
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20484 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Developing Skills for Machinery Industry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0286A Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO in Chinese 19 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0286A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Zhongwen (1729 1813 2429): "Establishment </F>
of `Human Talent Engineering' Imminent"] 
  [Text] The CPC Central Committee's listing of the machinery 
and electronics industry as a principal industry in the national 
economy has greatly encouraged the millions of staff members and 
workers on the machinery front. "Close involvement in reform, 
hastening development, vigorous development, and making the most 
of the national economy's dominant role," have become action 
slogans for stimulating an all-out effort throughout the 
industry. The development program for invigorating the machinery 
industry that the Ministry of Machinery has drawn up has been 
revised many times and will soon appear. 
  Human talent is the keystone in dominant industries. One 
important aspect of the invigoration of the machinery industry 
is good management and good use of all kinds of specialists and 
technical talent to improve the caliber of the rank and file 
throughout the industry. 
  Survey data show that as education, the economy, and science 
and technology develop, and as society and enterprises 
increasingly respect science and technology as well as 
scientific and technical talent, the speed of growth of 
technicians in the machinery system has been markedly higher 
than the total number of staff members and workers. Statistics 
from 10 dominant enterprises show an 8.6 percent increase in the 
total number of staff members and workers between 1988 and 1991, 
but a 20.8 percent increase in the number of technicians. At the 
same time, the caliber of technicians as a whole has also risen 
markedly, and the percentage of graduate students, and college 
undergraduates has increased by varying degrees. An environment 
of respect for human talent, respect for knowledge, and respect 
for contributions is gradually taking shape. 
  However, by comparison with needs in invigorating the 
machinery industry, numerous problems in need of immediate 
solution continue in the training and use of human talent. 
<H5>  Human Talent Utilization Efficiency Not High </H5>
  A questionnaire survey of 201 scientific and technical 
personnel shows that only 5.5 percent of scientific and 
technical personnel in the machinery and electronics industry 
personnel feel that their skills are being used to the full; 
39.8 percent feel they largely apply their talents; and 17.4 
percent believe their talents are not being used at all. In 
another survey of engineers in large and medium size 
enterprises, 72 percent felt they were being held back, 80 
percent felt work unsatisfying, and only 5 percent put in 
overtime. Such a slack and easy going state of affairs naturally 
creates not very high work efficiency. Some comparative data for 
1988 is shocking. In Japan, per capita gross output value of 
engineers in the machinery industry was $350,000, while it was 
only $84,000 in China. This is to say that in machinery 
industries having the same output value, China used 4.1 times 
the number of engineers as Japan. 
  There are both structural reasons and conceptual reasons for 
this state of affairs. Examples include out of date products, 
antiquated organizational methods, softening of demand for 
technology and for technical personnel, and being accustomed to 
the expansion of extensive inputs primarily, using large amounts 
of money and manpower; and a serious shortage of development 
funds that leads to having a large number of technical personnel 
in name but not in reality, which makes the development of new 
products very difficult, and makes it even harder to translate 
scientific research achievements into production. (The money 
provided for technical progress in some developed nations 
generally runs between 3 and 5 percent of total sales. In strong 
Japanese enterprises, it runs as high as 10 percent. In China, 
by contrast, many enterprises invest less than 1 percent.) A 
Shanghai survey shows 70 percent of new research achievements 
have not been translated into the development of products. The 
value of knowledge is not fully appreciated. Many enterprises 
continue to treat scientific and technical personnel like 
organizational cadres, their average bonus being between 10 and 
30 percent less than workers on the front line of production. 
Egalitarianism in distributions is a serious problem. "It makes 
no difference whether one works or does not work," or whether 
one "does not work and also takes few risks." This situation 
results in scientific and technical personnel not doing their 
best; production efficiency in the enterprise itself is not 
high; and overstaffing is the general rule, etc. 
<H5>  Serious Flight of Human Talent </H5>
  Surveys show that despite the increase in technicians in the 
machinery and electronics industry in recent years, in 
state-owned enterprises -- particularly in large and medium size 
enterprises -- the dropping out of skilled personnel, the aging 
of human talent, and the flight of human talent is extremely 
serious. It is mostly middle age and young permanent scientific 
and technical cadres that leave. A sample survey showed a 
decline from 24.6 to 19.28 percent in the number of scientific 
and technical personnel between the ages of 30 and 40 between 
1986 and 1991. Another survey showed the flight of more than 
one-third of the young scientific and technical personnel during 
the past 5 years from large and medium size machinery and 
electronics enterprises. More than 60 of the best graduates of 
institutions of higher education assigned to the Dalian 
Municipal Machinery Bureau were snapped up by the three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises. Between 1984 and 
1990, 4000 university graduates were assigned to a Beijing 
machine tool plant. More than half have already left. The 
problem in frontier regions is particularly serious. Survey 
statistics from 287 enterprises show only 7.92 percent of 
technicians in enterprises today are between 31 and 35 years of 
age, and 14.5 percent are between 26 and 30 years old. The 
flight of human talent not only weakens enterprises technical 
strength, but also damages continuity. It tends to create a 
vicious cycle. 
  The main reasons for the flight and dropping out of human 
talent are that large and medium size state-owned enterprises 
are in the least favorable position in the intense competition 
for human talent. They cannot compete with the three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises, or with township 
and town enterprises, in earnings. In the probability of making 
a name for oneself and opportunities to travel abroad, 
state-owned enterprises cannot compete with educational and 
scientific research units. In housing, working conditions, and a 
feeling of being respected, state-owned enterprises cannot 
compete with administrative institutions. In work freedom, work 
environment, and income, state-owned enterprises cannot compete 
with companies of all kinds. Yet another important reason for 
the flight of human talent is that technicians can more easily 
put their talents to use in the three kinds of partially or 
wholly foreign-owned enterprises, and in township and town 
enterprises, unlike in some large and medium size state-owned 
enterprises where seniority and age play a role, and where 
people are not used to the full. This corrodes people's spirit 
and enthusiasm. 
<H5>  Accelerate Building of a Human Talent Corps </H5>
  Informed people believe that the priority task in 
invigorating the machinery industry is accelerating the creation 
of a high caliber specialist corps that combines ability and 
political integrity, and that is sensibly composed. The human 
talent strategy that the Ministry of Machinery espouses is 
"maintenance of continuity in the corps, optimization of the 
make-up, improvement of caliber, and speedy selection for 
promotion and training of middle agent and young permanent 
technical cadres and academic leaders so that new technical 
personnel will be available to replace old technical personnel 
over the next 10 years. It wants to build a technician corps of 
good political quality, that has fine professional skills, whose 
make-up is rational, that is highly trained, and that is imbued 
with vitality to meet the needs of reform and opening to the 
outside world, scientific and technical competition, and social 
development." 
  The specific measures that the Ministry of Machinery has 
proposed to attain this strategic goal are the founding of a 
human talent bank, including the establishment first of a high 
level specialized talent bank, accelerated training of 
three-in-one talent (technology, management, and sales), and 
four-in-one talent (technology, management, sales, and foreign 
language); founding of a human talent exchange center, 
improvement of enterprises competitiveness, using fair 
competition as a basis for accurately guiding rational exchanges 
of human talent; formulation of preferential policies for the 
importation of scientific and technical management talent; 
founding a rewards system, increasing investment in education, 
etc. In short, the establishment of "human talent engineering" 
is imminent. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20485 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Benefits of GATT for Service Industries </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0291A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 4 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0291A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hong Xiaodong (3163 2556 2639), International </F>
Office, Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation: 
"China's Participation in GATT: Benefits to Trade in Services 
Long-Range; Current Pressures Alleviated Only by Enhanced 
Legislation To Increase `Tertiary Industry' Inputs"] 
  [Text] As a full participant in the Uruguay Round [of 
GATT], China is prepared to sign the round's final agreement and 
implement each obligation regulated by it. Trade in services, as 
an important topic, was brought into the negotiations for the 
first time. Its framework agreement, the General Agreement on 
Trade in Services, and addenda have been reached. On the basis 
of many rounds of bilateral negotiations, each country has 
submitted a list of preliminary agreements for reducing 
concessions. Since the start of the Uruguay Round, China began 
to participate in GATT negotiations and proposed its own 
preliminary list of promises to reduce concessions according to 
current Chinese laws and regulations which stipulate the degree 
of openness. 
  The following are advantages of China's participation in 
GATT: 
  Competition introduced appropriately promotes development of 
domestic service industries. We must introduce competition 
appropriately to accelerate the development of China's service 
industries. Since China implemented reform and open door 
policies, some Chinese service sectors have adopted different 
open measures which have played a definite role in spurring on 
the promotion of China's domestic service industry growth. 
Participation in GATT has solidified these efforts and 
continuously expanded the degree of openness of service sectors 
which will make China's domestic service industries develop 
rather quickly. 
  Appropriate use of highly effective foreign services can 
improve domestic service industry levels to serve the creation 
of China's manufacturing growth and product exports. 
  Increased transparency is advantageous to fully 
understanding 
foreign service market conditions. After GATT goes into effect, 
we could more clearly understand the restricted measures on 
service trades adopted by other countries via the preliminary 
list for agreement provided by signatories. This provided quite 
a lot of information to China's services and service providers 
to enter the service trade markets of other countries, which is 
beneficial to exporting China's services. 
  Advantageous to enjoyment of equal treatment for China's 
service trade exports, GATT is the first multiple agreement for 
comprehensive management of global trade in services. 
Preferential treatment is an important principle of the general 
agreement. This principle will provide a rather equal 
competition environment for China's service exports and avoid 
discriminatory treatment via the exchange of reduced concessions 
to be able to compete with other countries on an equal basis. 
  GATT is a new agreement regarding invisible trade. Its aims 
and purpose are the same as those of GATT; namely, to gradually 
remove all restrictive measures to entering the service industry 
market through rounds of negotiations, granting citizen 
treatment to foreign service providers, commonly using the 
principles of most favored nation treatment, and ultimately 
realizing full liberalization of trade in services. However, 
GATT does not require participants to attain the aforementioned 
demands while in the preliminary stage of implementation. What 
each country should do is undertake the obligations of its own 
promises to reduce concessions. The situation facing China at 
present is that various signatories will continuously demand 
that China liberalize the banking, insurance, telecommunications 
and posts, communications, sea transport, air transport, retail 
sales and specialized service (including law, consulting, 
accounting, etc) markets. In particular, China's high speed 
economic growth has been closely observed internationally, and 
pressure demanding we liberalize service industry markets will 
increase. Therefore, on the one hand we must determine the 
foreign openness of service industry based on domestic 
legislation and service industry development levels. On the 
other hand, it is imperative to accelerate service industry and 
service trade development. The main means are: 
  One, a greater degree of reform, faster service industry 
externalization, and gradually realizing the transformation of 
the majority of service industry sectors toward operations away 
from welfare, public interest and undertakings according to the 
principles of separate government and enterprises and pushing 
enterprises toward markets in the direction of industrialization 
and socialization. 
  Two, expand funding sources and channels for accumulating 
funds. Strive to increase service industry inputs and actively 
use foreign funds to develop the service industry. 
  Three, further even out and liberalize service industry 
prices. 
  Four, reform service industry planning, statistical systems 
and methods, overall planning, and develop statistical and 
assessment service industries. Since China wants to enter GATT, 
it must undertake scientific categorization and statistical 
methods of the domestic service industry according to common 
international practices. Then it will be comparable to service 
industries in other countries. 
  Five, accelerate service industry legal system construction. 
China's service industry has preliminarily promised to open to 
the outside world. In line with further opening, China's service 
industries will have to face competition from foreign service 
providers. One prerequisite for further opening China's service 
industry is to enhance service industry legislation. At present 
China is stressing drafting basic economic laws and regulations 
such as "trade laws," "market laws," "corporate laws," "fair 
business practice laws," "antitrust laws," "communications 
laws," and "auditing laws." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20486 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Importance of Agricultural Subsidies Stressed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0289 Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 20 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0289 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Peng Jianliang (1756 0494 5328): "Agriculture: </F>
The Long and Short of Subsidies"] 
  [Text] Government protects agriculture in practically all 
of the world's current market economy countries, whether 
developed or developing. Government subsidies are one main means 
of protection, that is, a government directly or indirectly 
protects agricultural development and farmer interests through 
subsidies in various forms, thereby ensuring the relative 
stability and continuation of agricultural yields. China is in 
the process of changing from a planned to a market economy. The 
market economy assault on agriculture may be greater than that 
upon other industries. Agricultural development will be greatly 
affected and peasants come to grief if mishandled. Therefore, 
drawing on foreign experience, it is extremely important under 
market economy conditions that China, such a large country with 
a huge population, ensures sustained stable agricultural 
development. 
  Subsidies of various countries surpass highs and 
lows--brief introduction to foreign agricultural subsidy methods 
  Considering the issue of foreign agricultural sub sidies as 
a 
whole, although subsidies emphasize different things, take 
various forms and are of infinite scope, various gove rnment 
agricultural subsidies mainly start from three things: One 
subsidizes the agricultural production process, the second 
subsidizes agricultural products in the process of exchange, and 
the third subsidizes agricultural products in the consumption 
process. Some of these directly support agricultural production. 
Others are indirect supports. 
  Production subsidies 
  The main forms of these subsidies are: 1) Agricultural 
infrastructure building subsidies. Peasants are indirectly 
subsidized through state subsidies for agricultural 
infrastructure building and agricultural science research. For 
example, Japanese Government subsidies for farmland capital 
construction are as high as more than 90 percent. Central 
government fin ancial assistance is the source of 45 percent of 
funds; 50 percent comes from local governments and farmers 
themselves only be ar 15 percent of the burden. To promote 
agricultural modernization in member countries, the European 
Economic Community stipulates that it shall provide 25 percent 
of the funds for purchasing large-scale agricultural machinery, 
land amelioration or construction or repair of irrigation 
projects, with 75 percent resolved by the country itself. India 
and other countries are in the midst of a "green revolution" 
through free government improved variety development selection 
and promotion. 2) Production cost subsidies, including various 
subsidies from planting to pesticides. For example, the EEC 
implements various production subsidies for mountainous grain 
farmers. The Japanese Government subsidizes backbone farming by 
supporting production. Subsidy costs can account for 50 percent 
of total costs. In many developing countries, there is a wide 
scope of production cost subsidies. In particular, chemical 
fertilizer subsidies are rather common. Chemical fertilizer 
subsidy rates in these countries almost surpass 30 percent in 
transport costs and sometimes are as high as 90 percent. In 
general, subsidy levels are 50 percent to 70 percent. 3) Credit 
subsidies. This mainly means states provide low interest or 
interest-free bank loans to agricultural producers to see that 
they obtain needed funds. The government subsidizes banks for 
differences between loan interest rates and the domestic 
financial market. For example, Brazil frequently has increased 
agricultural credit and lowered loan interest rates to support 
agricultural production. In the mid-1980s, in one year Japanese 
farmers received 1.5 trillion yen in subsidies in the form of 
low interest loans. The United States Government practices low 
interest loans for low yield farmers: in 1992 560,000 farmers 
received low interest production loans of $2.3 billion. 
  Circulation subsidies 
  This mainly refers to price subsidies implemented for 
producers in the process of exchanging agricultural products. 1) 
Protectionist price subsidies. Different agricultural product 
production costs, the supply and demand situation and price 
levels in recent years individually determine protected or 
target prices. When market prices are l ower than these prices, 
the government procures agricultural products at protected 
prices. For example, the Japanese Government adopts a high price 
grain procurement policy to protect grain farmers. Their prices 
often are six to eight times higher than international market 
prices. Approximately two-thirds of agricultural products in the 
United States enjoy price support. There are target prices on 70 
percent of EEC agricultural products. 2) Trade price subsidies. 
In order to protect imports and exports or ensure domestic 
market price stability, governments implement price subsidies 
for grain imports and exports in international agricultural 
product trade. For example, when importing foreign grains, EEC 
countries levy a price differential tax which is used to 
subsidize and protect the agricultural development of the 
importing country. The United States and other excess 
agricultural product producing states often hold down 
agricultural product export prices; the government s ubsidizes 
differences between domestic and export prices. The United 
States Government generally subsidizes 20 percent ot 3 0 percent 
of its toal agricultural product exports, and in some years the 
figure exceeds 80 percent. Agricultural product price 
differential subsidies are at more than $20 billion, or even 
more. 
  Consumption subsidies 
  This is a form of indirect agricultural production subsidy 
directly aimed at protecting consumers. For example, Japan, 
India, the ROK and other countries normally procure grains 
produced by farmers at relatively high prices and then resell 
them to consumers at relatively low prices. The government 
subsidizes price losses. The United States implements a "food 
stamp" policy to assist low income households. At present more 
than 20 million people in the United States nationwide draw food 
stamps which costs the gove rnment more than $10 billion. The 
government's consumer price subsidies actually are acts of 
procuring agricultural products and processed goods. They play 
an undeniable role in stabilizing domestic agricultural product 
prices and protecting agricultural production and farmer 
interests. 
  Other forms of subsidies 
  Some market economy countries, particularly developed 
countries which have excess farm produce, often have other forms 
of subsidies. For example, the United States Government 
implements subsidies to limit yields because it has excess farm 
produce. Any farming household which has signed a limited 
production and sale contract with the government can enjoy such 
subsidies. Subsidy scope and standards continuously fluctuate 
and are readjusted depending on crop yields and domestic and 
foreign market conditions. In the past limited production 
subsidies were implemented only on wheat, corn and cotton, but 
at present have expanded to more than 20 items and the trend is 
increasing. Limited production subsidy standards are target 
prices set by the government. When market prices are lower than 
the target price, the government pays qualified farmers who 
enjoy subsidies the difference. The United States and other 
countries also have idle field subsidies which are issued by 
land banks which restrict the total output of certain 
agricultural products by reducing the input of land. 
Specifically, at a high rent corresponding to approximat ely 60 
percent of the value of the land, the government leases back 
land on which there is a serious surplus of agricultural product 
which is left idle or soil conservation measures are taken. Some 
countries also have disaster subsidies. For example the United 
States Government gives to qualified farmers disaster subsidies 
based on the area affected, scope of reduced ou tput and target 
prices. Japan grants subsidies for major crops on a national 
scale through agricultural assistance insurance; the government 
grants subsidies of approximately 15 percent of insurance costs. 
When there is a disaster, it grants insu rance costs of 10 to 30 
percent of a normal year outlook. Some developing countries 
grant disaster subsidies in the form of free government grain 
supplies or agricultural tax reduction or annulment. 
  Subsidies have advantages and disadvantages, rarely 
used appropriately foreign agricultural subsidy advantage and 
disadvantage analysis 
  In general, under market economy conditions, there are 
advantages and disadvantages to government subsidies for 
agriculture. 
  Advantages analyzed 
  Subsidies promote production and development. Direct 
government subsidies have improved greatly agricultural 
production conditions, in particular, agricultural 
infrastructure, technology, equipment and agricultural 
scientific research. They have strengthened agricultural 
productivity and can turn the fruits of agricultural research 
into productivity as soon as possible. For example, because the 
United States practices a series of agricultural protection 
policies encompassing agricultura l subsidies, its agricultural 
production consistently has maintained relatively stable 
development. By 1992, U.S. soybean output was 54.40 million 
tons, more than one-half the world total, putting it in first 
place. It ranked second worldwide for grain output of 320 
million tons and cotton output of 3.90 million tons. 
  Subsidies increase farmer incomes. Some agricultural 
subsidies are directly granted to farmers in the production 
process while others are granted indirectly in various fo rms. 
Farmers obtain material benefits in these ways. At the same 
time, because subsidies promote increased agricultural output, 
farmers therefore can obtain suitable incomes. For example, 
average net income per farm in the United States is $280,000 and 
income per agricultural laborer is $180,000. 
  Subsidies promote agricultural exports. In developed 
countries with agricultural surplusses, agricultural product 
export trade is greatly promoted because the government 
subsidizes agricultural exports. Taking the United States as an 
example again, cereal export volume accounts for about 40 
percent of total export volume and approximately one-half of 
cotton is exported. Agricultural product exports are at more 
than $40 billion. Under conditions of a more than $100 billion 
deficit in national foreign trade, there is a more than $17 
billion surplus in agricultural product foreign trade. 
  In sum, government subsidies for agriculture to a large 
degree have altered agriculture's disadvantageous position in 
market economies, reduced agricultural risk, enhanced farm 
product competitiveness on domestic and foreign markets and are 
commonly welcomed by farmers. At the same time, they also play 
an important role in ameliorating domes ic supply and demand 
contradictions for farm products and stabilizing domestic 
economic and social order. 
  Disadvantages analyzed 
  Subsidies place an enormous fiscal burden on governments. 
Agricultural subsidies are government acts and expenses for them 
mainly are paid from government coffers. It is a rather heavy 
burden, whether for developed or developing countries. For 
example, the United States requires several tens of billions of 
dollars annually for agricultural subsidies including farm 
product export subsidies. Japan needs several billions of U.S. 
dollars annually for rice subsidies alone. Therefore, many 
countries are reexamining and determining agricultural subsidy 
policies with the trend toward reduced numbers of subsidies. 
  Agricultural product export subsidies often create trade 
friction between countries. The most prominent example is the 
stalemated negotiations between the EEC and the United States 
regarding reducing farm product export subsidies at the [GATT] 
Uraguay round which were stalled. No agreement could be reached 
because of high subsidies on agricultural product exports. This 
not only affected normal trade developments between Europe and 
the United States but also brought about disruption in some 
countries such as France. Regarding subsidizing farm product 
exports, although the starting point is protection of a 
country's agriculture and farmer interests, under certain 
circumstances the opposite may result. 
  Subsidies have created definite unequal competition. Market 
economies talk about fair competition and oppose monopolies. 
Government agricultural subsidies actually grant agriculture 
rather superior competitive conditions although it originally is 
at a disadvantage. 
  Therefore, in some countries there is controversy regarding 
government agicultural subsidies. For example, there has been 
opposition in the United States regarding excessive price 
supports for agriucltural products. 
  Secure stones from other mountains to polish gems for 
China--suggestions for China's agricultural subsidies 
  From the introduction above, under market economy 
conditions, 
almost all governments implement definite subsidy policies. 
  Profit is the highest principle in market economics. Under 
market economy conditions, capital always flows towards 
industries which can obtain relatively high profits. Agriculture 
normally is a rather low profit industry. Because agricultural 
capital is organized below industry, farm product prices cannot 
rise as quickly as those of industrial products. It is difficult 
to realize parity prices between industrial and agricultural 
products; thus agriculture generally cannot obtain equal 
profits. For a country's economic development and the people's 
livelihood, agriculture is indispensible. Relying on the role of 
market mechanisms alone, it is difficult to resolve the 
contradiction between the importance of agriculture and 
relatively low profits. Subsidies themselves are not the outcome 
of market economics. However, as government actions, they are 
macroeconmic readjustment and control measures which supplement 
roles that the market cannot fulfill. Agriculture's relative 
disadvantageous position is very clear as China builds a 
socialist market economy. Therefore, for a relatively long time 
period, the government still must subsidize agriculture. 
Otherwise, agricultural production may slump and there will be 
no relief of the contradiction between farm product supply and 
demand. It will not only be impossible to solidify the position 
of agriculture, but may limit China's national economic 
devleopment for the long term. 
  Subsidies must conform to a country's actual 
conditions, models cannot be copied indiscriminately 
  Considering the agricultural subsidy policies of various 
nations of the world, they differ in terms of aim, form and 
specific scope. Some emphasize price subsidies for inputs, other 
stress price subsidies for farm product purchases and sales. 
Some are mainly credit subsidies, others are chiefly subsidies 
in kind. Some limit production, others promote production, and 
so on. In sum, the starting point must be a country's actual 
conditions to establish the most effective agricultural subsidy 
system. The Chinese Government's subsidies of agriculture 
naturally cannot be indiscriminate copies of those used abroad. 
Considering the aims of subsidies, the fundamental aim of 
China's agricultural subsidies should be promoting developments 
in agricultural production and continuously improving the 
quality and quantity of agricultural products. Because of 
fundamental conditions in China, namely, a large population 
which will continue to grow within the next few decades, a small 
arable land area which may shrink further in line with economic 
development, the supply and demand contrad iction for farm 
products, especially grains, will exist for a long time while 
grain imports will be restricted in various ways. So in the end, 
how should subsidies be implemented? In terms of the scope of 
subsidies, one, we must enhance subsidies for agricultural 
capital construction, including agriculture infrastructure and 
scientific and technical research promotion to improve basic 
agricultural production conditions and improve technical levels. 
Two, subsidize high yield, top quality highly efficient 
agriculture, in particular we must support development of large 
projects in this respect. Three, subsidize comparatively 
large-scale farm product commodity production bases. Four, 
implement insurance subsidies for major natural disasters, 
establish a disaster subsidy system relying on insurance 
companies with appropriate state fiscal subsidies, and lower the 
risk to agricultural producers. In terms of subsidy form, one, 
we must complete the price subsidy system. The actual 
effectiveness of China's current system is not ideal because of 
scattered subsidies and irrat ional pricing. We should set up a 
producers target price subsidy system that can really play a 
role and gradually establish a n agricultural product trade 
price subsidy system to encourage exports. Two, we must augment 
credit subsidies and it would be best to establish an 
agricultural policy bank as soon as possible. 
  Agricultural subsidies must be in appropriate amounts 
  Considered as a whole, the role of agricultural subsidies in 
various countries has been brought into rather full play. But 
there are two extremes: subsidies in developing countries are 
too low, which is disadvantageous for promoting agricu ltural 
development or protecting the interests of farmers and 
consumers. Some developed countries overly subsidize agricult 
ure, which creates rather enormous financial pressure for the 
government although it is good for agriculture and farmers. In 
particular, overly high subsidies on export farm products often 
leads to trade friction with other countries, affecting normal 
economic and trade relation devleopments between nations. In 
this way, the aim of subsidizing actually is not met. Therefore, 
government subsidies of agriculture must consider factors 
overall and determine appropriate amounts. 
  China is a large agricultural country with limited fiscal 
power, relatively backward agriculture and comparatively low 
peasant incomes. If subsidies are too low, they will not play a 
role and if they are too high the government could not bear the 
burden. In the past, the Chinese government actually subsidized 
agriculture a lot; grain procurement price underpriced fiscal 
subsidies reached around 40 billion yuan annually. This is no 
small fiscal pressure! Therefore, it is extremely essential to 
determine appropriate subsidy amounts under the premise of fully 
considering the state's fiscal load capacity. Government 
subsidized agriculture will attain its aims if the state coffers 
can bear it, agricultural production is promoted and the 
peasants basically are satisfied. 
  In sum, learning from foreign experience, we should strive 
to 
find an agricultural subsidy route suited to China's national 
conditions and actual situations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20487 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   National 1993 Farmer Income Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0303U Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 18 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303U </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] According to a sample survey by the State 
Statistical Bureau, in 1993 per capita net income of rural 
households was 921.4 yuan, an increase of 137.4 yuan, or 17.5 
percent over 1992, deducting for inflation the net increase was 
3.2 percent. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20488 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  31 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces Report 1993 Livestock, Meat Output </TI></H3>
<H4>   Liaoning Hog, Pork Output </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303S Shenyang LIAONING JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 31 Jan 
94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0303S </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang LIAONING JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At the end of December, Liaoning Province had 
12,352,000 hogs in stock, a 1.1 percent increase over the same 
period in 1992; 10,343,000 hogs were removed from stock, a 9.4 
percent increase; and pork output was 1,035,000 tons, a 13.2 
percent increase. In the last half of 1993, the sales price of 
fatty pork was 4.00-4.20 yuan per kilogram. The procurement 
price for piglets was 5.00-6.40 yuan per kilogram, a 100 percent 
increase over the first half of the year. At present, the 
average market price for pork is 8.56 yuan per kilogram. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20489 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  11 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces Report 1993 Livestock, Meat Output </TI></H3>
<H4>   Jilin Livestock, Meat Output </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303X Changchun JILIN RIBAO in Chinese 11 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303X </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun JILIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At the end of December, Jilin Province had 
5,682,000 hogs in stock, a 4.3 percent increase over 1992, and 
gross output of pork was 479,000 tons, an 11.7 percent increase. 
There were 2,415,000 cows in stock, an 8.4 percent increase, and 
gross output of beef was 86,000 tons, a 40 percent increase. 
There were 3,342,000 sheep in stock, a 6.5 percent increase, and 
gross output of lamb was 12,000 tons, an 8.6 percent increase. 
Poultry stocks totaled 81,010,000, a 4.4 percent increase, and 
gross output of meat was 165,000 tons, a 25.9 percent increase. 
The chicken breeding industry has rapidly developed. Chicken 
stocks totaled 61,090,000, a 40.5 percent increase over 1992. 
Jilin consumes about 20 million chickens a year. Exports are 
expected to increase in 1994. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20490 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  9 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces Report 1993 Livestock, Meat Output </TI></H3>
<H4>   Gansu Meat Output </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303W Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 9 Feb 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303W </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993, gross output of meat in Gansu Province 
exceeded 500,000 tons, and the output value of the livestock 
industry accounted for 29 percent of the gross output value of 
agriculture. Beef output reached 60,000 tons, a 16 percent 
increase over 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20491 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 August 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Regulations on Agricultural Contract Management </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0309A Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 19 Aug 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0309A </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Anhui Province Agricultural Contract Management Regulations] </F>
  [Text] Announcement of the Standing Committee of the Anhui 
Provincial People's Congress (No 1) 
  The "Anhui Province Agricultural Contract Management 
Regulations," adopted by the Fourth Meeting of the Standing 
Committee of the Eighth Anhui Provincial People's Congress on 10 
July 1993, are hereby announced. The regulations will go into 
effect on 1 October 1993. 
  Standing Committee of the Anhui People's Congress 10 July 
1993 
<H5>  Chapter 1 General Principles </H5>
  Article 1 To stabilize and perfect the rural 
household responsibility system of linking remuneration to 
output, protect the legitimate rights and interests of both 
parties to agricultural contracting (abbreviated hereafter as 
contracting), maintain the rural economic order, mobilize the 
enthusiasm of peasants for production, and promote the 
development of a market economy in the countryside, we hereby 
formulate these regulations in accordance with the appropriate 
provisions in national laws and regulations. 
  Article 2 These regulations shall be applicable to 
the management of contracts in the fields of farming, forestry, 
animal husbandry, and fishing entered into by the agricultural 
collective economic organizations or villagers' committees 
within the jurisdiction of this province, on the one hand, and 
contractors, on the other. 
  Article 3 A contract must be concluded in a way 
that complies with the relevant laws and regulations, is 
consistent with national policies, abides by the principles of 
voluntary participation, mutual benefit, and democratic 
consultation, and takes into consideration the interests of all 
three parties--the state, the collective, and the individual. 
  Article 4 Means of production owned by the 
collective or owned by the state but used by an agricultural 
collective economic organization, including farmland, wooded and 
hilly areas, bodies of water, orchards, tea plantations, houses, 
and equipment and machinery, shall be contracted out by 
agricultural collective economic organizations which both own 
them and have the right to use them, or villagers' committees. 
  Article 5 Members of agricultural collective 
economic organizations, villagers, and other legal persons and 
citizens can all be parties to a contract. Other things being 
equal, a member or villager of the collective economic 
organization in question shall enjoy contracting priority. 
  In case of a large-scale project, the contractor shall 
provide guarantees while the contract-issuing party shall 
examine the credentials of the contractor before it awards the 
contract. 
  Detailed standards for large-scale projects shall be set by 
the township (town) people's government. 
  Article 6 Departments in charge of rural economic 
administration above the county level and township (town) rural 
cooperative economic management organs shall be organs of 
contract management responsible for the management of 
contracting within their respective jurisdictions. It shall be 
their responsibility to: 
  a) Publicize and implement the relevant national laws and 
regulations. Establish and improve a contract management system. 
  b) Guide the signing of a contract and oversee the 
verification of a large-scale contract. 
  c) Supervise and inspect the execution of large-scale 
contracts. 
  d) Mediate and arbitrate disputes over a contract. 
  e) Examine the amendment and termination of contracts. 
Affirm 
contracts null and void. 
<H5>  Chapter 2 Signing and Executing a Contract </H5>
  Article 7 What projects to be contracted out, the 
format of the contract, targets, and contract duration shall be 
decided democratically by members of the agricultural collective 
economic organization, villagers' assembly, or representative 
meeting. When a contract is to be awarded through open bidding, 
the relevant targets shall be announced in posters beforehand in 
the interest of fair competition. 
  Article 8 A contract is deemed to have been 
established when the two parties reach agreement and sign or 
seal it. 
  When one party to a large-scale contract demands 
verification 
or notarization, such verification and notification shall be 
performed by the local contract management organ and the 
notarization body, respectively. 
  The format of a written contract shall be established 
uniformly by the provincial department in charge of rural 
economic administration. 
  Article 9 The contract shall include the following 
provisions: 
  a) Names of the contract-issuing party and contractor. 
  b) The title of the project, its quantity, quality, 
location, 
the starting and finishing dates, and the method of production 
and operation. 
  c) The means of production and operation as well as services 
that the contract-issuing party shall provide the contractor; 
the production capability and technical resources the contractor 
shall possess as well as investment, management, and maintenance 
targets; d) the amount of taxes, the sum to be retained by the 
village, and township (town) comprehensive planning fee, all 
payable by the contractor. The contract shall also specify the 
schedule and method of payment and the amount of labor 
accumulation work and voluntary work the contractor shall 
provide. 
  e) In the case of a large-scale specialized project that has 
to do with wooded mountains, bodies of water, tea plantations, 
mulberry fields, and orchards, the contract shall specify the 
contracting fund and fixed assets depreciation fee, along with 
the due date and method of payment. 
  f) The responsibility of the contract-issuing party and the 
contractor to protect resources and prevent soil erosion and 
resource degradation. 
  g) Incentives to be offered by the contract-issuing party to 
encourage the contractor to boost investment, increase 
productive capacity, and surpass a target. 
  h) Penalties that the contractor shall incur for destroying 
resources and reducing productive capacity improperly. 
  i) Procedures for the transfer and liquidation of properties 
when the contract expires. 
  i) The liability of breaking a contract and other items that 
should be specified under the law or which the two parties to 
the contract think should be specified. 
  Article 10 A contract shall be declared null and 
void when one of the following conditions applies: 
  a) A relevant law, regulation, or national policy has been 
violated. 
  b) National, collective, or social interests have been 
infringed upon. 
  c) Article 7 of these regulations has been violated. 
  d) The contract-issuing party has overstepped its authority 
in awarding the contract and the ownership of the means of 
production in the contract is being contested. 
  e) Deception, coercion, and other illegal means have been 
used in the conclusion of the contract. 
  f) A party buys or sells the contract illegally or covertly 
in order to profit from it. 
  Article 11 A contract shall be invalidated by the 
contract management organ in accordance with the law. In the 
case of a law which has been notarized by a notarization agency, 
it shall be up to the latter to call for the revocation of the 
said notarization. 
  A contract that has been affirmed as null and void shall 
cease to be legally binding from the day it was entered into. 
  A contract may be null and void in part, with the rest of 
the 
contract remaining legally effective. 
  Article 12 After a contract is declared null and 
void, the properties acquired by one party under the contract 
shall be returned to the other party. In case of losses, the 
culpable party shall pay damages for such losses. If both 
parties are at fault, they shall both be held liable for the 
respective losses they have caused. 
<H3>  Chapter 3 Rights and Obligations of Both Parties to a 
Contract </H3>
  Article 13 The rights and obligations of the 
contract-issuing party are: 
  a) Collect from the contractor a sum of money for retention 
by the village and the township (town) comprehensive planning 
fee in accordance with contract provisions. 
  b) In the case of a large-scale contract, collect from the 
contractor contracting funds and a fixed assets depreciation fee 
in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
  c) Transfer the labor accumulation workers and voluntary 
workers that the contract should provide in accordance with the 
terms of the contract. 
  d) Re-issue the contract promptly upon its expiration. 
  e) Implement and carry through with the goals, policies, and 
measures of the state aimed at supporting and ensuring stable 
agricultural development, organize the development of the 
agricultural infrastructure. 
  f) Safeguard the contractor's decision-making authority in 
production and operations, its right to dispose of its output, 
and its right to make a profit, protect the contractor's 
legitimate rights and interests. 
  g) Guide the contractual operations and activities of the 
contractor in accordance with the contract and provide services 
before, during, and after production. 
  Article 14 The rights and obligations of the 
contractor are: 
  a) It enjoys decision-making authority in its operations and 
has the right to dispose of its output and make a profit. It is 
entitled to take advantage of the measures provided by the state 
and the collective to protect production, services to facilitate 
production and operations, and public welfare. 
  b) Upon the expiration of the contract, it may demand 
compensation from the contract-issuing party for the increase in 
value of the means of production in the contract. Value-adding 
compensation standards shall be worked out by the two parties to 
the contract. All things being equal, the contractor shall be 
given priority in the next round of contracting. 
  c) It has the right to refuse to assume any burden over and 
above what is specified in the contract that is inconsistent 
with the laws and regulations. 
  d) It shall accept the guidance of the contract-issuing 
party 
and complete the production and operational tasks in accordance 
with the terms of the contract. 
  e) It shall pay taxes, the village retention fund, the 
township (town) comprehensive planning fee or contracting fee, 
and fixed assets depreciation fee in accordance with the law. 
  f) Protect the land and other means of production and public 
facilities in the contract. Protect the agricultural ecology. 
<H5>  Chapter 4 Amending and Terminating a Contract </H5>
  Article 15 A contract may be amended or terminated 
if one or more of the following conditions apply: 
  a) Major changes have occurred in the laws, regulations, and 
national policies upon which the contract is based, markedly 
affecting a party's interests. 
  b) Both parties have agreed to amend or terminate the 
contract after consultation and such amendment or termination 
will not harm the interests of the state, the collective, and 
society. 
  c) The land and other means of production in the contract 
have been taken or adjusted by the state. 
  d) The contract has been rendered unenforceable in part or 
in 
whole by external forces that one party cannot control or 
prevent. 
  e) The contractor operates the land and other means of 
production in a destructive manner or lets them sit idle, 
despite repeated admonitions by the contract-issuing party. 
  f) The contractor has lost its contracting capacity and 
hence 
its ability to honor the contract. 
  g) One party has violated the contract, rendering it 
impossible or unnecessary to carry through with the contract. 
  Article 16 To have the contract amended or 
terminated, a party shall notify the other party promptly in 
writing. The latter shall reply within 15 days after it receives 
the notification. Where one party fails to reply within the 
specified time or the two parties fail to reach an agreement, it 
will be considered a contract dispute and handled accordingly. 
  When two parties agree to amend or terminate a contract, 
they 
shall draw up a written agreement which shall take effect after 
being signed and sealed. 
  When a party incurs economic losses as a result of the 
amendment or termination of a contract, the party responsible 
shall make economic damages. 
  Article 17 A contract may be inherited or 
transferred during the duration of the contract. When one party 
is merged or split up or when there are changes regarding the 
legal representative, the original contract will remain legally 
effective. 
  Article 18 When a contractor transfers the 
contracted project to another individual or organization with 
the permission of the contract-issuing party and a new contract 
has been concluded between the contract-issuing party and new 
transferee, the original contract shall be terminated. 
Alternatively, the transferror and the transferee may enter into 
a transfer contract which, however, shall not violate the 
original contract. 
<H5>  Chapter 5 Liabilities of Breaking a Contract </H5>
  Article 19 When a contract is rendered 
unenforceable in part or in whole by the wrongful acts of one 
party, the culpable party shall be held liable for breaking the 
contract. If both parties are at fault, they shall both be held 
liable for breaking the contract respectively. 
  Article 20 When one party breaks the contract 
unilaterally, it shall pay a contract-breaking fee to the other 
party. If such a fee falls short of covering the economic losses 
suffered by the other party, the party that breaks the contract 
shall make an additional payment equal to the shortfall. Should 
the other party demand that it continue to honor the contract, 
the latter shall do so. 
  Article 21 When a party cannot carry through with 
the contract in part or in whole due to forces beyond its 
control, it shall notify the other party in writing promptly. 
The execution of a contract may be delayed, a contract may be 
executed in part only, or a contract may not be executed if the 
two parties agree upon such a course of action after 
consultation as verified by the contract management department. 
  Article 22 Should the illegal interference by an 
organization, unit, or individual prevent the execution of a 
contract and cause severe losses, it or he shall be held legally 
liable and required to pay economic compensation. 
  Article 23 Should any one of the following apply 
to a party to a contract, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with Article 19 of these regulations. Should the 
situation be governed by other provisions in national laws and 
regulations, then the latter shall take precedence: 
  a) the contract-issuing party fails to collect fees or 
transfer labor accumulation workers and voluntary workers; 
  b) the contract-issuing party interferes with the 
contractor's normal productive or operational activities 
illegally; 
  c) the contract-issuing party amends or terminates the 
contract without authorization; 
  d) the contract-issuing party infringes upon the 
contractor's 
legitimate rights and interests arbitrarily; 
  e) the contractor transfers the contracted project or 
transfers, buys, or sells the contract without authorization; 
  f) the contractor sells off means of production in the 
contract or changes their use without authorization; 
  g) the contractor misuses or mismanages contracted means of 
production, resulting in damages or losses; 
  h) the contractor operates contracted natural resources 
including land in a destructive and predatory manner or lets 
them sit idle; 
  i) the contractor refuses to pay taxes, fees, and labor 
services for which it has assumed an obligation to pay under the 
law; and 
  j) the contract is being broken in other ways. 
  Article 24 Should a party to a contract break the 
law with serious consequences in the course of executing the 
contract, an investigation shall be made into its economic, 
administrative, and, ultimately, criminal, liability as the 
directly responsible party. 
<H5>  Chapter 6 Mediating and Arbitrating Contracting Disputes </H5>
  Article 25 County (municipal, district) agencies 
for rural economic administration and township (town) bodies for 
rural cooperative economic management shall set up a contract 
arbitration committee to be responsible for mediating and 
arbitrating contracting disputes within their jurisdiction. 
  Article 26 When a dispute arises over a contract, 
the two parties shall try to resolve it through consultation 
promptly. Should consultation fail, any one party may ask the 
local contract arbitration committee to arbitrate. 
  Article 27 After it receives a written application 
for mediation or arbitration, the contract arbitration committee 
shall reply within 15 days. Before mediation or arbitration, the 
contract should continue to be executed. 
  Where the contract arbitration committee succeeds in 
mediating the dispute, it shall prepare a written mediation 
agreement. When mediation fails, a case shall go to arbitration 
and an adjudication decision made. Both parties to a contract 
shall abide by the mediation agreement or adjudication decision. 
  When a party to a contract refuses to accept the arbitration 
decision, it may file an appeal with the local county 
(municipal, district) people's court within 15 days after it 
receives the adjudication decision. If a party neither abides by 
the decision nor files an appeal, the other party may apply to 
the people's court for performance of contract. 
  When a dispute arises over a contract, a party may also file 
a lawsuit directly with the local people's court. 
<H5>  Chapter 7 Supplementary Articles </H5>
  Article 28 Contracts entered into before these 
regulations go into effect shall be improved upon by being 
brought in line with these regulations. 
  Article 29 Issues relating to the detailed 
implementation of these regulations shall be interpreted by the 
provincial agency in charge of rural economic administration. 
  Article 30 These regulations shall take effect on 
1 October 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20492 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Cotton Procurement </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0303P Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 4 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303P </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 31 January, Anhui Province had procured 
3,090,000 dan of cotton, fulfilling 68.8 percent of the task. 
It is estimated that cotton farmers still have several dan of 
cotton on hand, all areas must procure it as soon as possible, 
and strictly implement allocation plans. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20493 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  2 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fujian 1994 Early Rice Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344C Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 2 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344C </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 the early rice area in Fujian Province 
will reach 8.2 million mu, an increase of 500,000 mu over 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20494 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces, Region Report 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Henan Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303T Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 18 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303T </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Henan Province was 660 yuan, a net increase of 72 yuan over 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20495 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  3 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces, Region Report 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Shanxi Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303Y Taiyuan SHANXI RIBAO in Chinese 3 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303Y </F>
<F P=104>  Taiyuan SHANXI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Shanxi Province was 718 yuan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20496 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  26 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces, Region Report 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Sichuan Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0303Z Chengdu SICHUAN JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 26 Feb 94 
p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0303Z </F>
<F P=104>  Chengdu SICHUAN JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Sichuan Province was 695 yuan, a 9.6 percent increase over 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20497 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  28 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provinces, Region Report 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Inner Mongolia Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0344B Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 28 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Inner Mongolia was 829 yuan, an increase of 110 yuan over 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20498 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hunan 1994 Cotton Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 20 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] The planned cotton area in Hunan Province for 
1994 is 4 million mu, an increase of 1,330,000 mu over 1993. In 
1993 gross output of cotton was 220,000 tons, an 8.3 percent 
increase over 1992, and the per mu yield was 82 kilograms. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20499 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Develops Export-Oriented Agriculture </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0303M Changchun JILIN RIBAO in Chinese 22 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303M </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun JILIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 farm exports from Jilin Province earned 
$880 million, a 23.1 percent increase over 1992, and accounted 
for 55 percent of foreign exchange earned by Jilin. Agriculture 
used foreign investment of $390 million to support 352 projects. 
Projects were set up with Japan, Thailand, and Taiwan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20500 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sichuan Sets Goal for Corn Output </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344D Chengdu SICHUAN NONGYE KEJI in Chinese No 1, 15 
Jan 94 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0344D </F>
<F P=104>  Chengdu SICHUAN NONGYE KEJI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] By the year 2000 gross output of corn in Sichuan 
Province will reach 9 million-10 million tons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20501 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sichuan Meat Exports in 1993 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0303V Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 18 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303V </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 Sichuan Province shipped 470,000 tons of 
meat outside the province, fulfilling 117.8 percent of the task, 
and exported 30,000 tons. Sichuan shipped 389,400 tons of pork 
outside the province, a 19.8 percent decrease from 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20502 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  13 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Cotton Area, Output in 1993 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0303R Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 13 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0303R </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 the cotton area in Xinjiang was 
9,670,000 mu, accounting for 28 percent of the total crop area; 
gross output of ginned cotton was 750,000 tons, and the average 
per unit area yield was 78 kilograms. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20503 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  11 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Religious Activity Site Management Stipulated </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0172 Shenyang LIAONING JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 11 Jan 94 
p 2 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0172 </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang LIAONING JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Article 1. Ensuring citizens freedom of 
religious belief, normal religious activities and safeguarding 
the legal rights and interests and normal order of religious 
activity sites to benefit the management of religious activity 
sites in accordance with relevant state stipulations and by 
summing up actual conditions in Liaoning province, these 
stipulations are hereby formulated. 
  Article 2. The so-called religious activity sites 
of these stipulations refer to monasteries, temples, Islamic 
mosques, churches, simple meeting places, scripture halls and 
other fixed sites where citizens who believe in religion engage 
in religious activities. 
  Article 3. These stipulations shall be applied to 
religious activity sites within the administrative area of 
Liaoning province. 
  Article 4. All activities undertaken within 
religious activity sites must respect laws, regulations and 
rules, safeguard social order and shall not be controlled by 
religious organizations or individuals outside Liaoning province. 
  Article 5. All levels of the people's government 
responsible for religious affairs shall be responsible for 
implementing these stipulations and for supervisory and 
inspection work thereof. 
  Article 6. Established monestaries, temples, 
Islamic mosques and churches must meet the following conditions: 
  1) Have a fixed address and name; 
  2) Have believers who regularly participate in religious 
activities; 
  3) Have religious teaching and administrative staff who 
guide 
religious activities; 
  4) Have democratic management organizations composed of 
believers; 
  5) Have complete management structures; 
  6) Have legal economic resources. 
  Simple meeting places and scripture halls should possess the 
conditions of clauses 1-5 above. 
  Article 7. Management (preparatory) organizations 
of established religious activity sites should apply for 
registration to sectors of the people's government above the 
county level responsible for religious affairs where they are 
located in hand of a municipal religious group written opinion, 
application to establish a religious activity site and 
information related to the site. 
  Article 8. Established monasteries, temples, 
Islamic mosques and churches apply for registration to sectors 
of the municipal people's government responsible for religious 
affairs; established simple meeting sites and scripture halls 
apply for registration to sectors of the county people's 
government responsible for religious affairs. 
  Within 60 days of receiving an application, sectors of the 
people's government above the county level responsible for 
religious affairs should reply in writing with a registration 
permit, registration denial or temporary registration. 
  Sectors of the people's government above the county level 
responsible for religious affairs issue "religious activity site 
registration certificates" to authorized established religious 
activity sites, and within 15 days of handling registration 
procedures shall report to the next level of the people's 
government responsible for religious affairs. 
  Terminated or consolidated registered religious activity 
sites should report and return "religious activity site 
registration certificates" to the sector which originally 
registered them. 
  Article 9. No organization or individual shall 
proselytize, hold religious meetings or distribute religious 
propaganda outside of religious activity sites without the 
approval of sectors of the provincial people's government 
responsible for religious affairs. 
  Article 10. The legal rights and interests of 
registered religious activity sites are protected by law. No 
organization or individual shall create disputes among different 
religions or sects within religious activity sites. 
  Article 11. Religious activity sites may accept 
charity donations [bu shih 1580 2457], monetary contributions 
[feng xian 1144 3759], and material contributions [0045 6317]. 
However, they must not apportion or extort belongings. 
  Article 12. Religious activity sites may accept 
contributions from religious organizations and individuals 
outside of Liaoning but they shall neither ask for belongings in 
any form from religious organizations or individuals outside of 
Liaoning nor shall they accept subsidizations for operating 
their organization. 
  Article 13. Religious teaching and administrative 
staff shall undertake management of a fixed number of staff at 
religious activity sites. Sectors of the people's government 
above the county level responsible for religious affairs and 
municipal religious groups shall agree on specific fixed numbers 
of staff. 
  Article 14. Permanent residents and temporary 
guests from elsewhere staying at religious activity sites should 
respect state stipulations regarding the management of 
household registration and complete household registration 
procedures. 
  Article 15. Organizations managed by religious 
activity sites may engage in agriculture, forestry or animal 
husbandry activities or initiate industrial, commercial, service 
or social public welfare undertakings according to relevant 
state stipulations. 
  Article 16. For real estate and land used legally 
by religious activity sites, real estate and land use permits 
shall be obtained by the religious organization concerned or the 
organization managing the site from relevant management sectors 
of the people's government above the county level. 
  Article 17. Property of religious activity sites 
is managed and used by organizations managing the sites. No 
person or other organization shall privately hold or use it for 
free. 
  Article 18. Organizations which manage religious 
activity sites may sell religious articles, religious works of 
art and religious publications on site with the permission of 
relevant sectors of the people's government above the county 
level. Unauthorized printing, distribution, duplication or 
commission sales of religious articles, religious works of art 
and religious publicat ions without the permission of relevant 
sectors of the people's government above the county level is 
strictly prohibited. 
  Article 19. Agreement shall be obtained from the 
site's management organization and sectors of the people's 
government above the county level responsible for religious 
affairs and permits obtained from relevant departments before 
product ion of sound or video works at religious activity sites. 
  Article 20. There shall be no commercial, service 
network or exhibitions held at religious activity sites without 
the agreement of organizations managing religious activity sites 
and the approval of sectors of the people's government above the 
county level responsible for religious affairs. 
  Article 21. Prior agreement from organizations 
managing religious activity sites and approval from sectors of 
the people's government above the county level responsible for 
religious affairs must be obtained by relevant units and 
individuals to rebuild or build new buildings on religious 
activity sites. 
  Article 22. Organizations managing religious 
activity sites listed by various levels of government cultural 
artifact protection units or those located in scenic or 
historical spots shall respect laws, regulations and rules to 
protect cultural artifacts and the environment. 
  Article 23. Those who violate these stipulations 
or encroach upon the legal rights and interests or religious 
activity sites may be ordered to stop rights-infringing 
activities by sectors of the people's government above the 
county level responsible for religious affairs, with the 
approval of relevant sectors. 
  Article 24. Sectors of the people's government 
above the county level responsible for religious affairs may 
warn, order a stop to activities, confiscate illegal articles 
and illegal income, punish or revoke "religious activity site 
registration certificates" according to the severity of the 
circumstances of organizations or individuals who violate these 
stipulations by the following behavior: 
  1) Initiating unauthorized religious activities without 
registering, or concealing real conditions while applying for 
registration; 
  2) Creating disputes with different religions or among 
different religious sects on religious activity sites; 
  3) Apportioning or extorting belongings; 
  4) Asking for belongings or accepting allowances from 
religious organizations or individuals outside of Liaoning; 
  5) Duplicating, selling or distributing religious 
publications and other religious propaganda without the approval 
of sectors of the people's government above the county level 
responsible for religious affairs. 
  Article 25. Public security organizations shall 
punish those who violate the "Public Security Management and 
Punishment Ordinances of the People's Republic of China"; legal 
investigation and criminal responsibility for what constitutes a 
crime is submitted to judicial organizations. 
  Article 26. Parties concerned who plead not guilty 
to penal decisions may apply for administrative reconsideration 
according to "Ordinances for Administrative Reconsideration of 
Decisions." 
  Article 27. Responsibility for interpreting 
specific questions regarding implementation of these 
stipulations shall be by sectors of the people's government of 
Liaoning province responsible for religious affairs. 
  Article 28. These stipulations come into force 
upon the date of issue. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20504 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  16 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kuomintang General Criticizes President Li </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0130A Hong Kong PAI HSING [THE PEOPLE] in Chinese No 33, 
16 Dec 93 pp 52-55 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0130A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong PAI HSING [THE PEOPLE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu K'eng (7120 6972) "Hsu Li-nung (6079 2980 </F>
6593) Opposed To Direct Election of President"] 
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] 
  This magazine's correspondent availed himself of the 
opportunity that a visit to Taiwan afforded to observe the 
election contest there. Following arrangements made by an old 
friend, Ting Chung-chiang [0002 0022 3068], he had a private 
interview with General Hsu Li-nung on 27 November in which 
Taiwan events were fully explored, including some 
behind-the-scenes political activities. 
  Question: Your announcement that you were leaving the 
Kuomintang to enter the New Party caused a stir both in Taiwan 
and abroad. I would like for you to talk about the thought 
process you used to make this decision. 
  This year marks my fifty-fourth year in the Kuomintang. 
[passage omitted]. I was a follower of the director general 
(meaning Chiang Kai-shek) and of Chairman Chiang (meaning Chiang 
Ching-kuo). I took part in the War of Resistance to Japan, 
resistance to Russia, and these campaigns in Taiwan. In all the 
Kuomintang's travails, I gave my all without rancor or regret. 
With such profound feelings, for me to leave all of a sudden was 
naturally a very painful decision. 
  Why did I want to leave the Kuomintang? Because I could not 
subscribe to citizen direct elections or anonymous entry into 
the United Nations. The recent proposal for two Chinas, in 
particular, was going too far. It ran counter to the precepts 
that the Kuomintang party president [Dr. Sun Yat-sen], the party 
director general [Chiang Kai-shek], and the party chairman, Mr. 
Chiang Ching-kuo always upheld. 
  Talking about deterioration, he (meaning President Li 
Teng-hui) has virtually become a follower of the Democratic 
Progressive Party. He implements the Democratic Progressive 
Party's policies. All of his important decisions echo the 
Democratic Progressive Party. Take citizen direct elections. I 
am not opposed to them, but I am opposed to direct citizen 
elections at the present stage. If the president is elected by 
20 million Taiwanese, is he the president of Taiwan or the 
president of the Republic of China? Furthermore, if the 
president is elected by an opposition party that does not 
identify with the country, is he president of the Republic or 
China, or president of the Republic of China in Taiwan? If the 
president is elected by the Democratic Progressive Party, he 
becomes the president of the Republic of Taiwan. 
  I had a talk with Mr. Li Teng-hui. Also present at the time 
was former Examination Yuan president, Huang Tsun-ch'iu, and two 
others. He said that "the reason some people are opposed to 
direct citizen elections is they fear that a candidate from a 
province other than Taiwan will never be elected president." The 
other three said nothing, so I said, "So far as I know, no one 
from any other province is thinking of becoming president at the 
present time, and no person from another province can become 
president. What worries me is that if you lose out to the 
Democratic Progressive Party in an election, that will be the 
end of the Republic of China." 
  He looked very displeased. Of course, many things I have 
done 
offended him, and this was one of them. 
  Why did he (meaning Li Teng-hui) speak so bluntly? My guess 
is that he could not be idiotic enough to really believe what he 
said. Since there were three other Taiwanese present at the 
time, I assume he purposely stirred up provincial feelings to 
pursue and consolidate his own political interests. 
  Citizen direct elections is the Democratic Progressive 
Party's policy. I can speak with knowledge about this matter. Li 
Yuan-ts'u, Chiang Yen-shih, and Sung Ch'u-yu did not know about 
it at the time. It was announced on Friday; as of Wednesday, no 
one knew about it. Early that day, a meeting was called to study 
this problem. At the time I was a member of the Standing 
Committee. I went to the meeting a little early. Li, Chiang, and 
several others were already there. In the car I heard on the 
radio that more and more high ranking people in the Central 
Committee were for direct citizen elections. After arriving at 
the meeting, I passed on to everyone what I had heard on the 
radio. I asked, "What is the meaning of this? Chiang Yen-shih 
said, "I heard it too," but Li Yuan-ts'u expressed great 
surprise. This showed that this main player still did not know. 
  Question: What did you think about this? 
  Answer: I felt it was the Democratic Progressive Party's 
idea. Mr. Lu, do you know that Chang Jung-fa has a fund? A 
national policy study center is under this fund. [passage 
omitted] The National Policy Center is run by Mr. T'ien Hung-mao 
[3944 1738 5399]. The National Policy Center puts out a 
bi-weekly magazine, which is the voice of Taiwan independence. 
  People say that at first this idea (meaning direct citizen 
elections) was proposed by four people: Kao Ying-mao, T'ien 
Hung-mao, Ch'eng Chung-mo, and Huang Shih-ch'eng. Later on, 
someone gave me proof. I won't mention this person's name now. 
He said that he had dined with T'ien Hung-mao and Ch'eng 
Chung-mo, and that they said that committee member direct 
elections would be soon changed. 
  Question: What other examples show that Mr. Li Teng-hui is 
carrying out the policy of the Democratic Progressive Party? 
  Answer: Hsu Hsin-liang's remarks serve as an example too. 
Once a media correspondent told Hsu Hsin-liang that the 
Democratic Progressive Party is in cahoots with Li Teng-hui. Hsu 
Hsin-liang said, "It is not the Democratic Progressive Party 
that is in cahoots with Li Teng-hui, but Li Teng-hui who is in 
cahoots with the Democratic Progressive Party." The Democratic 
Progressive Party wants direct citizen elections, so Li Teng-hui 
calls for direct citizen elections. The Democratic Progressive 
Party wants Hao Po-ts'un to step down, so Li Teng-hui calls for 
Hao Po-ts'un to step down. The Democratic Progressive Party 
wants to get into the United Nations, so Li Teng-hui tries to 
get into the United Nations. When it was in Hao's cabinet, the 
Democratic Progressive Party wanted to enter the United Nations 
anonymously, but Hao Po-ts'un flatly refused. 
  Question: Let us go back now to talk about what you are so 
opposed to "two China's," all right? 
  Answer: All right! I'll talk first about how things will 
end. 
He is now proposing "two China's." Next, he will talk about "one 
China and one Taiwan," and then it will be the "Republic of 
Taiwan." What am I so strongly opposed to this? I remember 
something that happened a year ago. When Kuomintang legislator 
Ch'en Che-nan ran for election, he used "one China, one Taiwan" 
as a political appeal. At that time, neither government agencies 
nor the party headquarters said anything, but in the Central 
Committee Standing Committee, we asked how a Kuomintang member 
running for election could use "one China, one Taiwan" as an 
appeal? President Li's answer was: Let us first define the 
meaning of "one China." As a Chinese on the soil of the Republic 
of China and in the Kuomintang headquarters, he still had doubts 
about "one China." I connected these two things together. It 
made me realize that this had been going on for a long time; it 
positively was not sudden. 
  Chiang Ping-k'un says he proposed a "two Chinas" on the 
basis 
of Ministry of Foreign Affairs materials, but Ch'ien Fu says he 
never saw them. Let me ask, just where did this "two China's" 
come from? 
  I personally feel that as a Chinese Kuomintang member, I 
should adhere to the precepts of the party president, the party 
director general, and Chairman Chiang. If everything you do 
today runs contrary to the abiding precepts, and I continue to 
remain inside echoing what others say and going along with the 
crowd, I am a traitor to the party and not upholding integrity 
in my later years. 
  Today, some people say I am a traitor to the party. They say 
that I do not uphold integrity in my later years. Chang 
Hsiao-yen even criticized me saying "a loyal minister does not 
serve two sovereigns, and a chaste woman does not serve two 
husbands." I believe that the "sovereign" we are talking about 
today is not an emperor but a concept. If I have one point of 
view today for one master, and I adopt another point of view 
tomorrow if the master changes, only then does the issue of 
"serving two sovereigns" exist. It is because I want to maintain 
integrity in my late years that I have now left the Kuomintang. 
Chang Hsiao-yen's mentioning of loyal ministers and chaste women 
is very ridiculous. 
  Question: Please discuss what will be the consequences if 
the 
Taipei authorities abandon "one China." One important reason why 
the Chinese Communists had a positive view of old Mr. Chiang 
was, as they said, "Mr. Chiang stood by one China. He displayed 
ethnic righteousness." 
  Answer: In my view, abandonment of "one China" is to take 
the 
Taiwan independence road. Internally, people like me cannot sit 
by and watch the demise of the Republic of China, and I am 
certainly not the only one who has this attitude. Some people 
cannot say so since they have not yet retired. When I was on the 
Standing Committee and was one of the heads of a department or 
committee, I held this attitude. I said, I am holding my badge 
of office in my hand ready to put it aside at any time. Some 
people cannot avoid having this or that apprehension, but when 
they come to life or death, survival or demise of the Republic 
of China, they can still step forward bravely. 
  Secondly, the Chinese Communists cannot sit by and look on 
at 
Taiwan independence. They have declared many times that if 
Taiwan becomes independent, they will go to war. In the Central 
Standing Committee, I analyzed this matter with Li Teng-hui. I 
asked if Taiwan becomes independent, what alternatives might the 
Chinese Communists take. First is going to war and what the 
consequences might be. Second is not going to war, but 
instituting a blockade and what might ensue. Third is announcing 
a blockade, for example, announce a blockade in November to go 
into effect on 1 March of the following year and see what 
happens. When this happens, very likely foreign capital will 
flee, and people having money will flee. At the time, Li 
Teng-hui said that you are using the Chinese Communists to scare 
the Taiwan public. The newspaper has printed his remarks. But I 
absolutely was not scaring anybody. 
  I told them solemnly that Taiwan independence should cause a 
serious catastrophe for Taiwan at once. 
  They said that every year we draw up such a large national 
defense budget. We have three powerful military services. Why 
should we fear the Communists? I said I admit that our three 
services are strong, but if the Chinese armed forces invade can 
we wipe them all out? What will happen to Taiwan? In warfare 
nowadays -- like in Kuwait, for example -- when the American 
army went into Kuwait, it lost seven men. This kind of warfare 
is called "advance warfare," but it employs airplanes, missiles, 
and all kinds of heavy weapons to disintegrate the enemy, 
including the enemy's government, economy, and especially his 
armed forces. When that happens, how many families will be 
broken up and scattered, how many fathers and mothers will lose 
their sons and daughters, and how many sons and daughters will 
lose their fathers and mothers. Or how many widows and orphans 
will be made? In other matters I may be a greenhorn, but I have 
been a military many for many years. At least I am no greenhorn 
about that. 
  Question: In view of present relations between both sides of 
the Strait, if you were in charge, what do you think would be 
the best course? 
  Answer: Given the present circumstances, the best course is 
to adopt a positive attitude about promoting mainland reform, 
realizing free, democratic, and equally wealthy unification at 
the proper time. In advance of the Fourteenth Plenary Session, 
the Kuomintang Central Committee invited a number of scholars, 
and experts to discuss a political program draft with some 
members of the Central Committee. I presented two ideas at this 
meeting: One was to remove restrictions on non-political direct 
shipping. Today, large amounts of exports from Taiwan reach the 
mainland, but they are transshipped through a third location. 
This increases the waste of manpower, material, and financial 
resources. Second is to remove restrictions on mainland labor 
coming to Taiwan. Restrictions have been removed on foreign 
laborers, why not for our fellow countrymen? Mainland workers 
have the same language, customs and habits, so why persist in 
getting people who have a different language, customs, and 
habits, rejecting what is close at hand while going after what 
is far away? 
  [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20505 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Gap' Seen Between KMT, Intellectuals on Campuses </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0129A Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] in Chinese 
No 353, 18 Dec 93 p 62 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0129A </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chi Yen-ling (4764 1693 7117): "This Hundred </F>
Year Old Shop is Still Selling Moldy Ancient Relics"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
  The university law is a "not very political" or even a "non 
political" law, but today when Taiwan society has long since 
entered the "post-martial law" period, the Kuomintang [KMT] 
continues to regard universities with a kind of political 
martial law point of view. The role of political indoctrinators 
and political parties on campuses not only has not been 
eliminated or reduced as the result of "post-martial law" 
structural changes; instead it has acquired greater legal 
standing and greater support than during the martial law era. 
Looked at with a "post-martial law" view, the product of martial 
law is old goods in old garb that are more martial than martial 
law. How can it be regarded as other than an ancient relic? Of 
course, the things that hundred year old shops sell are rich in 
"historical value." 
  At each election time, the KMT pulls out all stops to win 
over the public. It breaks its neck repaying the debts it owes; 
it goes all out to resolve grievances; and it writes all the 
checks that it has to write. From the chairman of the party to 
the candidates for office, everyone says nice things and thinks 
of all possible ways to coax and humbug the electorate into 
going to polling places to vote. But once the voting is over, 
the KMT reverts to its old ways. It will not budge on areas it 
must guard, and it will not relent on time it wants to control. 
Old debts are repaid only to incur new ones, and old grievances 
are resolved only to be replaced by new ones. The wider gap 
today between the KMT and the intellectuals on amendment of the 
university law is a classic example. 
  The fact is that for several years prior to amendment of the 
university law, the percentage of "non-KMT" or "anti-KMT" people 
on college campuses, from professors to students, has gradually 
increased. In recent years, in particular, in the aftermath of 
several large and small student demonstrations, the political 
position of many college students has tilted more and more 
toward the opposition party. Following graduation, college 
students who played the role of student movement leaders, either 
go into jobs helping opposition party candidates run for 
election, or become assistants to opposition party legislators. 
An even larger number rush off to opposition party candidate 
headquarters to volunteer whenever an election occurs. In 
addition, each time those in charge of student groups have been 
re-elected in recent years, most have been elected from among 
opposition party students. This also makes clear the political 
atmosphere on college campuses today. 
  Of course, college campuses still have very many professors 
and students who are strongly loyal to the KMT, but with each 
student campaign, the number who are strongly loyal to the KMT 
declines somewhat. This is a plain fact. During the past several 
years, the KMT has "fostered" and "created" quite a few 
opposition party elite in colleges. The "March Student Campaign" 
of more than three years ago was such a case; the "100 Actions 
League" of two years ago was such a case; and the present 
campaign to "rescue the university law" is naturally no 
exception. 
  During the martial law period, whether political 
indoctrinators and political parties should leave college 
campuses may have been a substantive issue, but today the issue 
of whether political indoctrinators and political parties should 
leave simply cannot generate any real effect on college students 
whose independence is increasing daily. No matter how ferocious 
political indoctrinators may be, the students can simply ignore 
them; and no matter how pervasive political parties, the 
students can make their own choice. Nevertheless, today the 
matter of political indoctrinators and political parties leaving 
or not leaving has become a symbolic issue. Leaving denotes an 
open frame of mind; not leaving denotes a conservative frame of 
mind. This is the main reason for the linking of hands by 
students and professors in opposition to amendment of the 
university law. 
  Superficially, the KMT has won in the university law 
amendment process, but ill will between the intellectuals and 
the KMT has deepened. This is the grievous price that the KMT 
must pay. The percentage of this generation of college students 
to go over to the opposition party camp will consequently 
increase. This is the second price the KMT must pay. The 
university law amendment process also makes the public realize 
once again the true face of the hundred year old KMT shop. It 
attests once again that the KMT speaks nothing but pretty lies, 
that it is an old political party with a thoroughly conservative 
frame of mind, and that Li Teng-hui's "changing into new garb," 
and "selling new goods" is nothing more than a deceptive slogan. 
This is an even greater price that the KMT must pay. The KMT 
obtained a university law, but it lost confidence and an image. 
Whether the KMT has gained or lost is clear. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20506 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 November 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   TIENHSIA Views Anti-Corruption Mechanism </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0129B Taipei TIENHSIA [COMMONWEALTH] in Chinese No 10, 
15 Nov 93 pp 102-104, 107 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0129B </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei TIENHSIA [COMMONWEALTH] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chu Wan-ch'i (2612 1238 3825): "Surgery on </F>
Bottlenecks in the Elimination of Corruption"] 
  [Excerpts] The "golden triangle" of existing "institutions 
for the elimination of corruption" -- investigative organs 
(including administrative style units), the procuratorial 
system, and the courts -- have all accepted "elimination of 
corruption cases," and "key points in work to eliminate 
corruption" as a result of the opposition party's clamor to get 
something done. The Supreme Procuratorate has set up a 
"Corruption Elimination Supervisory Team;" procuratorate offices 
in every jurisdiction have set up "corruption elimination 
enforcement teams;" and "clean government offices" are being 
studied. 
  Does the advent of these new "teams" and "cases," and even 
"offices," in the "corruption elimination system" truly help 
eliminate corruption? Just what problems have arisen in this 
system? 
  Institutionally speaking, the main reason for no effective 
action in the elimination of corruption is that in the overall 
corruption case adjudication process, the investigation and 
judicial organs receive too much "political" interference." This 
makes it very difficult for them to handle matters independently 
according to law. 
  [passage omitted] Thus, even though investigative organs 
make 
a great effort to gather evidence, they lack the authority to 
decide whether a case is forwarded to the local procuratorial 
office. Although the Investigation Bureau is under the Ministry 
of Justice, "daddy is the Ministry of Justice and mommy is the 
National Security Bureau," a senior investigator said. "Big 
cases," in particular, must be presented to an "advisory 
unit"--the National Security Bureau -- which considers "what 
effect the handling of a big case will have on social stability" 
before deciding whether or not to forward it to a procuratorial 
office. The National Security Bureau is, in turn, subject to the 
president's direction. Some "big cases" about which there has 
been speculation in the media, such as the "Eighteen Bids," are 
seemingly quiescent now. Should these "big cases" be tried? 
"Whether they are tried depends on the decision of higher 
authority. They are not forwarded for prosecution on the basis 
of evidence obtained," said an investigator. "Whether a big case 
is tried depends on the "determination of higher ups." 
  After cases are "filtered" by the Investigation Bureau, they 
are forwarded to the local procuratorate where they face another 
"filtering." This is because, even if the procuratorial officer 
in charge feels evidence is sufficient to prosecute, in 
practice, the principal procuratorial officer and the procurator 
"jointly consider" the case, and it is "considered level by 
level" before a final decision is made. Some years ago when Kao 
Hsin-wu was a low level procuratorial officer, once he 
determined that the evidence was sufficient, Wu T'ien-hui, who 
was director of the Judicial Conduct and Discipline Department, 
was immediately detained and prosecuted in a bribery case 
without notification to higher authority. For this Kao incurred 
criticism for not respecting judicial ethics, aruption" as a 
result of the opposition party's clamor to get something done. 
The Supreme Procuratorate has set up a "Corruption Elimination 
Supervisory Team;" procuratorate offices in every jurisdiction 
have set up "corruption elimination enforcement teams;" and 
"clean government offices" are being studied. 
  Does the advent of these new "teams" and "cases," and even 
"offices," in the "corruption elimination system" truly help 
eliminate corruption? Just what problems have arisen in this 
system? 
  Institutionally speaking, the main reason for no effective 
action in the elimination of corruption is that in the overall 
corruption case adjudication process, the investigation and 
judicial organs receive too much "political" interference." This 
makes it very difficult for them to handle matters independently 
according to law. 
  [passage omitted] Thus, even though investigative organs 
make 
a great effort to gather evidence, they lack the authority to 
decide whether a case is forwarded to the local procuratorial 
office. Although the Investigation Bureau is under the Ministry 
of Justice, "daddy is the Ministry of Justice and mommy is the 
National Security Bureau," a senior investigator said. "Big 
cases," in particular, must be presented to an "advisory 
unit"--the National Security Bureau -- which considers "what 
effect the handling of a big case will have on social stability" 
before deciding whether or not to forward it to a procuratorial 
office. The National Security Bureau is, in turn, subject to the 
president's direction. Some "big cases" about which there has 
been speculation in the media, such as the "Eighteen Bids," are 
seemingly quiescent now. Should these "big cases" be tried? 
"Whether they are tried depends on the decision of higher 
authority. They are not forwarded for prosecution on the basis 
of evidence obtained," said an investigator. "Whether a big case 
is tried depends on the "determination of higher ups." 
  After cases are "filtered" by the Investigation Bureau, they 
are forwarded to the local procuratorate where they face another 
"filtering." This is because, even if the procuratorial officer 
in charge feels evidence is sufficient to prosecute, in 
practice, the principal procuratorial officer and the procurator 
"jointly consider" the case, and it is "considered level by 
level" before a final decision is made. Some years ago when Kao 
Hsin-wu was a low level procuratorial officer, once he 
determined that the evidence was sufficient, Wu T'ien-hui, who 
was director of the Judicial Conduct and Discipline Department, 
was immediately detained and prosecuted in a bribery case 
without notification to higher authority. For this Kao incurred 
criticism for not respecting judicial ethics, and for failure to 
observe procedures for handling cases. Had Kao Hsin-wu abided by 
normal procedures for presenting the case, Wu T'ien-hui might 
not have been prosecuted for bribery. 
  Taiwan's procuratorial institutions are not a part of the 
courts, but are subordinate to the Ministry of Justice in the 
administrative system. Procurators are judicial administrative 
officers who must consider policies. 
  The declared policy of the government is to punish 
corruption 
severely. It was on the basis of the "corruption elimination 
program" that the Supreme Procuratorate set up the "Corruption 
Elimination Supervisory Team," the public procurator-general 
convening these teams, which are made up of the head of the 
Investigation Bureau, the head of the procurator's office, and 
the administrative discipline office director. All local 
procuratorial offices set up "corruption elimination execution 
teams" for which the procurator is the convener and the members 
include the procuratorial officer in charge, the Investigation 
Department (Station) chief, and the administrative discipline 
office director in the procuratorial organ. The execution teams 
hold a meeting once each month. At the end of each month, they 
must tabulate cases and report their adjudication to the 
"supervisory team." 
  In reality, the holding of such team meetings only provides 
the procuratorial organs a chance to exchange views. They do not 
discuss individual cases. "Today it is still a matter of general 
discussion about how to proceed. It is idle theorizing, not 
using the time to deal with cases," a procuratorial officer in 
charge said indifferently. 
  Since these "teams" function in such a limited way, what 
would happen were a "Clean Government Office" set up to deal 
with corruption? "To have a system like the one in Singapore or 
Hong Kong, the first problem is to amend the law. Only if it is 
geared to the law can a clean government office play a role. 
Given the Legislative Yuan's present efficiency and attitude 
about handling its agenda, with too many laws awaiting 
formulation and amendment, I think this is a very difficult 
problem," said a deputy magistrate pessimistically. " What units 
to set up is a secondary consideration. The most important issue 
is the determination and coordination of law enforcement 
personnel," said a procuratorate officer in charge who has 
handled cases for more than a decade, thereby expressing the 
same view. 
  Even if the determination exists, there are two few judicial 
personnel. When it comes to the elimination of cooperation, it 
is a case of the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak for 
judicial personnel. 
  Today, every procuratorial office and court has a 
"designated" procurator and justice in charge of corruption 
cases. In the view of the procurator general and the Chief 
Justice, a trait they hold in common is unquestionable personal 
integrity. They have enthusiasm for their work and ample 
experience in handling cases. They can serve only after being 
selected. Nevertheless, despite use of the term "designated", 
they must handle other cases as well. 
  Take the greater Taipei area, for example. Each month, the 
local procurator must handle between 140 and 160 cases. On 
average, he must handle six cases every work day. At the end of 
each month, he is under pressure to conclude cases, in addition 
to which corruption case investigations take time. The 
designated procurators who are able to "take the initiative, and 
actively" investigate evidence are few and far between. The 
difficulty is that the job "is impossible to do, but has to be 
done." One procurator said with some agitation, "the number of 
judicial officials on record is extremely limited, so 
procurators want the Investigation Department to help out. The 
number of Procuratorate personnel is decreasing rather than 
increasing. There are just too few hands..." Every month and 
every year the number of criminal cases mounts, but the number 
of procurators and justices on record do not rise in proportion 
to the number of cases. In addition, the manpower that the 
Investigation Department and transferred lawyers can devote to 
is consequently insufficient. All the courts and procuratorate 
offices agree. People have known this for a long time. This 
problem has lingered without solution for many years. It is a 
perpetual thorn in the side of the judicial system. 
  In addition to an insufficient number of judicial personnel, 
the system for selecting justices is also currently unable to 
ensure the quality of legal personnel. Law officers are 
generated by an examination system. If they are not versed in 
the law, even the law cannot pass them, much less can it produce 
officers having moral character. Examination Yuan member Ti 
Tsung-ch'uan believes that testing of justices should emulate 
the United States system, increasing moral character checks, and 
that a system for eliminating justices should also be instituted. 
  Second, the provisions of the law are not clear and 
punishments are not uniform. This also permits grafters to 
suppose they can get away with violations. They are willing to 
test the law. Current provisions for the punishment of 
corruption include the criminal law's dereliction of duty 
articles and a special law's "corruption punishment 
regulations." If other laws contained heavier penalty 
provisions, in view of the principle that "severe laws are 
superior to light laws," sentences would be heavier. 
  However, in actual enforcement, a sentence may be light at 
one time and heavy at another. The explanation that the courts 
give is that sentencing depends on the strength of the evidence. 
Some evidence only supports a sentence for an attempt to make 
money for oneself or for others; others support a sentence for 
offering bribes, and still other support a sentence for 
accepting bribes. Thus, sentences vary in severity or lightness. 
However, in the corruption realm, when distinctions are made as 
to whether corruption consists of payment for administrative 
action, the conveyance of benefits, profit for oneself, offering 
bribes, or accepting bribes, even justices must consider 
carefully so how much more so ordinary folk. Thus, everyone 
begins to calculate his own risk. Some who are risk takers by 
nature take a gamble. If they fail and receive a heavy sentence, 
they chalk it off to bad luck. 
  Only when the provisions of the law are crystal clear will 
the people be able to understand how to act. 
  "When Japan ruled Taiwan, major matters of justice such as 
participation in government and political affairs were clearly 
not accorded the people, but small matters of justice involving 
the courts, taxation, and the police, the Japanese did not 
withhold. Moreover, government adherence to these small matters 
of justice, which affected the people most, built the people's 
confidence about civil rights. No wonder that many people have 
fond memories of the past," said Huang Yueh-ch'in. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20507 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Direction of Administrative Reform Assessed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0156A Shanghai SHEHUI KEXUE [SOCIAL SCIENCES] in Chinese 
No 1, 15 Jan 94 pp 18-21 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0156A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHEHUI KEXUE [SOCIAL SCIENCES] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ren Xiao (0117 2556) of the Department of </F>
International Political Affairs at Fudan University, edited by 
Xi Ling (6007 1545): "China's Administrative Reform: Targets and 
Trends"] 
  [Text] The last decade of the 20th Century is being 
characterized by a great change and reorganization in the world 
order. The world has entered the post-Cold War period, an age 
of new great changes, also bringing international competition to 
a new stage. In this age of transition to a new century, the 
international test of overall national might based on S&amp;T is 
growing increasingly sharper, with all countries engaged in this 
competition going all out to keep from being left behind. As 
this race is essentially an economic one, economics is 
increasingly becoming the fundamental factor in international 
competition. This is precisely why the economic relations 
among countries is acquiring an ever more prominent status in 
international relations, with a country's foreign affairs 
evolving increasingly into economic diplomacy. Matters such as 
social stability, national might, foreign relations, 
international standing, national self-esteem, and cultural 
endurance are all closely tied to economic development. In 
this age of internationalization and growing economic importance 
that is so full of challenges and opportunities, we need even 
more so to evaluate China's development in the context of the 
overall order of world development, as well as evaluating 
China's administrative reform in the context of the overall 
order of China's social development, which is the only way to 
see clearly certain matters of fundamental importance. 
  In our over a decade of reform and opening since the late 
1970s, Chinese society has undergone enormous changes. Whether 
in economics, politics, and culture or in systems, mechanisms, 
and concepts, we have experienced a process of profound change. 
Chinese society is now in a period of full-scale conversion. 
This social transformation can be seen in the following: 
  1. The conversion from a planned to a market 
economy. We are converting the decisionmaking on our 
disposition of resources from planning to markets. In a planned 
economy, as production factors such as capital, technology, and 
labor are planned and set by governments at all levels based on 
subordinate relations, forcing and making it possible only for 
enterprises to carry out their production activities in 
accordance with the orders of the government departments 
responsible for them, a planned economy is actually a command 
economy. But in a market economy, as factors such as capital, 
technology, and labor are organized in an optimum fashion by 
markets, with enterprises carrying out production activities 
according to market signals, there is a more efficient 
disposition of resources. This is a great conversion of our 
economic system and its operating forces. 
  2. The transformation from an agricultural to an 
industrial society. This transformation is symbolized by 
the steady drop in the percentage of our GNP made up by 
agriculture, accompanied by a rapid upswing in the percentage 
accounted for by industrial output value, with the sudden coming 
to the fore as a new force of township enterprises sharply 
accelerating this transformation. As our agricultural 
productivity grows, our rural areas are experiencing a large 
amount of surplus labor. As urbanization accelerates, our rural 
and urban populations are in a state of one declining while the 
other grows. 
  3. The conversion from a closed to an open 
society. China's closed society used to be reflected in two 
areas. 1. We were closed to the outside world, unilaterally 
emphasizing independence and self-sufficiency free from 
international competition, resulting in a steadily widening gap 
with advanced international levels. 2. We were closed 
internally, with industries, systems, and regions closed off 
from each other, responsible only to superiors in various 
subordinate relationships, and taking orders from superiors 
instead of conducting lateral economic intercourse, which 
violated the laws of general socialized production, and created 
a huge waste of resources. But through over a decade of reform, 
Chinese society today is in a state of openness in all 
directions, both internally and to the outside world. 
  4. The transformation from an ethical to a legal 
society. In an ethical society, social behavior is largely 
standardized by family bloodlines and marriage and family 
relations; but in a legal society, social behavior is more 
equally standardized by mostly laws. So the transformation from 
the former to the latter is one from favoritism through dealing 
with different people in different ways to universalism 
through equal treatment without discrimination, and from a 
society dominated by status to one dominated by contract. 
  In such a process of profound social transformation, the new 
and old systems, orders, standards, and forces will coexist and 
overlap for quite a sustained period of time, producing various 
frictions, conflicts, and clashes that may grow particularly 
sharp for a time. This puts high demands on the government's 
role, administration, and management. From a macroperspective, 
the conflicts and clashes of the conversion period can be seen 
mainly in four areas. 
  1. The conflict between higher living standards and 
increased accumulation and investment. Any country that 
wants to develop its economy needs large-scale investment, 
meaning large amounts of funding. While some funding can be 
acquired from abroad, most capital formation must occur 
domestically, causing a conflict between steadily growing 
consumer aspirations and increased fund accumulation and 
investment. In a consumption-driven climate, the large amount of 
social resources urgently needed for economic development can 
slip away. In addition, in an initial period of economic growth, 
income-distribution inequality can increase, being further 
sharpened by a developed country's "demonstration effect," 
confronting the government with new pressures. 
  2. The contradiction between political participation 
and change, and stability. Basic political stability is a 
condition needed for economic growth. Policy formulation and 
enforcement can be effective only in a relatively stable 
political environment. In the course of a social transformation, 
public participation is bound to grow, even to the point of a 
so-called "participation explosion." So how to maintain basic 
political stability along with sustained change, and to preserve 
the necessary political order while public political 
participation is growing, are key matters that governments must 
resolve during periods of social transformation. 
  3. The conflict between economic system-conversion and 
balanced control. Economic system-conversion and the 
transformation of economic operating forces are the economic 
features of a period of social transformation. But a good start 
for economic activities also requires a good economic climate 
and order, meaning certain regulation and control mechanisms. 
M. J. Levy notes that after the modernization process begins, 
regardless whether development is as smooth or effective as 
imagined, it still requires a completely different type of more 
concentrated management, control, and coordination, which is 
needed for the modernization process per se. So while 
proceeding steadily with system conversion, it is necessary to 
establish a certain balanced control, to give the government 
diversified means of regulating and controlling economic 
activities. Otherwise, economic activities might no longer 
have rules and order, to land in a state of chaos and disorder. 
  4. The contradiction between cultural traditions and 
replacements. During periods of social transformation, the 
clash of outside cultures and values is often like surging 
waves, causing a contradiction between cultural traditions and 
replacements. Any society's development proceeds on its own 
unique historical and cultural terms, so that in the course of 
social transformation, while a society must change and renew, it 
absolutely must not wholly abandon its own cultural traditions. 
In fact, no society can first create a vacuum and then proceed 
to develop. So how to balance tradition with change is also a 
crucial matter. 
  And in real life, the conflicts brought by social 
transformation might be far greater than even these, with their 
manifestations also possibly being far more complex. Such 
intricate contradictions put enormous pressure on government, 
with how to effectively cope and deal with them being a 
formidable government mission. 
  Studies in modernization theory show that modernization in 
backward countries has two general features. 1. Political change 
often becomes the forerunner of economic and social change, with 
marked political change bringing striking economic and social 
change. 2. When modernization begins, as the outside world 
already has a far more developed society, modernization in 
backward countries becomes a sort of "catch-up" modernization. 
Japanese sociologist Fuyong Jianyi [1381 3057 0256 0001] has 
pointed out that social development in backward countries has 
the following five features: 1. Social development proceeds 
step by step based on particular development stages, with it 
being impossible to leap over intermediate stages; 2. In order 
for modernization and industrialization to take social roots in 
backward countries, government-led and conscientious 
modernization and industrialization policies "from top to 
bottom" are indispensable; 3. It is necessary to overcome 
clashes among domestic groups holding varying views on 
modernization; 4. In order to internalize as one's country's own 
things elements of industrial civilization, mostly S&amp;T, that 
are 
received through cultural transmission, it is necessary for 
someone to undertake this internalization; 5. It is necessary 
to shake off the yoke of adverse international economic 
relations. Obviously, these five features are all very 
important to the course of modernization in backward countries. 
  Historically, governments have played varying roles in 
different countries. In Britain, the first country to achieve 
modernization, the role played by government in economic 
development was more secondary. The only matters that Adam 
Smith's Wealth of Nations required government to 
handle were maintaining law and order and coping with foreign 
invasions. Decisionmaking on resource utilization and income 
distribution was left to markets, with government acting only as 
referee. But as time passed, government influence on 
economic development gradually expanded to the point where, 
without active government support, there was no successful 
economic development. In the second group of countries to 
develop, on the western part of the European continent (such as 
France and Germany), the system of government played a more 
important role in economic and social modernization. And in 
the countries that later modernized successfully (such as the 
Soviet Union and Japan), the political impact was often 
dominant. In other words, from the perspective of the course 
of worldwide economic development from modern times to 
contemporary to current, the economic development process has 
undergone a basic change from being market-determined to a state 
in which the role played by government is growing steadily. 
Meanwhile, in backward countries, the various issues necessary 
to be resolved for modernization, such as eliminating poverty, 
converting systems, expanding participation, raising 
literacy rates, preventing excessive income-distribution 
inequality, and accumulating the necessary economic development 
capital as quickly as possible, have steadily appeared one after 
another in a very short period of time. This means that the 
governments of backward countries must play a dynamic positive 
role in economic and social development, acting as powerful 
organizers and drivers of economic development. 
  In the course of a country's economic growth, once the 
economy begins to get into a good cycle, there is often a stage 
of rapid growth. This stage is usually also one of powerful 
government dominance, such as from 1955 to 1973 in Japan, fom 
1961 to 1979 in South Korea, and throughout the 1960s in Taiwan, 
all of which stages were ones of rapid economic growth with 
obvious government direction, guidance, and drive. As to 
China, this stage has begun, and can be predicted to continue 
through the end of this century and the beginning of the next. 
During rapid growth, the government has many ways and means of 
driving rapid economic growth, such as taking many protectionist 
steps for the country's young industries (protectionist policy), 
giving priority to propping up key strategic industries that the 
country needs urgently (industrial policy), controlling the 
labor movement (labor policy), and gradually increasing the 
international competitiveness of manufactured goods, while 
actively cultivating a modern market system. Taking industrial 
policy for instance, the crux of industrial policy is to 
concentrate the use of the country's limited resources in 
industries most advantageous to national development, by 
strengthening the country's industrial structure, in order to 
raise its international market competitiveness. Industrial 
policy and its expressed structural adjustment are strong 
leaders, not waiting for spontaneous market adjustment, but 
rather taking the initiative to powerfully guide structural 
adjustment and upgrading. And this leading role carries a 
certain flavor of opposition to markets. This is because the 
structural orientation of industrial policy does not adhere 
rigidly to the market dogma of "comparative advantage," often 
requiring rather that comparatively inferior industries be 
propped up to become ones with comparative advantage, thus 
steadily achieving industrial structural adjustment and 
industrial upgrading, to catch up to and even surpass advanced 
international standards. 
  In order for government to successfully play a dominant role 
in periods of rapid growth, it needs certain qualifications, the 
crux of which is an efficient system of government 
administration. This can be seen mainly in the two areas: the 
need for government to have enough capability to formulate and 
implement policy and the need for government policymaking to be 
scientific and optimized. 
  1. Government must have an adequate and strong enough 
capability for it to be able to play a positive and dynamic role 
in economic and social development, as a government without such 
capability would be bound to be incapable of accomplishing 
anything. Government capabilities include: 
  1. The ability to maintain order. Any reform and 
development can proceed smoothly only if there is a climate of 
basic stability. So it can be said that a certain amount of 
order and stability is a prerequisite for development. Creating 
this prerequisite for national development is an essential 
governrment responsibility. 
  2. The capacity to mobilize the public. Catch-up and 
concentrated development often requires government to have great 
mobilization capacity and appeal, so that it can mobilize all 
public resources and focus all social forces to work 
collectively toward certain designated national targets. 
  3. The capability to create new policy. As the domestic and 
external environment for a country's economic and social 
development is constantly changing, the government needs to 
create new policies in a timely way, by making prompt responses 
to changes in this environment, in order to control the 
development-initiative authority. 
  4. The ability to carry out policies. Contemporary 
political science studies show that a crisis often faced by 
developing countries is an implementation crisis, in that they 
cannot conscientiously carry out policies, so are unable to 
achieve strict enforcement of orders and prohibitions. In such 
a state of affairs, government policies are ineffective no 
matter how timely or correct, so that it is only with adequate 
implementation capability that government will can be converted 
into practical action. 
  2. Policymaking must be scientific. As 
governments in backward, catch-up economies need to play a 
dominant role, scientific government policymaking is decisive. 
  While the duties and responsibilities of the central 
government and local governments at all levels differ, 
optimizing government policymaking is an urgent joint 
responsibility. In government-dominated economic development, 
directed regulation, control, and guidance of policy is crucial. 
While the positive role of correct policy goes without saying, 
the negative impact of wrong policy must also not be downplayed. 
It is only scientific and optimized policymaking that produces 
correct strategies, timely policies, and effective measures, to 
ensure successful government dominance. 
  In light of this, our administrative reform targets are 
clear 
at a glance. As our system of government administration 
occupies such an important position in the catch-up 
modernization process, administrative reform targeted at 
speeding up and promoting an effective system of government 
administration also becomes a very pressing matter. As change 
is a constant subject of administration for all countries 
throughout the world, whether developed or developing, 
emphasizing and conscientiously conducting administrative-reform 
studies and practice has become a universal global phenomenon. 
In developed countries, as political and economic pluralism is 
more extensive, administrative reform generally focuses on 
cutting administrative spending and raising administrative 
efficiency to get more output (good policy) from less input 
(human and material resources). But in developing countries, 
in addition to cutting spending and raising efficiency, 
administrative reform is focused even more so on promoting 
economic development. Catch-up modernization means that backward 
countries have to complete in a shorter period of time the 
industrialization process that took developed countries a longer 
period of time to accomplish. Today's China is in this stage, 
which will continue into the next century. So at the turn of the 
century, with sharp international competition confronting 
China with a stiff challenge, how to meet this challenge 
successfully is a large matter that will determine China's fate. 
The most crucial things will be upgrading our economy and 
increasing our economic might. From the 1990s to the early 
21st century, as long as the domestic and external climate does 
not undergo a significant critical change, and our domestic 
political and social stability is not undermined, there is hope 
that China's economy will maintain a state of sustained rapid 
growth. Until this stage is over, government dominance will be 
exceptionally intense. The basic mission of China's 
administrative reform will be to steadily reform and optimize 
our administrative system, by establishing a corps of officials 
who are of high quality, efficient, and good at dealing with 
contingencies flexibly, and while speeding up the establishment 
of a socialist market economy, will be capable of strengthening 
government guidance and speeding up economic growth. So our 
corresponding administrative reform strategies should be: 
  To raise government efficiency, with the primary option 
being 
to strengthen government capability; 
  To make sustained and rapid economic growth our strategic 
orientation; 
  To take a rational disposition of public resources as our 
major means; 
  To make system optimization and organizational creativity 
our 
key ways. 
  During this age of sharp international competition, in the 
great international race toward the 21st century, the key to 
keeping China invincible will be economic development. To adapt 
to the needs of the times and our need for economic development, 
an effective and high-quality system of government 
administration will ensure and accelerate our economic and 
social development, which is the crux of administrative reform. 
Grasping this will mean getting a firm hold on China's 
administrative reform direction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20508 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  17 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xu Jiatun's Memoirs on Brainstorming Session </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0133A Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 7-9 Jul 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0133A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installments No. 64-66 of the serialized memoirs of Xu </F>
Jiatun: "Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
<H5>  [7 Jul p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Brainstorming Session (Part One of Two) -- 
Failing To Seek Instructions; Adopting Overly High-Profile In 
Mass Work; Li Hou, Lu Ping, and Zhou Nan Take Turns Criticizing 
Me 
  After the Beidahe conference, there were rumors in the media 
in both Beijing and Hong Kong that I was about to be 
transferred, rumors I simply ignored. I understood I was working 
beyond the retirement age and was ready to quit anytime. But I 
had always followed this principle: As long as the CPC Central 
Committee wanted me to stay in my post, I would try my best to 
do a good job. 
  Over two months later, the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office 
notified me a brainstorming session would be held for leaders 
from these four units: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Hong 
Kong and Macao Affairs Office, the foreign affairs department of 
XINHUA SHE, and the working committee of XINHUA SHE Hong Kong 
office. I was asked to send three participants from the XINHUA 
SHE Hong Kong office. They did not give me any names, so I 
decided that Li Zhuwen [2621 6308 2429] and Zheng Hua [6774 
5478] should attend the meeting with me. 
  Looking at the list of conference participants, I saw that 
the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office was represented by Li Hou 
and Lu Ping; the XINHUA SHE foreign affairs department, Li 
Zhongying [2621 6945 5391]; and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Zhou Nan [0719 0589] and Ke Zaishuo [2688 0961 7007]. At it 
turned out, Ke Zaishuo went on leave and did not attend. (There 
is no way of telling whether he really had other business 
engagements or was just trying to avoid the meeting.) 
  The brainstorming session took place at Zhongnanhai and was 
presided over by Ji Pengfei [1213 7720 7378], who asked me to 
address the gathering as the session began. I had a feeling the 
meeting was targeting me, so I said, "I don't know what to say. 
Why don't you air your views first?" Li Hou was the first to 
speak. He said that I had mishandled Sino-British relations 
without, however, giving any concrete examples. All he did was 
to go over Zhou Enlai's instructions on diplomatic work, the 
gist of which was that on diplomatic matters, the CPC Central 
Committee has delegated only limited power to organizations 
stationed overseas and that when it comes to important things, 
one must ask for instructions and not make decisions without 
authorization. Li Hou argued that XINHUA SHE was also a 
diplomatic organ and must not depart from this principle. He 
mentioned no names, but in reality he was attacking me for 
violating this particular instruction by Zhou Enlai. 
  The next to speak was Lu Ping, who talked about mass work. 
He 
said that after I went to Hong Kong, I assumed too high a 
profile in mass work, in some ways giving people the impression 
that I had created a second power center, that I had 
transplanted to Hong Kong the way of doing things back home. 
  Zhou Nan devoted the bulk of his speech to criticizing me 
for 
a point I made in a report on the principles of Hong Kong work: 
"The Hong Kong society is in a state of great upheaval, deep 
division, and extensive transformation." Calling this statement 
inaccurate, he said that the vast majority of Hong Kong people 
were patriotic and there was no such thing as "upheaval," 
"division," or "transformation." He also said that these were 
Mao Zedong's words and should not be repeated. 
  The morning was devoted to these three people's speeches, 
which appeared to be a prearranged division of labor. I spoke in 
the afternoon responding to their speeches. I also touched upon 
three topics: my interpretation of the situation, the 
Sino-British dispute, and united front and mass work. 
  "Great upheaval, deep division, and extensive 
transformation," I explained, represented the reality in Hong 
Kong after China and Britain began negotiations on Hong Kong. 
While there had been some dissatisfaction with British rule in 
the past few decades, by and large people were content because 
of the way the economy had developed. In contrast, they harbored 
doubts about China. Logically speaking and out of national 
sentimental feelings, some people embraced the idea of returning 
Hong Kong to China. Others did not care for it but could not 
bring themselves to say it. Even those who supported the return 
of Hong Kong to China also worried that their lives in the 
future would be affected by changes in the social system and 
felt uneasy. 
  Unwilling to turn over Hong Kong, Britain had resorted to 
the 
old ruse colonialists always used when forced to withdraw. The 
fact of the matter is that it was trying to divide Hong Kong, 
already split over the issue of China takeover. British actions 
only served to deepen the division in Hong Kong. Among the more 
tangible signs were these: the strong support for the proposal 
of Britain giving up sovereignty over Hong Kong in return for 
the right to rule it, the rejection of our suggestions, the 
increasing number of people immigrating overseas, and the rising 
outflow of funds. All this pointed to turmoil and growing 
division. 
  Bipolarization in Hong Kong was sharpening by the day in 
terms of social stratification, ideology, and along the 
pro-China versus pro-British line. Needless to say, there were 
people who trusted neither side and chose to leave Hong Kong 
instead. Social transformation had reached unprecedented 
proportions and was becoming more and more obvious. 
  I said, "One may or may not use the word `great' in our 
analysis of the situation. It is not necessarily wrong to use 
the word. Chairman Mao Zedong made mistakes in his old age, but 
that does not mean everything he said is unspeakable." 
  Regarding Li Hou's arguments, I noted that in terms of 
status, Hong Kong is different from other foreign countries. It 
is foreign (because it is a British colony). But China does not 
recognize its legitimacy as a colony and want to resume 
sovereignty over it. "XINHUA SHE Hong Kong office is a 
diplomatic organ, but only up to a point. As long as Hong Kong 
is not returned to China, the British remain the prime 
protagonist. We deal with the British every day. If we act like 
a diplomatic organ and ask Beijing for instructions in 
everything, you will be bothered no end and we won't be able to 
get anything done. On major things, I would ask for instruction. 
But I cannot do so all the time like a full-fledged diplomatic 
organ." 
  "As for the second-power-center claim, is that really the 
case? We need not get into that. In Hong Kong I do my level best 
to avoid giving that kind of impression. But with the prospect 
of China taking back Hong Kong looming on the horizon, isn't 
there a need for XINHUA SHE Hong Kong office to do work in the 
open? Since the CPC Central Committee and State Council sent me 
to work over there, it is my duty to do mass work and united 
front work on their behalf. Certainly, there should be 
differences in method, style, and substance from mass work and 
united front work on the mainland. But the bottom line is that 
we must work in the public arena. Otherwise, we would be tying 
our own hands, wouldn't we?" (Installment No. 64) 
<H5>  [8 Jul p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Brainstorming Session (Part Two of Two) 
  Li Zhuwen and Zheng Hua were asked to speak the next day; Li 
Zhuwen made exactly the same points as Li Hou, Lu Ping, and Zhou 
Nan. Only later did I learn that as soon as he arrived in 
Beijing, Li Zhuwen went to look up Wu Xueqian [0702 1331 6197], 
his old boss from the days of the Shanghai underground party, 
and became privy to what the meeting was all about, which was 
enough to make him do a complete about-face by siding with the 
Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and criticizing me. Zheng Hua 
made some remarks critical of me and offered a number of 
explanations. 
  After we spoke, Li Hou and Lu Ping made some additional 
comments. The former spent most of his speech attacking me, 
calling me arrogant and totally unresponsive to their opinions. 
Lu Ping argued that the conflicts in Hong Kong were 
multifaceted, with different conflicts taking center stage at 
various points in time. Therefore, he said, we could not 
consider the Sino-British dispute the main conflict in Hong Kong. 
  I was asked to speak after they finished. I said I would 
address the gathering the next day since time had run out. At 
that point Ji Pengfei opened his mouth and spoke for a dozen 
minutes, criticizing me for making "leftist" errors in my work 
in Hong Kong. 
  That was not what I expected. I thought they were going to 
criticize me for being "rightist." Now I was branded a 
"leftist." Only then did I realize the errors they cited, 
including such concrete examples as the Kowloon Walled City 
incident and particularly the "copy controversy," were all 
"leftist" errors. (Deng Xiaoping's endorsement of the "copy 
controversy"--"well said"--came after this meeting.) 
  After the conference, I thought about the position taken by 
Ji Pengfei and realized the unusual nature of this meeting. It 
was touted as a brainstorming session, but they took full notes 
and had them printed as a "summary." Actually it was anything 
but that. Every speech was recorded in full and included in the 
"summary," copies of which were sent to the CPC Central 
Committee, secretary of the CPC secretariat, the premier, and 
the vice premiers. The fact that it was made available to all 
these people showed the seriousness of the matter. The fact of 
the matter was that the meeting was called to "criticize and 
denounce" me. It was a continuation of the Beidahe meeting and 
these people came ready to do battle. Even as Zhou Nan, Lu Ping, 
and others were criticizing me in detail, Ji Pengfei had already 
made up his mind: Call Xu Jiatun a leftist. From my party 
struggle experience, I knew that nothing I said would do any 
good, at least in this case. I changed my mind and decided not 
to say another word at the meeting. 
  Ji Pengfei opened the third day of the meeting by calling on 
the three of us from the Hong Kong and Macao working committee 
to speak. Li Zhuwen said he totally agreed with Ji Pengfei's 
criticisms, taking me to task for having committed "leftist" 
errors from the higher plane of principle and two-line struggle 
and giving a litany of examples that he said showed I was 
"leftist." Zheng Hua did some explaining. I stated my attitude 
concisely and to the point, "Originally I planned to make a 
speech but have now decided against it. While I would consider 
your views, I reserve my own judgement. A CPC member operates in 
accordance with the party constitution. In future I would ask 
for instructions from you as far as major matters are concerned. 
I would do whatever you say." 
  They saw where I stood and, realizing the meeting could not 
go on, wrapped it up sullenly. 
  Li Xiannian [2621 0341 1819] Advised Me To Resign (Part 
One of Two) -- Deng Xiaoping Wanted Me To Remain in Hong Kong; 
Ji Pengfei Agreed to Make Li Zhuwen Retire 
  The brainstorming session was barely over when Li Xiannian's 
secretary telephoned me to say Li Xiannian had been in failing 
health recently. I replied that I was going to visit him, which 
I did at his home that very day. 
  Li Xiannian made no reference to the brainstorming session. 
After a little small talk, he said, "You are getting on in 
years. Just quit." I replied, "I have wanted to quit a long 
time. It is the CPC Central Committee that asked me to take the 
job." He asked, "Who wanted you to stay?" I said, "Hu Yaobang 
said not long ago he wanted me to take the job." "Li Xiannian 
then said, "If Hu Yaobang wants you to do it, you better remain 
on the job." 
  Leaving Li Xiannian's house, I mulled over his words and 
realized they were not said by accident. Zheng Hua told me Zhao 
Ziyang sent for him in the afternoon the very same day and 
questioned him at length about the meeting. After he heard what 
Li Zhuwen had said, Zhao Ziyang asked, "If that is the case, how 
can they continue to cooperate?" 
  While in Beijing I met with Xi Zhongxun and Yang Shangkun, 
who commended me for doing a good job in Hong Kong. Xi Zhongxun 
even said, "Some people say you are Hong Kong's Deng Xiaoping. 
The CPC Central Committee is very pleased." This was in sharp 
contrast to the attitude of Ji Pengfei and the Hong Kong and 
Macao Affairs Office. I must straighten this out with the CPC 
Central Committee. 
  I first went to see Hu Qili and told him I wanted to talk to 
Hu Yaobang. Hu Qili wanted me to see Zhao Ziyang first. So I 
tried to set up an appointment with the latter through his 
secretary. However, Zhao Ziyang did not get back to me right 
away. I wanted to talk to Deng Xiaoping too, but felt that the 
matter was too detailed, too bothersome. Besides, I was involved 
in it personally, which would make any approach to Deng Xiaoping 
about this matter an inappropriate thing to do. Just as I was 
hesitating, Deng Pufang came to see me. In the past I saw Deng 
Pufang every time I visited Beijing. Sometimes I looked him up; 
at other times he took the initiative to call on me. I told him 
what happened at the brainstorming session. 
  Maybe he went back and briefed Deng Xiaoping. Two days later 
Zhao Ziyang asked to see me. I was aware that he had talked to 
Ji Pengfei earlier for 10 minutes or so. Zhao Ziyang began by 
praising my work in Hong Kong. Then he told me, "Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping has decided that you should remain in your job in Hong 
Kong for a while." I told him that personally I was not 
interested in keeping the job but that I would comply with the 
CPC Central Committee's decision. My plan was to keep working 
only until the 13th CPC National Congress (scheduled to be held 
in late 1987). 
  Zhao Ziyang was surprised to hear this but did not say 
anything. He asked me, "You and Ji Pengfei are old colleagues, 
aren't you? How come you cannot get along with each other?" I 
smiled but did not say a word. 
  I told Zhao Ziyang that the Central Organization Department 
had so far failed to send me a deputy. The absence of a 
competent assistant had hampered my work. There was also the 
need for a successor. Hu Yaobang had considered several people, 
but none of the prospects worked out. I told Zhao Ziyang I hoped 
the CPC Central Committee would give the matter additional 
thought. I also asked that the leading group of the working 
committee be further reshuffled. Zhao Ziyang agreed and asked me 
to work out the detailed personnel arrangements with Ji Pengfei 
and report them to the CPC Central Committee. He also asked me 
to have a word with Ji Pengfei before returning to Hong Kong. 
This conversation too lasted a dozen minutes or so. 
  I went to see Ji Pengfei right away after the meeting to 
brief him about what we had discussed. Apparently he and Zhao 
Ziyang had gone over the same territory; he was aware of just 
about every point in our discussion. When told that Zhao Ziyang 
wanted me to consult Ji Pengfei about personnel changes, he was 
very moved and said, "Zhao Ziyang always has respect for 
people." He indicated his approval. I asked his opinion about 
making Li Zhuwen retire. He agreed instantly. (Installment No. 
65) 
<H5>  [9 Jul p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Li Xiannian Advised Me To Resign (Part Two of 
Two) -- Brainstorming Session Showed Li Zhuwen To Be an 
Opportunist; Appointment of Zhou Nan as Successor Stalled at 
Central Organization Department 
  Li Zhuwen and I had worked together for over 3 years now. At 
the beginning I was extremely trustful of him and relied on him 
a good deal, almost invariably following his advice. I also gave 
all-out support to his work. 
  It was not long before someone from the XINHUA SHE foreign 
affairs department told me that he was criticizing me in private 
and that he had set his sight on the directorship. I shook my 
head in disbelief. 
  Wu Xueqian, vice premier and concurrently minister of 
foreign 
affairs, passed through Hong Kong during his several trips 
overseas. Li Zhuwen went to the airport to welcome him, never 
once telling me, and accompanied him to Shenzhen, preventing me 
from coming in contact with Wu Xueqian. I never had any 
suspicion. It was part of Li Zhuwen's job to handle foreign 
affairs, which made Wu Xueqian his direct boss. I thought it was 
just an oversight on Li Zhuwen's part that Wu Xueqian and I did 
not get to meet each other. 
  A number of old comrades who had worked in Shanghai later 
told me that Li Zhuwen already was a double-dealer back in 
Shanghai, someone who trimmed his sails. Zhao Xingzhi [6392 5887 
1807], formerly deputy secretary of the Shanghai municipal CPC 
committee, worked side by side with Li Zhuwen back in the 
underground party days; the two were good friends. After the 
gang of four was crushed, Su Zhenhua [5685 2182 5478] and Peng 
Chong [1756 3095] were in control of the Shanghai municipal CPC 
committee. During this period, Li Zhuwen saw eye to eye with the 
municipal party committee and Zhao Xingzhi in everything, 
fulsomely praising Zhao Xingzhi everywhere. When Hua Guofeng 
came under criticism, however, Chen Guodong [7115 0948 2767], Hu 
Lijiao [5170 4539 2403], and Wang Daohan [3076 6670 3211] were 
sent by the CPC Central Committee to run the Shanghai CPC 
Committee. These people launched an attack on the Shanghai party 
committee headed by Su Zhenhua and Peng Chong. Right away Li 
Zhuwen changed his political stand one-hundred and eighty 
degrees and started criticizing Su Zhenhua, Peng Chong, and Zhao 
Xingzhi openly. Old comrades in Shanghai called him a "trimmer." 
  They warned me, "Be careful." I was half skeptical. 
  After working together with Li Zhuwen for more than 1 year, 
I 
learned that he had a knack for detailed work but was not suited 
to be a leader, who has to make comprehensive planning and get 
the work done step by step systematically. Although he might do 
a good job on his own, he lacked the talent to mobilize the 
rank-and-file cadres to work with him. I figured this probably 
had something to do with his long-standing but narrow background 
in religious work. I asked him repeatedly to produce a plan for 
united front and religious work, which fell within the scope of 
his responsibilities, yet he did not come up with anything for a 
long long time. This convinced me he lacked the aptitude for and 
experience in taking charge of a broad area of work. 
  He was thought well in society but there were also some 
negative views. In the KMT era, Li Zhuwen was a priest at the 
Shanghai Xu Jiahui Catholic Church where he baptized some 
members of the "Shanghai gang" now thriving in Hong Kong and 
their children. These people privately said that the CPC was 
fearful and considered Li Zhuwen inscrutable, someone who 
thought in one way and behaved in another. 
  Within the organization Li Zhuwen was perceived much less 
favorably than in society at large. The several departments 
under him had complained that he neither delegated nor trusted 
his subordinates. The only people he had confidence in were the 
handful he had transferred to Hong Kong from Shanghai. Moreover, 
he grew angry and started swearing at the drop of a hat. This I 
regarded as a matter of personal temperament and training. 
  He transferred some people from Shanghai to Hong Kong but 
never consulted me beforehand. Nor did he inform me after the 
fact. It was by asking questions when I saw a strange face at a 
meeting that I came to know what was going on. He was in charge 
of Taiwan work but kept me in the dark about some secret 
contacts in Taiwan and the United States, revealing to me only 
their codes. He did not inform me about his dealings with them, 
not beforehand, not afterward. Only when he needed my signature 
on the report to the CPC Central Committee did I have a chance 
to find out. What he did was against organizational rules. He 
should have told me about the contacts, however important they 
might be. The reason was that the CPC trusted me and sent me to 
Hong Kong to be in overall charge. He should not have done what 
he did, unless the CPC Central Committee had said to him, "Xu 
Jiatun is untrustworthy. Don't tell him." 
  Be that as it may, I maintained a cooperative relationship 
with him as colleagues. His conduct at this particular 
brainstorming session, however, proved that he was indeed a 
"trimmer." When the principles were under discussion by the 
working committee, he was all for them. Now he had done a 
complete about-face by repudiating and criticizing them. In 
doing so, he adopted an interpretation of Hong Kong work that 
was different from mine. When it comes to Hong Kong work, both 
my understanding and practices had been endorsed by the CPC 
Central Committee. In contrast, siding with the Hong Kong and 
Macao Affairs Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Li 
Zhuwen rejected them completely. How could we continue to 
cooperate? Besides, he had reached retirement age and should 
step down. 
  Reviewing the brainstorming session, I saw that it was in 
fact masterminded by Ji Pengfei and Wu Xueqian aimed at driving 
me out of office. Thwarted in their attempt to circulate a 
notice against me at Beidahe, they now worked to turn this 
brainstorming session into a criticism meeting, a public 
accusation meeting. They even had the proceedings of the 
conference printed and issued in the form of a "summary," which 
was in reality anything but a summary. The idea was to influence 
the thinking of the leaders on the CPC Central Committee. That 
Li Xiannian advised me to retire and Zhao Ziyang questioned me 
about my relations with Ji Pengfei suggested that some people on 
the CPC Central Committee wanted to see me step down. 
  Rumors were making their rounds in Hong Kong at the time 
that 
I was about to be transferred back to the mainland. Other rumors 
in Beijing said that Zhou Nan would be sent to Hong Kong to take 
over my work. I queried a deputy director in the Central 
Organization Department in charge of Hong Kong and Macao cadres. 
He emphatically denied the CPC Central Committee had been 
assigning tasks and did not plan to do so. He said, "Zhou Nan 
does not have the right stuff. He only has diplomatic 
experience, but what Hong Kong needs is a politician. This is 
also why we have not been able so far to find a right-hand man 
for you." He added, "He was transferred back from the United 
Nations because he had made a mess of personal relations. There 
were problems with his private life too, which gave the 
foreigners a handle against him. It was feared he would become a 
big headache. How then could we send him to Hong Kong?" 
Apparently the plan of having Zhou Nan succeed me went nowhere 
with the Central Organization Department. A decision was to be 
made after the "brainstorming session." 
  I raised this matter with Deng Pufang for the sole purpose 
of 
clarifying the matter. My desire to retire was genuine. Hence my 
statement to Zhao Ziyang about working until the 13th CPC 
National Congress. (Installment No. 66) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20509 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  26 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tianjin, Anhui 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Tianjin Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0344F Tianjin TIANJIN RIBAO in Chinese 26 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344F </F>
<F P=104>  Tianjin TIANJIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Tianjin Municipality was 1593 yuan, a 12.98 percent increase 
over 1992. According to Tianjin Mayor Zhang Lichang, within the 
next five to seven years per capita farmer income will increase 
from the present 1500 yuan to 3000 yuan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20510 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  8 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tianjin, Anhui 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Anhui Farmer Income </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0344H Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 8 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344H </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Anhui Province was 724.5 yuan, an increase of 150.92 yuan, or 
26.3 percent over 1992. Deducting for inflation, the actual 
increase was 9.4 percent. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20511 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 September 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ministry Surveys Anhui Policy Implementation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0095A Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] in Chinese No 9, 20 Sep 93 pp 8-17 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0095A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Du Yingzhi (2629 7751 1013), Ministry of </F>
Agriculture Survey Team: "Policy Formulation and Implementation 
Looked at in a Large Agricultural Province"] 
  [Text] Editor's Note: This is a factual and critical 
survey report. The author steeped himself in the situation in 
Anhui Province, bringing to light various erroneous 
understandings of macroeconomic agricultural policy that reveal 
the crux of China's agricultural problems. It is hoped that this 
report will arouse more discussion. 
  From mid-April until the end of June, we conducted an 
on-site 
survey in rural Anhui on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture. 
In the course of this survey, we strove to analyze completely 
and systematically the classic problems of a classic large 
agricultural province like Anhui with a view to arriving at some 
correct policy conclusions for solving various deepseated 
incongruities and problems. 
<H5>  1. Current Status of Agricultural Production </H5>
  Anhui Province has plentiful agricultural resources. It is a 
major area for the production of agricultural products such as 
grain, cotton, edible oil, hemp, and hogs. During 14 years of 
reform, its agricultural production has developed fairly 
rapidly, increasing by an average 6.4 percent each year between 
1979 and 1990. Following an especially severe flood in 1991, the 
goal set by the provincial CPC committee and the provincial 
government of "recovering in one year from one year of disaster" 
was substantially attained in agricultural production during 
1992. Outputs of most agricultural products revived to normal 
levels. 
  The guiding thought for agricultural production throughout 
the province for 1993 is to emphasize a market orientation. 
While ensuring steady increase in the production of grain, 
cotton, and edible oil, major efforts are being made to change 
the structure of agriculture, active developing readily salable 
products, and promoting "two high and one premium" [high yield, 
high returns, and premium quality] agriculture. The structure of 
farming throughout the province is to be diversified in 1993. 
This includes a slight reduction from 1992 of the 88 million mu 
sown to grain, substantial cutbacks in the area planted to 
cotton and oil-bearing crops, and an expansion of the tuber, 
corn, soybean, peanut, sesame seed, melon, fruit, and vegetable 
growing areas. 
  The main problems in Anhui's agricultural production today 
are as follows: 
  1. Accompanying the high speed growth of the national 
economy 
has been a widening of the gap between the speed of development 
of industry and agriculture. Agricultural and rural resources, 
including money, land, and large amounts of manpower have flowed 
into nonagricultural pursuits, into cities, and into coastal 
areas of the country. Thus, efforts to warm up and stabilize 
Anhui's agriculture are doomed to failure. During 1992, 1.5 
billion yuan flowed out of Anhui Province's industrial and 
commercial system into developed coastal areas. Money from 50 
percent of agricultural unit bank accounts in the provincial 
Bank of Agriculture flowed into other banks or financial 
institutions. More than 23 million yuan from the Bank of 
Agriculture Business Office in Hefei left. During 1992, 195 
different development zones were built throughout the province. 
These reduced the cultivate land area by more than 300,000 mu. 
This was the greatest decrease in the cultivated land area since 
1987. During the winter of 1992 and the spring of 1993, 
approximately 5 million members of the rural work force 
(approximately 20 percent of the total) left to work elsewhere, 
most of them going to Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Shanghai. A survey 
of 16 counties and cities shows that 115,300 peasant households 
gave up the farming of 346,600 mu of land. Unless this overly 
rapid shift is brought under control, another shortage of farm 
products is extremely likely to occur. 
  2. Expansion of demand for intermediate investment drives a 
rise in prices of agricultural means of production. At the same 
time, however, the prices at which peasants sell their products 
have not risen greatly; thus, the price scissors has widened 
further. Between January and May 1993, prices of agricultural 
means of production throughout the province rose 12.5 percent 
over the same period in 1992. However, the price that peasants 
received for major farm products such as grain remained 
basically flat, except for rapeseed, which enjoyed brisk sales 
and the price of which rose approximately 15 percent over 1992. 
Despite the adoption in 1993 of several policies to nurture 
agriculture, peasants continue to report that they lose money 
farming. They are extremely unhappy particularly about failure 
to control rises in prices of means of production like chemical 
fertilizer and diesel fuel. In addition, provincial departments 
concerned report that because of the anticipated increase in 
diesel fuel prices, the provincial petroleum company is unable 
to buy from east China companies sufficient quantities of diesel 
fuel for agriculture at the parity price. Between January and 
April, only 37,800 tons of parity price diesel fuel was 
obtained. This is only 28.8 of annual plan. As of 15 June, only 
5.5 percent of the entire year's parity price oil had been 
provided. 
  3. The bumper summer grain harvest in 1993 does not 
demonstrate a warming of agriculture. This is because the main 
reason for the increase in summer grain production was a 2.5 
percent increase over 1992 in the area sown to grain. Second, 
heaven helped out; weather conditions were better than in the 
previous year. The weather during the late stage of the growing 
season was particularly fine. It played a decisive role in the 
heading of the wheat and the bumper harvest. However, the 
peasants actually invested less. Provincial supply and market 
cooperative sales of chemical fertilizer, agricultural 
pesticides, and agricultural plastic were down 4.4, 27.5, and 
21.3 percent from the previous year. Retail sales of 
agricultural means of production for the province as a whole for 
the first four months of the year increased only 2.3 percent 
over the same period in 1992. After deduction for price 
increases, sales volume showed a further decline. Comparison of 
sales during the period January through May with the same period 
in 1992 shows an 18.7 drop in chemical fertilizer sales, a 1.6 
percent decline in agricultural pesticide sales, and a 42.5 
percent fall in sales of agricultural plastics. In addition, a 
survey of the spring planting preparations of 7,750 households 
in 31 counties all over the province shows purchases of chemical 
fertilizer, seeds, agricultural pesticides, agricultural 
plastic, and diesel fuel as running at between 43.1 to 67.4 
percent of the same period in 1992. The situation reported by 
provincial agricultural survey teams also shows an actual 
decline in expenditures for agricultural production among 
peasant expenditures for the first quarter of 1993. It is 
noteworthy that the direct reason for the reduced peasant 
investment is not a shortage of supply, but mostly a rise in 
prices of the means of production. In addition, as a result of 
natural disasters in Anhui during the past two years, peasant 
income has declined. Some peasant families have no money to 
spend. They may want to invest, but they cannot pay. Their 
spirit is willing, but their flesh is weak. 
  4. Investment in agricultural infrastructure is 
insufficient; 
reserve strength is lacking for steady growth of agriculture. 
Expenditures for agriculture in the provincial Seventh Five-Year 
Plan fiscal budget (including expenditures to support 
agricultural production, payments for agricultural, forestry, 
and water conservation projects and investment in capital 
construction, and expenditures to assist undeveloped areas) 
amount to only approximately 10 percent of total government 
expenditures. As a result of major natural catastrophes in 1991, 
government investment in agriculture rose to 13.7 percent, but 
in 1992, it returned to the lowest point since implementation of 
the Seventh Five-Year Plan at only 9.06 percent. It is expected 
that no increase will occur during the next two years because of 
limited financial resources. Basically, the 1992 level can only 
be maintained. Furthermore, the percentage of fiscal budget that 
prefectures and counties apply to agricultural production shows 
a basic trend toward decline except in major disaster years. 
<H3>  2. Policy Climate Not Favorable to a Large Agricultural 
Province </H3>
  (1) Contributions of a Large Agricultural Province 
  Anhui Province was the place in China in which rural reform 
began. Following the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Party 
Central Committee, it was the peasants in Anhui Province who 
first demolished the shackles of the old system to take the lead 
in implementation of the family output-related contract 
responsibility system, which raised the curtain on China's 
surging rural reform. During the past 14 years of reform, 
profound changes have taken place in the good earth along the 
Chang Jiang and the Huai Jiang. Anhui Province's economy and 
undertakings have developed by leaps and bounds. The main 
national economic statistical indicators show a speed of 
economic development in Anhui that cannot be considered slow. 
During the decade of the sixth and seventh 5-year plans, annual 
increase in Anhui Province's GNP, national income, social gross 
output value, gross output value of industry and agriculture, 
and gross output value of agriculture were all greater, in 
varying degrees, than the national average. (See Figure 1) 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1. Average Speed of Increase in Anhui Province's Main National Econo-| 
|mic Indicators and Comparison With the National Average for 1980-1990 ()  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Anhui Province (A)|National Average (|A-B               | 
|                  |                  |B)                |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|GNP               |15.94             |14.74             |+1.20             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National Income   |15.05             |14.62             |+0.42             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Social Gross Outp-|16.54             |16.11             |+0.43             | 
|ut Value          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gross Output Valu-|17.13             |16.14             |+0.99             | 
|e of Industry, Ag-|                  |                  |                  | 
|riculture         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gross Output Valu-|15.92             |14.83             |+1.09             | 
|e of Agriculture  |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Grain Output      |5.65              |3.36              |+2.29             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: All figured at current prices                                        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Anhui Province is a classic large agricultural province. 
During 1992. 46.2 percent of the province's revenues derived 
from the agricultural sector. This was 11.5 percentage points 
higher than the national average. Anhui ranks seventh among 
China's provinces, autonomous regions and directly administered 
municipalities in the percentage of revenues derived from 
agriculture after Tibet (63.6%), Hainan (60.0%), 
Guangxi 
(52.1%), Jiangxi (49.6%), Inner Mongolia 
(46.6%), and Hunan 
(46.4%). The province's township and village population 
in 1992 
accounted for 82.1 percent of the total. Urbanization was 8.47 
percentage points lower than the national average. 
  Anhui Province is one of the country's main agricultural 
production regions, and it is also one of the small number of 
provinces having the potential for great agricultural 
development. Anhui Province's output of major agricultural 
products holds an important position nationally. In 1990, Anhui 
ranked seventh among the country's 30 provinces, autonomous 
regions, and directly administered municipalities in gross 
output of grain, seventh in gross output of cotton, fourth in 
gross output of oil-bearing crops, second in output of hemp, 
tenth in gross output of meat, and tenth in net purchases of 
agricultural and sideline products. Each year Anhui Province 
ships large quantities of agricultural and sideline products to 
other provinces, making an enormous contribution to the economic 
development of east China and the country as a whole. 
  In 1978, Anhui was still a net recipient of grain shipments, 
but implementation of the household output-related contracting 
system released agriculture's potential. Grain output increased 
year after year. During the so-called period of limbo in grain 
production elsewhere in the country during the 1980s, Anhui's 
grain production continued to grow year by year. In 1978, the 
province's grain output totaled 29.65 billion jin. In 1979, it 
broke the 30 billion jin mark; in 1983, it broke the 40 billion 
jin mark; and in 1990, it broke the 50 billion jin mark at 50.4 
billion jin, advancing three steps in 12 years. The provinces 
rate of increase in grain output was 1.4 times that of the 
country as a whole. In 1979, Anhui Province became a net shipper 
of grain, the amount shipped increasing from the very earliest 
several hundred million jin and a few billion jin to more than 6 
billion jin during the 1980s. Between 1985 and 1990, the 
province's grain system alone shipped an average of 5.55 billion 
jin of grain each year. After deducting two-thirds of the 50 
billion jin per year of grain that the province produces for the 
peasants' personal use, plus 17 billion jin of commodity grain, 
and 6.7 billion jin for grain system fixed procurement for the 
province, and the portion that the grain system sells in other 
provinces (this portion amounting to 25 percent of the amount of 
grain sold within the province), for a total of approximately 9 
billion jin of grain, in most years the province can ship more 
than 8 billion jin of grain to other provinces. Anhui Province 
is currently only one of seven net grain shipping provinces. In 
1990, per capita grain production was 445 kilograms, or 55 
kilograms higher than the national average of 390 kilograms. In 
some new grain producing areas such as Chuzhou City, per capita 
grain output amounts to more than 882 kilograms. This is one of 
the areas in the country having fairly high elasticity in grain 
supply. 
  (2) Contrast Between Contribution and Income 
  Although Anhui Province's growth rate during all of the 
1980s 
cannot be considered low, this is only in terms of gross output 
value and gross output indicators. If national economic net 
output value and the main income indicators are examined, the 
quality of Anhui Province's economic development has to be 
greatly discounted. Likewise, growth rates for Anhui Province's 
local government revenues, the average wages of staff members 
and workers, and peasant per capita net income during the decade 
of the sixth and seventh five-year plans were also lower than 
the national average. (See Table 2). 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 2. Average Annual Speed of Increase in Main Income Indicators in Anh-| 
|ui Province and Comparison With the National Average From 1980-1990 ()    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Anhui Province (A)|National Average (|A-B               | 
|                  |                  |B)                |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Local Government  |10.06             |11.81             |-1.75             | 
|Revenue           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Local Government  |13.66             |11.03             |+2.63             | 
|Expenditures      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Average Wages     |10.34             |10.88             |-0.54             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Peasant Per Capit-|11.30             |12.65             |-1.35             | 
|a Net Income      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: All figured at current prices                                        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Table 1 shows that despite a national income growth rate in 
Anhui Province that was slightly higher than the national 
average for a decade, this was the lowest growth rate among all 
the output indicators, and it was also the indicator that 
exceeded the national average least (See Table 1). Naturally, 
this fairly low increase in the net output value rate is 
connected with the economic structure. The contributions to 
national income of the development of basic industries and raw 
and processed materials industries are far from those of 
processing industries, in addition to which Anhui happens to be 
a large agricultural province, a large raw and processed 
materials province, and a large basic industries province. 
  Comparison of Table 1 and Table 2 also shows Anhui 
Province's 
rate of increase in the gross output value of agriculture and 
grain output to be 1.09 and 2.29 percentage points higher than 
for the country as a whole, yet the rate of increase in both 
local government revenues and peasant per capita income are 1.75 
and 1.35 percentage points lower than for the country as a 
whole. These two pieces of data show that government revenues 
and peasant income have not increased in step with the 
development of agriculture and the increase in grain production. 
  Anhui's ranking in the country for peasant per capita net 
income and per capita government revenue also clearly shows the 
province is in the predicament of being a "large agricultural 
province and a fiscally poor province," and that its peasants 
"increase output but do not increase income." In 1978, peasant 
per capita net income in Anhui Province ranked fourteenth in the 
country, and fifth among the seven provinces and directly 
administered cities of east China (ahead of Shandong and 
Jiangxi). The super normal growth of agriculture during the 
initial period of rural reform stimulated a sharp rise in 
peasant income, peasant per capita income in Anhui Province 
zooming to eighth place in the county, an all time high. Later 
on, for various reasons, its ranking decreased year by year, 
reaching twenty-first place in 1990, and last among the seven 
counties and directly administered municipalities of east China. 
In 1991, when the province sustained a flood of more than once 
in 100 years proportions, peasant per capita net income fell to 
thirtieth place among the country's 30 provinces, directly 
administered municipalities, and autonomous regions. Despite the 
rebounding increase of 1992, it stilled ranked only 
twenty-seventh in the country, just above Shaanxi, Guizhou, and 
Gansu. A look at its income indicator shows that in 1990 Anhui 
ranked twenty-fourth in the country in per capita national 
income and national income accumulation. Its city and 
countryside residents' consumption level ranked twenty-sixth; 
per capita wages of staff members and workers in state-owned and 
collectively owned enterprises ranked twenty-seventh; per capita 
fiscal revenues and expenditures ranked twenty-ninth, and by 
1992, average per capita government revenue stood at only 95 
yuan for twenty-ninth place in the country, or above Tibet 
alone. Per capita government expenditures stood at 100 yuan for 
last place in the country. In the course of this Anhui survey, 
some old cadres who are extremely well informed about Anhui told 
us emotionally that the people of Anhui are outstanding and the 
land is fruitful. It is also a well endowed region that lacks 
nothing, so why did economic development end up in this 
predicament? The gap between Anhui and developed provinces is 
becoming wider and wider, money is flowing away, and talented 
people are leaving. It is really hard to bear! We also heard 
people say that on a television station contest about knowledge 
of the country, the master of ceremonies asked: Which province 
in the country ranks last in economic strength? The contestant 
replied: Anhui! The master of ceremonies said: Exactly right. 
Add 10 points! How out of keeping this income ranking and 
heartfelt anxiety of the people is with Anhui's contribution to 
the whole country as a major agricultural province, and Anhui's 
place in the country in output of major agricultural products! 
  (2) Relationship of the Government, Finance and 
Banking, Enterprises, and the Peasants to Grain Production 
  Agriculture is an industry that produces high social and 
ecological benefits, but low economic returns. From the cadres 
at the top to the peasants at the bottom in Anhui Province, all 
have quietly made a contribution to ensure agriculture's steady 
growth and ensure completion of the political task of providing 
grain effectively. However, we can see from the analysis that 
follows that under the existing system the development of 
agriculture and the promotion of grain production resulted in 
government, finance and banking, grain businesses, and the 
peasants shouldering a heavy burden. Objectively, this became a 
detrimental factor limiting the economic development of the 
whole province. 
  1. Fiscal weakness became fiscal subsistence. The disparity 
between government receipts and expenditures in Anhui Province 
is fairly glaring. Despite the numerous measures adopted in 
recent years to increase revenues and reduce expenditures, the 
problem of inability to make ends meet has become increasingly 
serious. As of the end of 1992, the provincial government 
deficit stood at 1.178 billion. Governments at all levels in the 
province have a hard time coping. More than 70 percent of the 
province's 72 counties (or cities) show a deficit. More than 
half receive subsidies, and only by milking special purpose 
funds can they get by. 
  Because of straitened financial circumstances, government 
spending is increasingly in disarray, meaning the frequently 
talked about eating at the expense of building. Reportedly more 
than 80 percent of all government expenditures in the province 
are for people. Limited financial resources are used on 
supporting people, but the percent spent on increasing 
production is less than 20 percent. Each year only about 1 
billion yuan is spent on production. Not only is this amount 
lower than the between 2 and 3 billion yuan that Jiangsu, 
Shandong, and Fujian spend, but it is even lower than the 1.4 
billion yuan than Jiangxi spends. Investment in increasing 
production is grossly inadequate, and conversely this inadequacy 
limits economic development. Not only this, but economic 
backwardness means limited employment opportunities. Each year 
the province has to provide for between 30,000 and 40,000 
military personnel returning to civilian life and university 
graduates. In the end, they can only be thrust into 
administrative units. This single requirement eats up more than 
half of the annual increase in financial resources. In every 
county that we visited in the course of this survey, it was 
common to find that cadres at the primary county and township 
levels had not been paid for several months. 
  Fiscal hardship and destitution is directly related to 
Anhui's being a large agricultural province. No more fiscal 
revenues can be obtained from the agricultural tax, the 
agriculture and forest special products tax, the cigarette tax, 
and other agricultural products processing taxes; thus, revenue 
sources are limited. This means that fiscal revenues are unable 
to keep pace with the growth of agricultural product processing. 
Furthermore, in order to maintain essential investment in 
agriculture, each year something must be squeezed from limited 
financial resources for investment in agriculture from which 
there can be virtually no direct return. In addition, so long as 
the price scissors exists between industrial and agricultural 
products, Anhui stands to lose more than several hundred million 
yuan on the shipment of large quantities of agricultural 
products out of the province in exchange for large shipments of 
industrial goods into the province. 
  In addition, the government must heavily subsidize grain. 
Statistics show 7.4 billion yuan spent for government grain 
subsidies between 1980 and 1991, 2.6 billion yuan or 35 percent 
of it coming from local governments. During the past three 
years, the charging off of grain business losses has increased 
greatly, amounting to 2.647 billion yuan as of the end of 1992. 
This has become a glaring problem bedeviling both the government 
and grain businesses. As a key grain producing province, Anhui's 
grain output increased year after year, but not only have local 
treasuries obtained no benefit from this increase, but their 
burdens have increased. Analysis of data from Shouxian, one of 
the highest output provinces in the country, shows a 
relationship between grain production and fiscal revenues. 
Between 1978 and 1984, there was a direct relationship; between 
1985 and 1989 there was a weak relationship, and after 1990 
there has been a negative relationship. This further intensifies 
the vicious cycle of subsistence finance. 
  2. The low operating efficiency of the Bank of Agriculture 
has turned it into a "procurement bank." As was said above, a 
serious credit gap exists in the Anhui provincial banking 
system. Demand for money is much greater than supply. Take just 
the provincial Bank of Agriculture system, for example, in which 
the level of savings is less than the national average but the 
scale of lending steadily increases thereby steadily widening 
the credit gap. In 1980, the provincial Bank of Agriculture (not 
including credit cooperatives) had a credit gap of 1.18 billion 
yuan. By 1992, the credit gap had widened to 10.1 billion yuan, 
and by the end of April 1993, because of further decline in 
savings, the credit gap further widened to 10.4 billion yuan. 
  Faced with enormous money supply and demand pressures, the 
Bank of Agriculture's funds are used entirely for agriculture, 
particularly for meeting the rigid policy requirement of 
providing funds for state procurement of agricultural products. 
This is manifested in a fairly large percentage of the Bank of 
Agriculture's credit being for operating funds, and a fairly 
small percentage being for production. Operating funds loans 
account for two-thirds of the Anhui Provincial Bank of 
Agriculture's loans each year. Only one-third are loans for 
production. At the end of 1992, 65.6 percent of outstanding 
loans were operating funds loans, 49.9 percent of them loans to 
grain businesses. Production loans (including agricultural 
credit and township and town enterprise credit) accounted for 
only 33.6 percent. This ratio is just the opposite of developed 
coastal provinces (such as Jiangsu Province). In 1993, Bank of 
Agriculture credit plans increased 1.98 billion yuan, 1.1 
billion yuan or approximately 55 percent of which was an 
increase in agricultural products and by-products procurement 
credit. Consequently, comrades in the provincial Bank of 
Agriculture laughingly term themselves the "Procurement Bank." 
The province's 1993 goal of realizing a township and town 
enterprise output value of 80 billion yuan will require an 
additional 6 billion yuan investment in fixed assets, but 1.9 
billion yuan of this is unavailable. Pressures on the Bank of 
Agriculture are very great from all side, but the Bank of 
Agriculture system has long since shown itself to have more 
difficulties than it can handle. 
  An even more serious problem is that the high percentage of 
credit extended for policy reasons (more than 70 percent of it), 
plus system and management problems create an increasingly 
serious burden on the limited funds of the Anhui Provincial Bank 
of Agriculture in the form of a siphoning off of funds. As of 
the end of 1992, irregular loans accounted for 9.38 billion yuan 
of the 24.97 billion of the credit balance of the Bank of 
Agriculture system throughout the province (including credit 
cooperatives). This was 37.6 percent of the loan balance! Of the 
irregular loans, 48 percent were overdue loans, 46 percent were 
stagnant loans, and 6 percent were bad debts. Moreover, of the 
irregular loans, the irregular loans of just grain businesses 
totaled 3.7 billion yuan, or 56.2 percent of the 6.58 billion 
yuan in loans extended to them. This was 39.5 percent of all 
irregular loans. Such a large siphoning off of money not only 
intensifies the already very acute funds shortage, but also 
increases the banks burdens immeasurably making it difficult for 
them to cope. 
  3. Grain businesses are mired in a predicament; they have 
become major losers. As the main grain and edible oil 
procurement and marketing channels in a large agricultural 
province, Anhui's state-owned grain system's fate is closely 
link to the production and marketing of grain. They reflect in a 
concentrated way all the conflicts in the existing grain 
procurement and marketing system. 
  The golden age of Anhui Province's grain system began in 
1983 
when losses began to be turned into profits (thanks to fixed 
subsidy contracting), and it lasted until 1989. During this 
period profits were maintained year after year, the peak year 
being 1989 when profits amounted to 128 million yuan. However, 
beginning in 1990, the province's grain system once again 
incurred severe losses. Losses for that year reached 980 million 
yuan (657 million yuan more than total profits for the previous 
seven years). Thereafter, losses amounted to 1.15 billion yuan 
in 1991, and 110 million yuan in 1992. For the period January 
through May 1993, losses were 250 million yuan. After 
subtracting the treasury-subsidized portion, the province's 
grain system losses pending totaled 2.57 billion yuan. In 1993, 
Anhui Province ranked fifth after Hubei, Hunan, Heilongjiang, 
and Jilin provinces among the country's 30 provinces, directly 
administered municipalities, and autonomous regions in the size 
of losses. By the end of 1992, losses on account advanced to 
2.647 billion yuan. Additionally, at least one-tenth of the 
grain currently in storage is over age and has mildewed. This 
means even greater potential losses. 
  Faced with such enormous book losses, the provincial grain 
sector concludes from an audit that 92.8 percent of them are 
losses resulting from loans made for policy reasons. The 
remaining 7.2 percent are losses on loans made for business 
reasons, but the treasury has yet to accept this accounting. The 
main reason for grain businesses' book losses since 1990 are: 
grain price distortions, the more grain procured the greater the 
losses; a sharp change in grain supply and demand, negotiated 
price grain being purchased at a high price and sold at a low 
one; the high cost of building granaries, and of storing and 
transporting grain; tremendous rise in bank interest rates; the 
sale at parity prices of grain purchased for storage at a higher 
than the parity price, failure to recover grain loaned to the 
people, and the increased cost of rescuing grain from granaries 
in low-lying areas during flood years; failure to recover funds 
paid to peasants in advance for grain, and government failure to 
pay subsidies owing, etc. 
  The severe debt burdens of grain businesses not only make it 
hard for them to function as the main channels for grain sales 
but also produces three-way bickering that draws in public 
finance and holds the banks hostage. This produces an uproar in 
the macroeconomic regulation and control system that causes 
losses in development of the entire economy. Ultimately, it is 
the peasants who must bear this "cross." 
  4. Structural changes occur slowly, the peasants increasing 
production without increasing their earnings. For the above 
reasons, it is difficult to allocate all of Anhui Province's 
resources for effective structural reforms. Unlike at the 
beginning of reform, even though the province's economy has 
undergone a certain amount of change, it still lags greatly 
behind the average level for the country as a whole. Comparison 
of 1990 with 1978 shows a 3.1 percentage point decline in the 
agricultural portion of Anhui Province's social gross output 
value, and a respective 4.5, 2.0, and 0.5 percentage rise in the 
industry, construction, and transportation portion (with an 
extraordinary 3.9 percentage point decline in the commercial 
portion). However, a lateral comparison shows the agricultural 
portion as 10.2 percentage points higher than the average level 
for the country as a whole, and the industry, construction, 
transportation, and commercial portions to be a respective 8.0, 
0.6, 0.8, and 0.9 percentage points lower than the average for 
the country as a whole. Anhui still clearly exhibits the 
backward economic structure of a large agricultural province. 
The internal make-up of agriculture, in particular, has changed 
only extremely slowly during the past decade. Its structural 
change value is 7.8 percentage points lower than for the country 
as a whole (See Table 3) (Footnote: "Structural change value" is 
an indicator showing the extent of structural change. It 
consists of the difference between the various occupations 
making up agriculture [e.g. farming, forestry, etc.] for the 
reporting period and the various occupations making up 
agriculture for the base period, the differences in these 
structural ratios then being added up to produce an aggregate 
absolute value). Even more astounding is that the structure of 
agriculture in Chuzhou City, which this survey covered, has seen 
virtually no change in more than 10 years. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Table 3. Changes in the Structure of Agriculture in Anhui Province and Comp-| 
|arison With the Country as a Whole ()                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|          |Anhui Province                  |Country as a Whole              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|          |1978      |1990      |Percentag-|1978      |1990      |Percentag-| 
|          |          |          |e Points  |          |          |e Points  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Farming   |80.0      |65.7      |-14.3     |76.7      |58.5      |-18.2     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Forestry  |1.6       |4.6       |+3.0      |3.4       |4.3       |+0.9      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Animal Hu-|14.1      |22.1      |+8.0      |15.0      |25.6      |+10.6     | 
|sbandry   |          |          |          |          |          |          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Sideline  |3.7       |4.6       |+0.9      |3.3       |6.2       |+2.9      | 
|Occupatio-|          |          |          |          |          |          | 
|ns        |          |          |          |          |          |          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Fishing I-|0.6       |3.0       |+2.4      |1.6       |+5.4      |+3.8      | 
|ndustry   |          |          |          |          |          |          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
|Structura-|          |          |28.6      |          |          |36.4      | 
|l Change  |          |          |          |          |          |          | 
|Value     |          |          |          |          |          |          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 


  The slowness of structural change show ups ultimately in 
earnings. Analysis of peasant earnings in Anhui Province shows 
two marked characteristics: First, the lion's share of total 
earnings comes from agriculture, and the lion's share of income 
from agriculture comes from grain farming. Furthermore, this 
income make-up has changed but little over the years (See Table 
4). Since the percentage of income coming from other than 
agriculture has always been small, this is one of the reasons 
for the slow growth of peasant earnings. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 4. Composition of Anhui Province Peasant Family Income              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |1984                         |1990                         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Total Income (|Percent       |Total Income (|Percent       | 
|              |yuan)         |              |yuan)         |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total Family  |405.02        |100           |771.21        |100           | 
|Income        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Income From A-|286.85        |70.8          |511.49        |65.8          | 
|griculture    |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Grain Farming |192.74        |47.6          |336.3         |43.6          | 
|Income        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Nonagricultur-|31.61         |7.8           |91.84         |11.9          | 
|al Income     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Second, the increase in peasant per capita income has been 
affected by price fluctuations in agriculture, particularly 
grain price fluctuations. Comparison of peasant per capita net 
income in Anhui Province with the country as a whole shows 1985 
as the year when the difference was least at only 5.20 yuan. 
Thereafter, the gap widened with each passing year until 1990 
when per capita peasant income in Anhui was 147.10 yuan behind 
the average for the country as a whole. Furthermore, the 
difference was greatest in two years during this period: 27.10 
yuan in 1984, and 61.30 yuan in 1990. As is well known, these 
two years happened to be the ones when "difficulty selling 
grain" occurred everywhere. In addition, Anhui's peasants suffer 
greatly from the price scissors. The peasants call the price 
scissors "the fire tongs," whose effect on them is truly more 
real than for the peasants in developed provinces. 
  Most of the peasant households we surveyed reported no 
improvement in there lives in recent years. They had no assets, 
and peasant households everywhere owed debts. In moderately 
economically developed Jiashan County, for example, peasant 
indebtedness is 210.50 yuan per capita or about 1,000 yuan per 
family. Most peasant households have to go into debt in order to 
farm and live. 
  Thus, we have depicted the various aspects of Anhui's 
economic development as it relates to grain in terms of public 
finance, finance and banking, grain businesses, and peasant 
income. Now the problem is just how the economic development of 
a large agricultural province such as Anhui ended up in this 
destitute predicament. To attribute Anhui's backwardness and 
difference from the country as a whole solely to historical 
factors, or to blame it on the truly grievous losses from the 
great flood of 1991 is not convincing, we believe. This can 
neither explain why neighboring provinces are in a better 
position nor explain the 1990 data that is constantly quoted in 
this report. The fact is that there is no lack of provinces like 
Anhui. Without except, other large agricultural provinces such 
as Jilin, Hubei, Hunan, and Jiangxi face the same difficulties 
and problems that Anhui faces. This demonstrates that even 
though the importance of agriculture to the national economy is 
constantly reiterated, a different logic operates in real life, 
namely that those who develop agriculture and develop grain 
production are the ones who suffer! This logic is manifested not 
only in the peasants "increasing production without increasing 
income," but is also exhibited in local public finance, finance 
and banking, and businesses, thereby seriously limiting the 
optimum allocation of resources through the entire economy. 
Close study leads to the conclusion that this is a major 
institutional reason why the economic development of all large 
agricultural provinces becomes mired in straitened circumstances. 
  The reason we have taken great pains to detail the various 
examples in Anhui Province that illustrate this point is not 
only concern about the inevitable results of the foregoing 
logic, but also because we want to point out that this logic is 
inevitably attributable to a certain policy environment. In this 
sense, we feel that Anhui provides is a classic example. We can 
use this classic example to examine the formulation of 
macroeconomic agricultural policies and analyze the reasons why 
policies are not diligently carried out. 
<H3>  3. Reasons Why Central Government Policies Are Not Carried 
Out </H3>
  The only way for Anhui Province to get out of its economic 
predicament lies in more rapid readjustment of its industrial 
structure, However, in overall terms, how to maintain steady 
growth of agriculture while changing the economic structure is a 
strategic issue that must be conscientiously addressed. Thus, 
one basic principle in drawing up macroeconomic policy should be 
to do whatever helps different jurisdictions make the most of 
their own resources potential and economic strengths, creating a 
policy climate that is consistent with this. Otherwise, policies 
will be detrimental to economic development and detrimental as 
well to the coordination of overall strategy. Therefore, the 
problems with existing policies and how to adjust and solve them 
was also an issue the pros and cons of which we repeatedly 
examined in connection with whether policies were or were not 
implemented during this survey. 
  One point about which we had a strong feeling during this 
survey was that a marked difference exists between central 
government policy goals and Anhui Province's own policy goals on 
the issue of developing agriculture. Proceeding from the needs 
of overall national economic development, the central 
authorities more greatly require that large agricultural 
provinces like Anhui provide more agricultural products in order 
to support structural changes in the economy as a whole. 
However, proceeding from the reality of its own economic 
backwardness, Anhui Province strongly demands that changes in 
the industrial structure be intensified to narrow the gap 
between Anhui and developed provinces. It has less interest in 
developing agriculture to satisfy needs outside the province. 
  In explaining the reasons for these different policy 
choices, 
one cannot simply fall back on the usual reason of a conflict 
between what benefits the country as a whole and what benefits 
one part of it. The fact is that, to a very large extent, Anhui 
Province's choice is based on the realization that it is the 
policy climate that is responsible for an agricultural province 
getting the worst of things. Thus, the essence of the matter is 
that actual economic policies do not reflect the importance of 
agriculture. The differences between the central government and 
local government policy goals are actually a reflection of this 
real conflict. 
  The problem is that if agriculture cannot really obtain the 
protection it should have, public finance, finance and banking, 
business enterprises and the peasants not only gaining no 
benefit but actually suffering losses, who has any interest in 
developing agriculture? The pointedness of this question, given 
the policy climate, lies in various interest groups not only 
having no interest in developing agriculture but, insofar as 
they act rationally, inevitably coming to regard agriculture as 
a burden to be gotten rid of! This is also the most basic reason 
why a series of plans, policies, and specific measures that the 
central authorities have framed have either not been implemented 
or have been distorted in implementation. 
  Specifically, the understanding of the situation we gained 
from this survey suggests reasons at many levels and in many 
regards for the failure to implement agricultural policies. In a 
nutshell, they are mostly problems in the following several 
regards: 
  1. The detrimental effect of the macroeconomic economic 
climate. Agriculture is not an isolated system. It is closely 
related to the overall operation of the national economy. 
Consequently, implementation of agricultural policies frequently 
depends on more than just efforts within the agricultural 
system. The external climate is also an important, and sometimes 
a decisive, factor. Since 1992, the national economy has entered 
a new period of high speed growth in which industry has seen 
high speed growth, but in which large amounts of rural economic 
resources such as money, land, and manpower have been lost, 
investment demand has expanded dramatically, the price scissors 
has widened further, and agricultural labor opportunity costs 
have risen. This has been accompanied by turmoil in finance and 
banking and in the commodity circulation order, and the 
surfacing of various social contradictions that lay latent in 
rural villages, all of which created enormous pressures on the 
steady development of agriculture. Without a cooling of the 
external economic climate under these circumstances, it will be 
very difficult to put in place a series of new policies of the 
central government regarding agriculture and rural villages. No 
matter the effort made, only half the results will be obtained. 
For example, raising of the "two funds" will be difficult, 
procurement funds will be diverted to unauthorized purposes, and 
reduced peasant burdens will increase again, etc. The problems 
will show up in rural villages, but there roots are in the 
external environment. Therefore, limiting the implementation of 
policies solely to agricultural and rural villages will not 
work. The proportional relationship between industry and 
agriculture must be fundamentally altered to create a minimum 
normal economic order. This is the only way to get the basic 
conditions needed for the implementation of agricultural and 
rural policies. 
  2. Skewed orientation of policy formulation. Some of the 
policies being inaugurated today not only do not protect the 
interests of agriculture and the peasants, but are detrimental 
to them. This shows up mostly in the formulation of some reform 
measures that are clearly motivated by public finance's desire 
to get rid of burdens. An example is the new grain production 
and marketing policy, which substitutes charges not included in 
the price for the former "three link-ups." This was a move in 
the right direction, but the situation that ensued suggests that 
the basis for figuring the price difference was far too low. The 
peasants had to find more money to pay for the same quantities 
of chemical fertilizer and diesel fuel. An even more glaring 
example is the "weaning" of public finance from technical 
service organizations. Since both institutional reform and 
delegation of the "three authorities" stubbornly and arbitrarily 
emphasized "weaning" and streamlining, Anhui Province's 
grassroots level agricultural technology sector was dealt a 
mortal blow, which forced agricultural departments to operate 
some business entities having nothing to do with their function. 
This meant that every day agricultural technology personnel had 
to rush around to make a living, which produced a "five 
reductions" situation of less organizational support, personnel, 
operating funds, facilities, and services. It even resulted in 
inability to perform regularly the most basic tasks of providing 
early insect warnings and livestock and poultry inoculations. 
The spread of agricultural techniques takes a long time, yet it 
is indispensable to progress in agricultural technology. In 
addition, given the current level of development of peasant 
households in which "service for payment" generally applies only 
to specialized households and to some areas and links in 
agricultural production, mindless insistence on "weaning" and 
"service for payment" not only leads to taking benefits from the 
peasants, but also is bound to have serious consequences for the 
development of agriculture. Thus, it is very necessary to 
examine closely similar so-called reform measures today, clearly 
understand and set forth the relationship between building of a 
market economic system and protecting agriculture, resolutely 
correcting some erroneous ways of doing things and deviations. 
  3. Some policies are inoperable. The original intention in 
drawing up some policies is good, but because of failure to 
integrate policies, failure to take the total situation into 
account, and failure to investigate situations in detail, their 
operability is poor; they cannot be implemented. Just a few 
examples are provided here: 

  -  The grain floor price system. Although announced two years 
ago, neither the central government nor provincial governments 
have yet set up a grain risk fund system for the grain floor 
price system. Consequently a grain floor price simply cannot be 
put into effect. Thus, in the absence of a source of price 
differential subsidies, the more grain that grain businesses 
buy, the greater their losses. They must either pay the peasants 
less or limit procurement. Not only are the interests of 
grain-growing peasant hurt, but confidence in policies is 
undermined. 
  -  Ceiling price for means of livelihood. This is limited only 
to ex-factory prices and not to market prices, in addition to 
which supply and marketing cooperative's private ownership 
reform practice of "renting out the shell, and selling the meat" 
[zu kezi, mai rangzi] has increased the difficulty of policing 
ceiling prices, the ceiling price policy existing in name only. 
  -  The "two funds" policy. The original intention of this 
policy was to support peasant grain and cotton production, but 
returns from this policy far from offset the cost of and losses 
from its operation. Both grain and supply enterprises have no 
interest in its diligent enforcement. 
  -  Procurement funds specialized household control. This 
generally applies only to the first issuance. Once procurement 
funds have begun to circular, two problems are encountered at 
once. One is that when money withdrawn from circulation on sales 
made for the purpose of regulating the market is settled among 
the various specialized banks, it is frequently garnished 
instead of being returned to specialized households. Second, 
grassroots operating units must divide up the money taken out of 
circulation among multiple People's Bank outlets at a higher 
level. The links are numerous and procedures are 
complicated. 

    Some of these kinds of operating problems can be improved in 
practice, but in some cases revisions are needed, more 
thoroughgoing reform measures taken. 
  4. Some policies are changed shortly after they are 
announced 
rendering their implementation impossible. During the survey, 
comrades at the grassroots level reported this situation in many 
regards. For example, the central authorities have already 
clearly announced a change in the method of linking grain sales 
to the provision of three kinds of goods in 1993, charges not 
included in prices to be paid to the peasants in cash. But 
recently, the province received a notice from the central 
government informing it that the portion of the differential 
price for fertilizer for which the central government bears 
responsibility will not be paid for in cash but with goods. It 
permits local governments themselves to decide whether to supply 
goods or cash for their portion. The reason given is that 
imported chemical fertilizer is accumulating in inventory. Local 
government comrades are very unhappy about the offhand way in 
which policies come out in the morning only to be changed by 
nightfall. Repeated changes of announced policies leaves 
implementers with the problem of how to provide an explanation 
to the peasants. Another matter is the issuance of rubber 
checks. During 1988 and 1989, for example, the State Council 
authorized the China National Cereals, Oil, and Foodstuffs 
Import and Export Corporation to regulate special purpose grain, 
which permitted Anhui Province to purchase nearly 1.3 billion 
jin of trade grain. It was initially agreed to pay a .022 yuan 
per jin storage fee for all grain not shipped after half a year. 
However, to date, less than 200 million jin of grain has been 
shipped and not a cent has been paid for storage fees. 
Provincial grain departments must spent an additional more than 
25 million yuan each year in storage fees. In 1991 and 1992, the 
state also decided to apply a concessionary policy for the 
procurement of negotiated price grain, providing a subsidy of 
.03 yuan per jin. It made arrangements to purchase 600 million 
jin of rice from Anhui Province. The grain was purchased, but 
the national treasury refused to pay the bill. The subsidy 
remains unpaid to this time. The grain departments had to 
advance 18 million yuan for this purpose. The offhanded way in 
which policies are applied are also expressed in arbitrariness 
and misinterpretations. An example is the definition of the area 
to which no issuance of IOUs is to apply in the procurement of 
agricultural products. The spirit of the central government 
intent was clearly all agricultural products that the peasants 
sell, but acting in the spirit of the national financial 
administration conference, financial units limited it only to 
fixed procurement items. 
  The "modification" of policies actually reflect the rigid 
interests of different sectors to the point where they take it 
upon themselves to revise, accept or reject, and distort central 
government policies. This has become an "intestinal 
obstruction": in the implementation of government decrees. 
  Lack of separation of government administration and 
enterprise management, and institutional impediments are also 
one of the causes of policy distortions. While realizing that 
government policies are frustrated by the interests of certain 
sectors, one must also recognize the existence of problems in 
other regards as well, namely that at the time policies are 
drawn up, insufficient account is taken that certain aspects of 
the system for their implementation itself is changing as part 
of reform. Instead, traditional administrative methods continue 
to be followed. For example, units such as the specialized 
banks, grain, and supply and marketing departments continue to 
discharge numerous functions for policy purposes while they are 
also engaging in reforms to change their operating systems. They 
are in process of partly or completely changing from being 
administrative agencies to operating like business enterprises. 
While in this process, enterprises own business character and 
the continued discharge of functions of a policy nature creates 
inherent contradictions and clashes. Therefore, until such time 
as government administration has been completely separated from 
enterprise management, and during the designated period when 
policy and business functions continue to be centralized in a 
single entity, if the policies we formulate fail to take account 
of the profit and loss situation of the interests in the system 
that is to enforce the policies, which is in process of becoming 
a business, and if there is no mechanism for recompensing losses 
for the implementation of policies that an organization of a 
business nature incurs, resistance in the implementation of 
policies will be difficult to avoid. If the losses that grain 
and supply and marketing businesses incur in the discharge of 
tasks for policy purposes are commingled with business losses, 
whatever the treasury should pay for or has no way of knowing 
what to pay for the banks will be allowed to suspend. This will 
not only disrupt relations among grain dealers, banks, and the 
treasury (actually the treasury will incur a bank overdraft 
through the suspension of a grain enterprise account), but since 
you will not acknowledge the business character of grain 
dealers, supply and marketing units, and the specialized banks, 
you actually tacitly permit them the right to haggle with the 
government. In such situations, our policies themselves 
frequently become the best bargaining chip; consequently, 
policies are frequently sacrificed under such a system. 
Therefore, unless relations between the government and business 
concerns are straightened out, policy functions and the business 
functions handled separately, many of are policies will remain 
in their infancy. A fate for them other than anticipated will be 
a foregoing conclusion. 
  6. The incompleteness of rural grassroots organizations and 
institutions is also a reason why policies are not put into 
effect. Virtually all of our rural policies must ultimately be 
implemented by a township or village organization. The situation 
found in Anhui Province suggests that difficulties in 
implementing many policies are directly related very greatly to 
the incompleteness of grassroots organizations and institutions. 
As was said above, the "single account book" for finances at the 
village level that exists in all rural villages in Huaibei 
County is a main institutional reason why the "two funds" do not 
reach peasant households, and why peasant burdens are so heavy. 
Since the contracting of production to individual households in 
these places, the development of various kinds of cooperative 
economic organizations that transcend peasant households has 
been slow. The collective economy is weak, and various 
democratic procedural systems that the peasant self-rule law 
provides for have not even been broached. Village cadre 
allowances are the responsibility of the villagers, and this 
conflicts with the cadres' role of doing the government's 
bidding. This is manifested very glaringly here. In addition, 
cadre caliber is low and work style is poor. This makes for 
tense relations between cadres and the public and not very 
vigorous policy implementation. 
  7. Arbitrary policies mean that in large agricultural 
provinces, the spirit may be willing but the flesh is weak in 
carrying out policies. This situation shows graphically the need 
for the local treasury to provide money for the implementation 
of some policies. As was said earlier, the financial resources 
of the large agricultural province of Anhui are rather weak. 
Following implementation of the system of dividing revenues and 
expenditures between the central and local governments and 
holding each responsible for balancing its own budget, 
agriculture suffered more here than in developed provinces. 
Under these circumstances, until central government policy is 
tilted somewhat in favor of large agricultural provinces, these 
provinces financial burdens will increase. Thus difficulties in 
implementing policies will increase, and ultimately there will 
be no way to implement them. An example is the national grain 
production and marketing policy newly inaugurated in 1993, many 
provisions of which will require local governments to spend 
money. This includes a change in the method of providing goods 
associated with the sale of grain in the "three link ups." Local 
governments will have to pay 100 million yuan in subsidies. 
Local governments will have to put up 100 million yuan for grain 
reserves. After grain prices were decontrolled throughout the 
province on 1 April, the failure to solve grain businesses' 
longstanding problems will mean losses of 300 million yuan. In 
addition, allowances paid to administrative unit staff members 
and workers will require between 900,000 and 100 million yuan. 
For these several items alone, local treasuries will have to 
obligate 600 million yuan. This is 11 percent of fiscal 
revenues. This does not even include the setting up of a grain 
risk fund and dealing with the pending need for funds of grain 
agencies. Furthermore, the central government has decided to 
deduct over a 3 year period the 600 million yuan special grain 
subsidy paid provinces, and this 600 million yuan is only enough 
to pay a single year's new payments for grain, never mind 
eliminating the losses pending from previous years. In such a 
situation in which revenues do not cover expenditures, for new 
grain production and marketing policies to suggest that "local 
government may suitably increase added value standards as their 
financial resources permit, local government treasuries bearing 
all increased expenses" is a wish that can even less be talked 
about. In the investment field, too, the central government also 
frequently resorts to a proportional division of investment 
among local jurisdictions. When such a method is applied to the 
harnessing of large rivers -- projects of significance for the 
entire country -- (such as the Huai He river system's new Hui 
and Hong rivers), it is rather unreasonable. Not only does it 
intensify the inequality of wealth of different jurisdictions, 
but since the local government of large agricultural provinces 
cannot pay such sums, assessments must be levied on the 
peasants. This becomes, in turn, a main reason for the increase 
in peasant burdens in traditional agricultural areas. 
  To summarize the foregoing, we realize that the inability to 
implement some central government agricultural policies is not 
just a failure of vigorous enforcement. It also depends on 
whether the drawing up of these policies was itself a correct 
move, whether the policies are workable, whether the gains and 
losses of the system charged with their implementation have 
considered and corresponding measures adopted, and whether the 
external climate is favorable. For large agricultural provinces, 
the problems are even more complex. They have to bear more 
directly pressures coming from all sides, and implementation of 
policies is hobbled by more serious conditions. Therefore, 
greater effectiveness of our agricultural policies requires 
efforts in many regards to improve our operating system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20512 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  8 October 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Views Role of NRO </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0138A Beijing XIANDAI BINGQI [MODERN WEAPONRY] in 
Chinese No 10, 8 Oct 93 pp 38-39 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0138A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XIANDAI BINGQI [MODERN WEAPONRY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dai Yong (2071 3144): "Secret News: The U.S. </F>
National Reconnaissance Office"] 
  [Text] For over 30 years, the U.S. National Reconnaissance 
Office (NRO) was one of the U.S. Armed Forces' and intelligence 
agencies' most secret organs. But in September 1992, the heavy 
curtain was pulled back slightly to expose it. 
<H5>  A Product of the Cold War </H5>
  The NRO was established secretly on 25 August 1960 by the 
U.S. National Security Council. Mainly, it was a merger of 
several space-related departments from the U.S. Air Force 
(USAF), Department of Defense (DoD), and Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA). Despite its public title, the NRO's means of 
gathering intelligence and its capabilities were strictly held 
secrets. 
  It is now known that in addition to national photo 
reconnaissance satellites, NRO employs telecommunications 
intelligence satellites, special purpose reconnaissance 
satellites for observing and controlling foreign radar, 
meteorological satellites for monitoring the climate at target 
sites, and telecommunications relay satellites to transmit 
information from space to the earth. The NRO uses virtually no 
aircraft. 
  NRO's chief mission is to furnish accurate target data to 
the 
USAF's strategic nuclear force, assisting U.S. strategic bombers 
and guided missiles in carrying out accurate attacks. At the 
same time, it also gathers the topographical data which aids 
missiles' on-board computers perform the complex programming 
which controls the missiles' flight. 
  NRO is a principal component of U.S. intelligence agencies, 
under the dual direction of DoD and CIA. Its staff is drawn from 
DoD, chiefly the Air Force, and with one high-ranking civilian 
official of the USAF in charge. The former director was 
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Space) Martin Faga. 
<H5>  Extraordinary Talents </H5>
  The success of NRO's advanced reconnaissance satellites has 
been a source of pride for their manufacturer and users alike. 
  In 1961, NRO satellites discovered the precise number of 
strategic nuclear missiles of the former Soviet Union. 
Reconnaissance results showed that the number of 
intercontinental missiles in the former Soviet Union were much 
fewer than Washington had estimated. Satellites took pictures of 
the shipping boxes of the first SSX-18 intercontinental missiles 
of the former Soviet Union. This new discovery influenced the 
superpowers' weapons negotiations for many years. They also 
exposed the secret of the former Soviet Union's Y-Class nuclear 
submarine: A considerable number of them were huge, expandable, 
rubber boats which could be deployed as decoys. 
  An NRO reconnaissance satellite soaring in the skies 
disclosed that the former Soviet Union was constructing a 
massive underground concealed command network for use by its 
leadership in case nuclear war broke out; that Korea was 
building a shrewdly camouflaged nuclear weapon facility near 
Yongbyon. In 1988, a satellite discovered a CSS-2 
intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in the Saudi 
desert. In this way, Western countries began to suspect that 
China had started to export weapons of this sort. 
  However, NRO analysts have sometimes been fooled, perhaps 
due 
to the organization's blind faith in the very clear satellite 
photographs. When the U.S. found that Libya had a chemical 
weapons plant near Rabta, the Libyans played a trick--setting a 
fire in the plant area, then coating the plant building with dye 
to make it look charred. In this instance, the Americans 
believed only in what they saw, decided that the plant had 
burned down, and so were taken in. 
  At the end of 1992, when President Bush decided to dispatch 
troops to Somalia, the first question he asked NRO was: "How 
long is the runway at the Mogadishu Airport where American 
aircraft will land?" This was a key point which the U.S. 
military had to know in order for American troops to carry out 
"Operation Restore Hope." No one doubted that NRO could answer 
this question with no problem. 
  From the beginning of the seventies to the beginning of the 
eighties, Secretary of the Air Force and NRO Director Hans Mark 
believed that NRO played an "extremely important role" in world 
peace during the Cold War. He says, "NRO made it possible for 
the U.S. and the Soviet Union to reach agreement on weapons 
control, because NRO could keep watch on them." He also stated 
that "NRO plays a major role in providing timely, important 
information for policy makers." Some people estimate that NRO 
collects 90 percent of U.S. intelligence data. 
<H5>  NRO's "Birds" </H5>
  It was a long-held, popular belief that NRO's satellite 
photographs, taken from 240 km out in space, could differentiate 
among the license plate numbers on cars passing through Moscow's 
Red Square. When Faga was asked whether they could determine an 
individual's sex from the photos, he just smiled. He never 
answers questions of this sort. 
  There is no doubt that NRO has supplied a vast quantity of 
detailed pictures from outer space, including Russia's mobile 
intercontinental missiles, the mobility status of Iraq's 
"Fleetfoot" missile, and the actions of international terrorists 
in Libyan training camps. In these instances, timely 
intelligence supplied to the U.S. President for grasping the 
situation in military or diplomatic confrontations is an 
invaluable asset. 
  Dennis DeConcini, Chairman of the Senate Intelligence 
Committee, regards the satellite reconnaissance system as the 
most complicated of the various reconnaissance systems now in 
operation. He believes that the billions of dollars spent on the 
satellite system were worth it for the most part. 
  Former Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge secretly held 
the concurrent post of NRO head during the Reagan 
administration. He points out that during the entire Cold War 
period, the maintenance of world stability could be attributed 
to the success of NRO. Its contribution of pictures which kept 
the U.S. in a favorable weapons control position will never be 
forgotten. A satellite requires five to eight years from design 
to launch. 
  For more than 30 years, satellites have continued to take on 
new telecommunications technology, computers, and optics. In 
addition, the microminiaturization of components has greatly 
downsized the satellites while considerably improving their 
functions and the speed at which they can process data, so their 
missions can be assigned or re-assigned rapidly. 
  NRO satellites operate on an elliptical track, making one 
orbit around the earth every 24 hours. It on-board photo 
facilities can conduct target reconnaissance and monitoring. 
They can take close-up pictures of certain special areas, and 
take pictures of wide regions of the globe; researchers can then 
look for interesting content in the pictures. 
  Today, NRO's "birds" are still staring at the strategic 
nuclear missile bases in the various countries of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. In the 1990s, in addition to 
such traditional assignments as checking on the status of 
implementing the agreement to reduce military facilities, the 
NRO will assume some new ones. 
  One of these is monitoring the environment. Such natural 
disaster data as forest fires, volcanic eruptions, floods, 
earthquakes, etc. will be monitored by satellites of NRO or 
other information organs and the data then sent to a group of 
specialists doing environmental research. This group consists of 
more than 50 specialists drawn from government and localities. 
In 1991, the U.S. also set up an environmental operations 
contingent under the direction of the CIA. 
  The demand for political intelligence increases daily. 
Examples of this are: taking pictures of the Bo Hei [3134 7815] 
POW camp, closely watching the spread of nuclear, biological, 
and chemical weapons and ballistic missiles throughout the world 
and monitoring the countless regional conflicts which might 
threaten U.S. interests. 
  NRO has received new orders to assist the U.S. military in 
rapidly dispatching troops outside the U.S.'s borders. In the 
future, more and more U.S. troops will be stationed at home, so 
when a crisis situation occurs, intelligence concerning remote 
places must be collected in the shortest time possible. At such 
times, there is no better way than using satellites. 
  NRO does not itself assign missions directly to its 
satellites; this task is undertaken by a special committee under 
the Director of Central Intelligence--the Photo Needs and Use 
Committee. NRO's daily assignments come from this committee. 
<H5>  The NRO Staff </H5>
  NRO is responsible for information satellites and a complex 
network of ground facilities. At present, the three U.S. 
military branches employ a total of 38 military satellite 
control stations throughout the world. The USAF operates 15 
stations, most of them used to assist NRO staff. 
  How many people work for NRO? It is still a secret today. 
Its 
staff includes civilian technical personnel and engineers who 
have undergone intensive training, but it also gets a great deal 
of help from the USAF, and its facilities are all hidden in the 
USAF. 
  NRO operators send controlling data to the satellites by 
computers, making each satellite travel its required path, as 
well as controlling the satellites' entry into space to take 
pictures. 
  Unlike the National Security Agency, the huge U.S. 
communications intelligence organization, the NRO does not 
itself perform intelligence analysis of the data it gathers, but 
it has consumers which do. Examples of these are the CIA, the 
Defense Intelligence Agency, the State Department, U.S. military 
intelligence organs, etc. 
  NRO personnel are very enthusiastic about their work. They 
operate complicated machines with thousands of components and 
parts; even a slight mistake can have serious consequences as a 
satellite could go off track. 
  The Pentagon's budget has been slashed continuously over the 
past eight years, and estimates are that NRO's budget has been 
cut to 5 to 6 billion dollars. 
  In the next several years, it is estimated that the number 
of 
reconnaissance satellites will be reduced by 25 percent, 
although more advanced and longer-lived new satellites will to a 
certain degree compensate for some of the reductions. But the 
budget reduction means that consumers may not able to get the 
intelligence they want on time. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20513 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> NORTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Vice Chairman Views Unity, PLA </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0189B Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 20 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0189B </F>
<F P=104>  Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [By wire dated Urumqi 19 January from Xinhua reporter Xu </F>
Jinzhang (5171 6855 4545): "At Press Conference, Abulaidi 
Amuderexiti (7093 0008 0171 2251 7093 0008 6757 3583 6007 2251) 
and Pan Zhaomin (3382 0340 3046) stated: Joining Hands To Build 
a Stable and Prosperous Border Region, the Unity of Xinjiang's 
Military and People Have Brought Forth a Completely New Overall 
Situation"] 
  [Text] At a recent press conference, Abulaidi Amuderexiti, 
vice chairman of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and Pan 
Zhaomin, political commissar of the Xinjiang Military Region, 
were highly pleased to announce that the people and the military 
of Xinjiang have made it their common mission to build up a 
stable and prosperous border region. A new overall situation 
will arise, one of mutual respect and support, of bravely 
fighting shoulder to shoulder, and of unity between the military 
and the political authorities, between the military and the 
people, and between the various nationalities. 
  After reporting on the successes achieved in the economic 
construction and other undertakings accomplished in Xinjiang, 
Abulaidi Amuderexiti said that Xinjiang's development and 
prosperity are the crystallization of the unity which has been 
established between military and people and between the various 
nationalities. The troops stationed in Xinjiang have made it 
their major task to assist this region in the development of its 
national economy, in the interest of ensuring social stability 
and promoting unity and progress among its nationalities. In 
recent years, officers and men of the army have participated in 
over 210 major local construction projects, assisted in over 310 
public welfare undertakings. On over 1,200 occasions they have 
rendered emergency help in calamities, they have voluntarily 
planted over 1 million trees, built over 150 schools, and helped 
over 80,000 impoverished households in the encampment areas to 
extricate themselves from their state of poverty. Officers and 
men have dug 1,400 km of canals for people of various 
nationality; this expanded and improved the irrigated areas of 
land by over 1.4 million mu. The irrigation projects, 
named "Military-People-Unity Canal" and "Love-of-People Canal," 
can be found along the northern and southern slopes of the 
Tianshan mountain range. The troops also voluntarily dug over 
110 wells for the people and laid over 40,000 meters of pipes 
for running water supplies, thereby ending for over 120,000 
herdsman households their long history of merely relying on snow 
and dirty water for much of the time. The various nationalities 
of Xinjiang will never forget the meritorious deeds of these 
fraternal soldiers, deeds which have been performed in the 
interest of Xinjiang's development. 
  Pan Zhaomin stated that the various nationalities of 
Xinjiang 
"regarded the troops as a `Great Wall' and looked on soldiers as 
if belonging to their own families." Whenever soldiers had to 
perform large-scale, arduous tasks, people living nearby would 
send some of their own young, strong men as laborers to help 
transporting goods and provisions. Governments of all ranks, 
though financially hard pressed, would eagerly raise funds to 
resolve difficulties that the military may have with regard to 
drinking water and electricity, jobs for military dependents, 
and schools or child-care centers for their children. Commercial 
enterprises and supply and marketing coops of various types, as 
well as booksellers, would regularly send mobile units to the 
military camps. Border counties/cities and farming and 
stockbreeding communities would institute a joint 
military-citizenry joint defense system, energetically 
cooperating with the troops in assiduously patrolling the area 
and protecting the stability of the border region. The entire 
autonomous region has over 3,100 family service centers, who 
warmheartedly work to dispel anxieties and resolve difficulties 
for officers and men on duty guarding the border and for family 
members of fallen soldiers. Each kilometer of road, each 
military camp, each power station, each water supply engineering 
project, all these are the fruit of much painstaking labor of 
the peoples of various nationalities. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20514 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> NORTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Strengthens Party Organization Work </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0189A Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 15 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0189A </F>
<F P=104>  Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by own correspondent: "Autonomous Region Held </F>
Report-Back Meetings on Building Up Grassroots Party 
Organization in the Farming and Livestock Breeding Regions of 
the Northern and Southern Sectors of Xinjiang--Zhang Fusen (1728 
4396 2773) and Zhou Guofu (0719 0948 1381) Presented Four 
Demands for Future Work"] 
  [Text] Further deepening of understanding, unremitting and 
  energetic development of the grassroots party 
organization in the farming and livestock breeding areas. 
  Laying stress on the key points, doing a sound and solid 
job. 
  Closely linking the buildup of the grassroots party 
orgnization in the farming and lifestock breeding areas with the 
overall development of the rural economy. 
  Substantially strengthening leadership in the buildup of 
grassroots party organization in the farming and livestock 
breeding areas. 
  On 9-11 January, the autonomous region held report-back 
meetings in Kashi and Kuitun on the buildup of the grassroots 
party organization in the farming and stockbreeding areas of the 
northern and southern sectors of Xinjiang. At the meetings, 
experiences were reviewed and exchanged with regard to the 
buildup of grassroots party organization, which had actually 
been carried out during the past two months in the various 
farming and livestock breeding areas. The meetings also analyzed 
existing problems and made plans and dispositions as to the next 
phase of work. 
  Zhang Fusen, deputy secretary of the Autonomous Regional CPC 
Committee, and Zhou Guofu, member of the Standing Committee of 
the Autonomous Regional CPC Committee and director of the 
Organization Department, presided over the northern Xinjiang 
meeting and the southern Xinjiang meeting, respectively. 
  Judging by the situation reported by the leadership of the 
various autonomous prefecture cities and key counties (cities), 
initial successes have been achieved in the work of building up 
the grassroots party organization, which had indeed been carried 
out since the early part of November of last year in the various 
farming and stockbreeding areas. In 15 key counties (cities), 
184 key townships (towns), and in 1,453 less developed villages 
throughout Xinjiang, a comprehensive overhaul of party branches 
had been instituted. From various places, 7,580 cadres had been 
selected and despatched for work in the key counties, townships, 
and less developed villages, and 976 young and promising cadres 
from government agencies were despatched to these less developed 
villages to assume duties or register for work. By laying stress 
on the key points and adopting forceful measures, a healthy 
development was achieved in the buildup of the grassroots party 
organizations in the farming and stockbreeding areas. 
  Leading cadres from various autonomous prefecture cities and 
key counties (cities) who attended the meetings analyzed 
existing problems and then expressed the opinion that, although 
the buildup of the grassroots party organization in the farming 
and lifestock breeding areas had been effective, the 
development, comprehensively speaking, has been very uneven. 
Leading cadres in some places showed insufficient understanding 
of the importance, necessity, and urgency of the buildup which 
has to take place at the grassroots in the farming and lifestock 
breeding areas; they had been slow in taking action and not 
forceful in their performance. In some places they had not 
accurately taken charge of the key points in their work; they 
had failed to study sufficiently thoroughly the difficulties in 
building up the grassroots party organization in the farming and 
stockbreeding areas and had adopted rather ineffective measures. 
  In their concluding speeches at the report-back meetings in 
the northern and southern sectors of Xinjiang, Comrades Zhang 
Fusen and Zhou Guofu presented four demands relative to a more 
effective future buildup of the grassroots party organization in 
the farming and stockbreeding areas: 
  One. Further deepening of understanding, unremitting and 
energetic development of the grassroots party organization in 
the farming and stockbreeding areas. The grassroots party 
organization is the foundation of the entire fighting power of 
the party. This is a point that all leading cadres in party and 
government must understand very clearly; there must be not the 
slightest ambiguity in this regard. Party committees at all 
levels must grasp this matter of strengthening the buildup of 
the grassroots organization in the farming and lifestock 
breeding areas as an important and urgent task within the 
party's overall work in the rural areas. 
  Two. Guiding ideology must be clear and definite, work 
performance must be sound and solid. Guiding ideology must 
stress the basic things, lay the foundation, strive for 
stability, and spur on development. When engaged in 
strengthening the buildup of the party's grassroots organization 
in the farming and stockbreeding areas, it is necessary to 
primarily concentrate on the key points, focus all energy and 
strength on the effective education of party members and on the 
effective rectification of party branch committees in the key 
counties (cities), townships (towns), and less developed 
villages. It is not only necessary to make a good selection of 
the person of party branch secretary, but the entire set of the 
party branch committee must be well and effectively constituted, 
and there also has to be some down-to-earth work performed for 
them. 
  Three. It is necessary to closely link the buildup of the 
grassroots party organization in the farming and stockbreeding 
areas with the overall development of the rural economy. 
Economic development is the central task of the party, as it is 
also the fundamental starting point and the point where the 
party will make its stand in its efforts to strengthen the 
grassroots organization in the farming and stockbreeding areas. 
Leading cadres of all ranks must firmly espouse the guiding 
ideology of "pay attention to party construction as a matter 
bound up with the economy, pay attention to party construction 
as a means to spur on the economy." The extent to which 
townships and villages will achieve a moderate degree of 
prosperity at an early date must be major criterion for whether 
the buildup of the grassroots organization has been effectively 
accomplished. 
  Four. Party committees of all ranks must effectively 
strengthen their leadership in the work of building up the 
grassroots organization in the farming and stockbreeding areas. 
Main leadership problems require personal attention of the 
leading cadre, assigned leadership problems must be attended to 
with all the assignee's strength, other leadership problems must 
be made coordinated efforts. In this matter of strengthening the 
buildup of the grassroots party organization in the farming and 
lifestock breeding areas, it shall also be incumbent to 
institute the leadership responsibility system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20515 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> NORTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Financial Difficulties Examined </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0191A Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 3 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0191A </F>
<F P=104>  Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Fuqiang (3769 1381 1730) and Xie Xuan (6200 </F>
3551): "Tracing the Reasons for Xinjiang's Financial 
Difficulties"] 
  [Text] In recent years, the financial difficulties of 
Xinjiang have become increasingly serious; the dimensional 
spread of the deficit has continuously broadened, and the 
deficit amount has grown year after year. Because so much of 
the funds are held up by pending accounts, it is extremely 
difficult to make financial dispositions. Some expenditures that 
should be ensured cannot be ensured, and allocations for normal 
budget expenditures cannot be made and paid out. In many places 
even the monthly wages cannot be paid. This state of affairs is 
certainly on the minds of people of all walks of life. 
  There are many different causes for the financial 
difficulties of Xinjiang: 
  Weak economic foundation, insufficient income logistics. 
Xinjiang's industrial production is undiversified, of low grade, 
and poor quality, while production costs are high. There are 
hardly any specially successful enterprises or hit-type products 
that would yield high tax revenue or profits. This restricts the 
scope of financial revenue and limits quite substantially the 
depth and breadth of financial revenue growth. Even though 
Xinjiang's financial revenue increased progressively 17.4 
percent during the years from 1985 to 1992, that was, to a 
certain extent, due mainly to a change in taxation policy. 
  Because of insufficient investments in the technological 
transformation of enterprises during the Sixth and Seventh 
Five-Year Plan, technical equipment has remained rather poor, 
and the organizational structure of enterprises and the product 
mix is highly irrational. This is one of the reasons why the 
present enterprises are operating at low speed and low 
efficiency. Profits and tax revenue from budgeted industrial and 
commercial enterprises throughout the region show negative 
growth, and up to the end of September of 1993, profits turned 
over to the finance authorities had declined 14.33 percent, 
compared to the corresponding period of 1992. Among the 524 
budgeted industrial and commercial enterprises, the dimensional 
spread of losses and the amount of losses has gradually 
increased, with 200 enterprises being implicated to the amount 
of 166 million yuan. This is 19.05 and 110.14 percent more, 
respectively, than during the corresponding period of 1992. 
  The county-level economy is not well developed. Most county 
(city) economies consist of large farms and small industries; 
they are correspondingly producing little financial revenue. In 
1992, total revenue from all the 85 counties (cities) of the 
region was 1.386 billion yuan, which amounted to 53.1 percent of 
the entire revenue of the autonomous region. Only the cities of 
Korla and Kuytun had been places with more than 100 million yuan 
revenue. The counties (cities) with less than 100-million yuan 
revenue had brought in 231 million yuan, which amounted to 8.8 
percent of the total revenue of the autonomous region. The 
overwhelming majority of counties (cities) are subsidy counties. 
County-level finance is the foundation of national finance. If 
county-level finance lacks vitality, no turn for the better can 
be expected in the financial condition of the entire autonomous 
region. 
  Development of the region's individual and private economy 
and of village and township enterprises is relatively backward. 
For all of 1992, the region's individually operated industrial 
and commercial businesses and privately run enterprises turned 
in 261 million yuan of taxes, which amounted to 10.01 percent of 
the autonomous region's total revenue, and which was somewhat 
more than 20 percentage points lower than the national average. 
Total output value of village and township enterprises amounted 
to 15 percent of the total rural social output value, which was 
45 percentage points lower than the national average. Total 
value of industrial output of village and township enterprises 
amounted to 7.26 percent of the total industrial output value of 
the entire region, which was 22.74 percentage points lower than 
the national average. Village and township enterprises produced 
a tax revenue of 204 million yuan, which amounted to 7.8 percent 
of the total revenue of the autonomous region and was 7.4 
percentage points lower than the national average. These facts 
reveal that the development in Xinjiang of the individual and 
private economy and of village and township enterprises has been 
much slower than in the developed regions in the rest of the 
country. The level of development is very low, and revenue 
provided by this sector is very little. 
  The party committee and the people's government of the 
autonomous region have adopted various measures to accelerate 
the economic development in Xinjiang. They have gradually 
increased, at an accelerated pace, investments for the 
technological transformation of enterprises, they have raised 
input in key capital construction projects, and started up some 
large-scale projects. From a long-term point of view, these 
measures may have a major impact on the resolution of the 
autonomous region's financial difficulties. However, these 
investments have been made with borrowed funds, and their 
repayment, with interests, will of course take up a considerable 
portion of the anticipated revenue. In the next few years, 
there cannot possibly be any great improvement in the revenue 
situation, and the state of insufficient sources of financial 
income will be a long-range phenomenon. 
  Insufficient financial income logistics, combined with a 
tendency toward increasing expenditures, will no doubt further 
aggravate the financial difficulties. 
  Xinjiang is inhabited by several different nationalities. 
Newspapers, periodicals, books, documents, broadcasts, and 
television must all use different languages and scripts. 
Separate middle and primary schools must be set up at various 
places for Han-nationality and for minority-nationality 
children. The population of Xinjiang is small, but it has an 
administrative organization with a multitude of units and a huge 
personnel. Educational and public health affairs have to be 
attended to at many widely scattered places. Government 
employees and teachers account for around 4.5 percent of the 
total population. Xinjiang has a vast territory, its lines of 
communications are long, it has a long cold season, and 
expenditure on these accounts is therefore higher than the 
national average. As to expenditure for organizational personnel 
alone, the proportion of persons on government payroll in 1993 
was 4.3 percent of the total social population, which was over 1 
percentage point above the national average, with an expenditure 
that was over 40 percent more than in ordinary areas. 
Expenditure for business trips, postal and telecommunication 
services, heating, and other public utilities are twice as high 
as in other, ordinary areas. 
  In the last few years, many factors have contributed to the 
increase of fiscal expenditure, with increases especially large 
for personnel, and these expenditures have, furthermore, been 
inflexibly necessary. By the end of 1992, staff and workers in 
the administration and public institutions and retired personnel 
throughout the entire region amounted to 650,000 persons. 
Considering additionally that the state is coming out year after 
year with new policies for raising wages and allowances, the 
sums involved here are very large. According to statistics, 
personnel expenditure for wages alone has increased from 630 
million yuan in 1985 to 1.88 billion yuan in 1992, an increase 
of almost four times in seven years and a progressive increase 
of 16.9 percent every year. This is more than local finance can 
bear, and any increase in revenue will almost all have to be 
spent every year on increased wages for personnel. On the other 
hand, organizational reforms and redistribution of personnel 
require transitional processes, and adding to it the impact of 
commodity price increases and the corresponding rises in the 
tariffs of various expenses, the result is that expenditure will 
continuously broaden in scope. 
  During the change-over from planned economy to market 
economy, the pattern of unified and centralized state control 
over income and expenditure has been broken up, but centralized 
expenditure still persists. During 1992, the one item of price 
subsidies alone resulted in an expenditure for the entire region 
of over 600 million yuan, while the condition of overcommitment 
of public finance could not be mitigated or resolved. It so 
happened that expenditure that should have been ensured could 
not be ensured anymore. Under the market economy system, some 
undertakings can be carried out by fully mobilizing social 
forces and thereby lightening the burden on public finance. 
However, presently, due to the limitations of objective 
conditions and insufficient subjective effort, this kind of 
effort is still in its initial stage, and its effectiveness 
cannot yet counted on to lighten the burden on public finance. 
  Extravagant spending and incidents of wastefulness are still 
occurring in some places, departments, and units. Frequently, 
the ineffectual supervision and investigation of such violations 
of discipline by fiscal departments and departments charged with 
just such supervision and investigation contribute to 
unnecessary increases in the fiscal burden. The great difficulty 
of rectifying and cutting down on the scope and structure of 
such kind of expenditures adds to the difficulty of balancing 
fiscal revenue and expenditure. 
  Changes in the system of public finance are also a 
contributing factor to Xinjiang's economic difficulties. 
  From 1980 to 1986, when the state worked with a financial 
contractual responsibility system, the appraised basic figures 
for revenue and expenditure were essentially quite reasonable, 
and that allowed Xinjiang to get along not too badly. Because 
the self-sufficiency of the region in financial respects is 
rather low--it was only at a 46.4 percent rate in 
1992--increases in fiscal expenditure mainly relied on 
progressively increasing subsidies from the state and 
supplementation by fiscal income growth. From 1987 on, the 
central finance authorities adopted a policy of retrenchment, 
reducing the flat rate subsidy for Xinjiang, and also including 
it in the contractual base figure. As a result, to cope with its 
increased expenditure, the region had to mainly rely on growth 
in its own financial strength, thereby greatly weakening the 
autonomous region's ability at fiscal macro-regulation and 
control. Because of the small revenue base figure of the 
autonomous region and its large expenditure base figure, only a 
2 percent increase of revenue could ensure satisfying the needs 
of a 1 percent increase in expenditure. The absolute figure of 
increased revenue cannot by far catch up with the growth of the 
absolute figure of increased expenditure, and as a result the 
fiscal revenue-expenditure contradiction is deteriorating almost 
by the day. 
  Besides this, some of the financial distribution functions 
have been dismembered, which also aggravated the financial 
difficulties of the autonomous region. Following the initiation 
of the socialist market system, some departments and units 
erroneously assumed that market economy is "free economy," and 
without going through the finance departments and without 
authority of their own, they decided on some policies of their 
own that involved matters of public finance. This has caused 
the diversion and loss of some part of the revenue, while it 
increased some unnecessary expenditure and weakened the 
distributory function of public finance. 
  Because of all the above-mentioned reasons, which had the 
effect of continuously widening the dimensional spread and the 
amount of the deficit, an aggravation of the fiscal difficulties 
had become a matter of course. Without any doubt, the widening 
of the region's fiscal deficit and the deterioration of its 
financial difficulties have naturally added to a certain extent 
to the difficulties of performing financial tasks and have 
hampered the development of the region's economy and 
undertakings. However, as far as minority regions are concerned, 
we must not taken this as the only criterion to assess the 
quality of financial work performance. The arduous labor 
expended by the financial departments of all ranks throughout 
the entire region to promote the region's reform, opening to the 
outside world, and economic development, must be fully affirmed. 
Insufficient effort is certainly one of the causes for the 
above-stated financial difficulties, but the main causes are 
deep-rooted problems in the reform and in the developmental 
process that have affected public finance, and some of these are 
historical causes. Resolving these problems cannot be achieved 
by relying merely on the financial sector, the solution must 
rely on the energetic efforts of all sectors of society. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20516 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial: Li's Trip as `Pragmatic Diplomacy' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  OW2202095094 Taipei CHINA POST in English 18 Feb 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> OW2202095094 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CHINA POST </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "President Li Demonstrates His Pragmatism"] </F>
  [Text] President Li Teng-hui once again demonstrated his 
pragmatism as he gave an account of his eight-day unofficial 
visit to the three Southeast Asian countries of Indonesia, the 
Philippines and Thailand, and answered questions at an 80-minute 
press conference held on Wednesday night upon his return from 
the trip. 
  The President said one major purpose of his Southeast Asian 
trip was to promote economic cooperation. To illustrate the 
need, he said, Taiwan's future economic development must rely on 
continuous investment abroad to create more sales opportunities 
and to secure the supply of essential raw materials. 
  He described his visits to the three countries and his 
discussions with the leaders of the governments involved as 
fruitful, especially in the strengthening of economic 
cooperation. 
  When asked what about the diplomatic implications of his 
trip, Li replied he did not expect to see any immediate gains in 
this respect. He said much more must be done and it takes time 
for the achievement of concrete results. 
  In fact, Li's meetings with President Suharto of Indonesia, 
President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines and King Phumiphon 
Adunyadet of Thailand in themselves represented a major 
achievement of his pragmatic diplomacy. None of the three 
countries have formal ties with Taiwan. 
  Asked about his chances of being invited to the 1994 summit 
meeting of APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) leaders, Li 
said he did not bring forward the matter in his meeting with 
Suharto, who will play host to the event this year. 
  Li said he was not sure that he would be invited. But the 
President indicated he will not insist on participating, should 
that arouse protest from Beijing and consequently affect the 
convention of the summit. The Republic of China [ROC] after all 
wants to be a nation having the respect of all, he added. 
  He was also asked to comment on the repeated protests 
Mainland China lodged with the three countries, warning their 
governments not to receive him. Li said those interventions 
were unreasonable and surely were not mature policies. 
  The President noted that, despite Beijing's continued 
protests, the three nations still went ahead to discuss 
bilateral relations with the ROC and made clear to him that they 
want to be friends with this nation. Li did not believe that 
his Southeast Asian tour will have adverse effects on Taiwan's 
relations with the mainland. He said he did not hold any 
political attempts in embarking on his Southeast Asian tour, 
explaining that he had no idea of trying to use the trip to 
promote a two-China policy. 
  Li continued that, since Taiwan and the mainland have 
remained divided because of political differences, this island 
must decide, as in the past, its own course of development. And 
he believes that in dealing with an intransigent Beijing, the 
best way, is to step up Taiwan's own strength, and use it [to] 
win the mainland's recognition. 
  He is certainly right. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20517 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  23 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   New KMT Legislative Yuan Party Whip Profiled </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0169A Taipei TZULI WANPAO in Chinese 23 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0169A </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei TZULI WANPAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Li Chi-kuang (2621 1323 0342): "Lin Chih-chia, </F>
the Child-King, Squeaks in--A Low Party Whip Moves in High 
Political Circles"] 
  [Excerpt] As the KMT's chief party secretary in the 
Legislative Yuan [LY], what Lin Chih-chia [2651 1807 0857] 
actually likes best is children's books, the comics. But 
the cartoon world of clear demarcations between gratitude and 
resentment and sharp distinctions between good and evil is 
unable to explain the complex political approach of this 
unconsciously powerful and connected LY member. When Lin 
Chih-chia squeaked into the post of chief party secretary in the 
election for the KMT's chief party secretary in the LY on 19 Jan 
1994, outsiders speculated that the KMT might be on the verge of 
a brand-new parliamentary image, while being concerned about 
whether Lin Chih-chia, who is commonly known as the "child 
king," could make the overall transition to moving in such "high 
political circles." 
  Lin Chih-chia is of course not a child. His father, Lin 
Ta-k'un [2651 1129 0981], served in Taipei County for three 
terms as the Wuku Township magistrate, and for 13 years as 
township legislative assembly president, so that the Lin 
family is considered to be not an inconsequential faction in 
Wuku and even in all of greater Taipei County. Early in his 
childhood, the Lin family was involved in politics and, as 
children were not noticeable as opponents, Lin Chih-chia as a 
child was often sent into the enemy camp to election 
headquarters to gather intelligence, acting as a "messenger." 
  But while Lin Chih-chia was familiar with "participation" in 
election battles early in his childhood, he is certainly not 
held to have more political cells in the LY than other 
legislators. With a background in chemistry, he studied in the 
United States, only genuinely engaging in the field of 
government administration during his Ph.D. studies, with 
political science on the side, before which he had been only a 
pure and conscientious overseas student. Growing up in a 
smooth-sailing atmosphere made it unnecessary for him to be 
concerned about or deal with "human" issues, with the eternal 
topics in political struggle around mainly man and human nature 
certainly not having left a deep impression on him in his early 
life. 
  His neglect of human nature left him appearing stuffy in 
this 
election for chief party secretary. Being unfamiliar with the 
customary exchange of gifts among legislators at New Years, Lin 
Chih-chia greeted legislators of all parties with complimentary 
baskets of bamboo shoots to express thanks for their votes. 
While these were small gifts with great feeling, the 
legislators who were generally not used to receiving New Years 
gifts from Lin Chih-chia still felt such gifts to be rather 
abrupt, which discounted their effectiveness. 
  In addition, he had not been alert enough to promptly 
explain 
the ties that he had forged with Cheng Feng-shih [6774 6646 
2514] at the time of the legislative elections in his election 
district, causing the LY second-team public-opinion society 
headed by Cheng Feng-shih to become his major election obstacle 
in this election for chief party secretary, which Lin Chih-chia 
had never expected. The conflict of LY Chairman Liu Sung-fan 
[0491 2646 5672] and Vice Chairman Wang Chin-p'ing [3769 6855 
1627] with Jao Ying-ch'i [7437 4481 1142] involved him, 
affecting his votes for chief party secretary, making him a 
nomcombatant offender. Strictly speaking, all of these 
influences on the elections results were ones that Lin Chih-chia 
could not have considered, leaving him during the elections 
without his former guiltless smile, and asking with fear in his 
heart: "How could things have turned out this way?" 
  Lin Chih-chia had always had a positive image among his 
party's legislators, as he was probably one of the legislators 
with the best attendance rate in the LY. Due to his family's 
all-out backing and support, Lin Chih-chia was able to devote 
all of his attention to the congress without concern for his 
home front. Meetings to deliberate on bills were able to add 
to his legal and professional knowledge. While other 
legislators might avoid various LY meetings as being beneath 
them, Lin Chih-chia attended them with much pride and glee. 
When the legislature was not in session, other legislators 
rushed back to their districts to do grassroots work, while Lin 
Chih-chia showed up at the LY every morning at 0800 sharp. KMT 
calls to his office to mobilize party legislators to vote were 
often in vain, as he had long since been in the legislative 
chamber. In light of these points, he was more suited to become 
party whip than most of his party's legislators. 
  When Liao Fu-pen [1675 4395 2609] was chief party secretary, 
Lin Chih-chia was deputy party secretary, as well as serving as 
LY work committee vice president. While Liao Fu-pen held 
himself to be "intelligent, resourceful, and courageous" but 
helpless about having too many outside affairs, so was certainly 
not very actively involved in consultations between the ruling 
and opposition parties, Lin Chih-chia as his assistant had many 
more opportunities to temper himself in such consultations. 
DPP offseason secretary general Lu Hsiu-yi [1982 0208 0001] 
holds Lin Chih-chia to be a moderate and rational "gentleman" 
with whom one can work. 
  As a natural gentleman, the moderate and rational Lin 
Chih-chia has always had the air of a scholar. His 
coordination in 1993 spurred the health administration to agree 
to build a children's hospital on the site of Taiwan U's former 
hospital. While such planning and staffing concern for Taiwan 
U's hospitals and capacity might be a best opportunity to show 
merit on behalf of voters for an ordinary legislator, Lin 
Chih-chia did not even report it to the media. No one in the LY 
has ever seen Lin Chih-chia pounding the lectern, shouting, or 
clashing with others. Despite mistakes by subordinates and 
assistants, Lin Chih-chia has no record of blaming others. 
  But his moderate nature is also interpreted by some at times 
as irresponsibly obedient behavior. Especially when faced with 
structural issues within the KMT organization, many question 
whether Lin Chih-chia knows how to settle inner-party demands of 
various differing interests and factional disputes. 
  Within the party, the KMT is now facing a transition period, 
entangled between top-down mission-type political party 
leftovers and bottom-up democratic-type political party 
pressures. Unfortunately, the LY is the convergence point for 
these two forces. Party legislators are pressured by voting from 
below and policies set by the party central committee from 
above. They have to both protect party policy and pay attention 
to winning votes and keeping from losing them. Mobilizing for 
such efforts is always painful for the party organization. With 
one legislator being more powerful than another, who fears whom? 
It is always hard to serve as party whip, not to speak of the 
moderate Lin Chih-chia. 
  Another problem that may become a headache for Lin Chih-chia 
is LY factional grievances. Particularly under the two senior 
and mid-level party whips of Central Policy Council Enforcement 
Chief Jao Ying-ch'i and LY Work Committee Director Liao Fu-pen, 
there are special problems involved in playing the role of a low 
party whip. With the ties between Jao and Liao, while Lin 
Chih-chia was once Liao Fu-pen's assistant, and is regarded by 
outsiders as part of Jao's forces, the two both see Lin as a 
youthful member of the younger generation, and as a disciple. 
So the problems caused by the two elders for the younger, as 
to Lin Chih-chia who does not easily clash with others, and how 
to stand off the close ties between these two legislators, seems 
to be a problem that Lin will have to do much future work on. 
Lu Hsiu-yi has some reservations about Lin Chih-chia's ability 
to act responsibly and take charge in the future. 
  In addition, as politics revolves around people, with 
alliances and grievances among political figures, both the good 
and the bad, playing out and changing in the space of weak and 
unclear human nature, Lin Chih-chia who is less sensitive about 
"people" is likely to have to make an even greater show of rare 
spirit. 
  [Passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20518 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   First Chinese Chief Secretary Profiled </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0170A Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
85, 1 Jan 94 pp 72-73 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0170A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mei Tzu (2734 1311): "Hong Kong's Iron Woman -- </F>
Ms. Chen Fang An-sheng, the First Chinese Chief Secretary"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] In Hong Kong's nearly 100-year 
history as a British colony, only the past few years have seen 
Chinese holding high posts in the government. It is especially 
unprecedented for a Chinese to be promoted to the post of chief 
secretary -- the No. 1 official under the Hong Kong governor, 
equivalent to the prime minister of Hong Kong. Now, the Hong 
Kong government has given this No. 1 post not only to a Chinese, 
but to a Chinese woman. This may be seen as a pioneer move in 
Chinese society, which is noted for its patriarchal tradition. 
  When Sir David Ford, the British chief secretary, decided to 
retire by the end of this [as printed] year, nine Chinese 
officials at the council and service levels were candidates for 
this No. 1 post in the Hong Kong government. They were all men, 
except Chen Fang An-sheng. However, the outcome of the 
competition was that Chen Fang An-sheng, the only female, beat 
all the others and became the winner. 
  It was no sheer good luck that Chen Fang An-sheng gained the 
recognition of Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten. With 30 years of 
experience in civil service, this female official has proved 
capable, sharp, bright, and sober-minded. She dares to speak 
out, talks eloquently, and is dauntless in taking on 
responsibilities. She is a very outstanding civil servant, 
demonstrating the style of a strong woman. 
  Chen Fang An-sheng's success in reaching the peak in her 
official career is, of course, due to her hard work and strong 
ability. But there is another reason -- she lives in the right 
time and place. Some commentators in Hong Kong link Chen's 
success to the rising awareness of feminism in the local 
society. In recent years the women's rights movement has been 
rather active in Hong Kong. Now, women's social status is a lot 
higher in Hong Kong than in any neighboring country or region. 
The assumption of the highest official post by Chen Fang 
An-sheng, say the commentators, indicates that the Hong Kong 
women have begun to break through the prejudice and restrictions 
imposed upon them by the patriarchal society. 
  Ironically, however, this Hong Kong woman, though 
representative of the soaring women's rights, still puts her 
husband's surname before her own name as required by the old 
Chinese tradition. Some media even call her Mrs. Chen instead of 
her maid name, Fang An-sheng. 
  In fact, it is the civil-servant localization policy pursued 
by the Hong Kong government for the transitional period that has 
given this Chinese woman an opportunity to stand out among 
others. [passage omitted] 
  In September this [as printed] year when the Hong Kong 
government officially announced that Chen Fang An-sheng would be 
the chief secretary--the first such Chinese official in Hong 
Kong history--her illustrious family background immediately 
caught the media's attention. When reporting and commenting on 
her appointment, many newspapers and periodicals added these 
words: Chen Fang An-sheng is a descendant of a celebrated 
Chinese family. Her grandfather was Fang Chen-wu, a renowned 
Kuomintang general in the War of Resistance Against Japan. 
  Chen Fang An-sheng's ancestors lived in Wabu Town of Anhui, 
which was once a well-cultured town but now is a very poor area. 
When two reporters from the English-language paper SOUTH CHINA 
MORNING POST went to Wabu to trace her family origin, what they 
saw was a poor and backward town in the cold wind. They could 
hardly believe that the No. 1 strong woman of an international 
metropolis is from a family in such a poverty-stricken and 
out-of-the-way town. 
  Yet this is the real fact. Perhaps what is noteworthy is 
that the Fangs are a celebrated family in this small town. Chen 
Fang An-sheng's grandfather, General Fang Chen-wu, was an ardent 
patriotic serviceman, who took part in the Anti-Manchu 
Revolution led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. In the wake of the 18 
September Incident, General Fang Chen-wu contributed all he had 
for the sake of the country and organized an anti-Japan national 
salvation army in southern Shanxi, fighting many brave, bloody 
battles against the Japanese. Later, he founded the World 
Anti-Fascist Alliance and shuttled between London, Paris, and 
Cairo to appeal for international support for the Chinese 
people's anti-Japan struggle. In the War of Resistance Against 
Japan, he was away from home for six long years and did not come 
back even when his father and mother passed away. Unfortunately, 
this renowned general known for his deeds in fighting the 
Japanese was missing in 1941 when he was traveling from Hong 
Kong to Guangzhou. Rumor has it that he was assassinated by a 
special agent sent by Chiang Kai-shek. In the absence of 
evidence, however, the death of Fang An-sheng's grandfather has 
remained a mystery even as of today. 
  Though a girl from a family in Wabu, Fang An-sheng was born 
in westernized Shanghai. Her father, Fang Chen-wu's son, was a 
textile industrialist. When Fang An-sheng was two years old, the 
family moved to Tianjin, where she spent an unforgettable 
childhood. 
  In 1948, the Kuomintang army was badly crushed by the 
Chinese 
Communists' fierce offensive. With a sharp political 
sensibility, Fang An-sheng's father knew that the situation 
would undergo a drastic change. To escape the disaster, he 
brought the entire family to Hong Kong, thus beginning a new 
chapter in the Fang family's history. [passage omitted] 
  The Fangs had a clan tomb in Wabu. It was built by General 
Fang Chen-wu for his parents when he returned home in 1929. The 
tomb was destroyed in the Cultural Revolution. All of a sudden 
this [as printed] year, the Anhui Provincial government decided 
to rebuild the tomb and erect tablets for the clan members, in 
particular General Fang Chen-wu, the meritorious military leader 
in the War of Resistance Against Japan--it is not known whether 
this decision had something to do with Fang An-sheng's 
achievements in Hong Kong. Last September when the 
tomb-rebuilding project was completed, a large number of the 
Fang clansmen--some 1,000 from various parts of Anhui and 18 
from Hong Kong--came back to Wabu to attend the ceremony. Among 
them was daughter Chen Fang An-sheng, the Fang family's pride. 
She received the warmest welcome from the native people. "I will 
never forget this sentimental trip," said the iron woman. 
  HSIANG-KANG SHIH PING [7449 3263 2514 6097] says that Fang 
An-sheng's deep-rooted family origin in China has made her the 
best choice to fill the highest official post in Hong Kong 
during the transitional period, adding that this would 
facilitate Hong Kong's communications with China. A review of 
her maturing history, however, shows that she herself has no 
profound relationship with China. She is purely an elitist 
brought up by the Hong Kong government. 
  In 1962, Fang An-sheng graduated from the University of Hong 
Kong. Then, she took a job in the Hong Kong government as an 
administrative official. At that time, Hong Kong society was 
still quite conservative. Fang An-sheng, then still an unmarried 
woman, was the first female who became an administrative 
official in Hong Kong. [passage omitted] 
  Since then, this bachelor of arts in English literature has 
advanced smoothly in her official career. Starting from a 
grassroots administrative official, she worked in various 
administrative departments of the Hong Kong government, crowned 
with brilliant achievements and getting one promotion after 
another. Finally, she ascended the post of the No. 1 civil 
servant. 
  As a rule, people of extra ability draw both praises and 
criticisms. Chen Fang An-sheng is no exception. Her strict work 
style is appreciated by Governor Chris Patten and respected by 
many people in Hong Kong's political circles. But her 
subordinates are afraid of her. They revere this female boss, 
but do not like her. 
  It is said that when she was the director of the Social 
Welfare Department, she used to invite her subordinates to a 
coffee gathering every week. While drinking the hot coffee, she 
still talked profusely about work, her face being solemn without 
the slightest relaxation. Over time, the subordinates were 
afraid of this gathering, which they called a "coffee 
conference." They tried not to attend it if they could find some 
excuse. This is indicative of Chen Fang An-sheng's utter 
devotion to work. 
  Chen's stern attitude has also been experienced by the 
Chinese communists. 
  After Chris Patten presented his political reform package to 
speed up the democratic program in Hong Kong, Sino-British 
relations quickly soured. On the issues of the New Hong Kong 
Airport and the No. 9 Container Dock, Chen Fang An-sheng, who 
was then the secretary for the Economic Services, sternly faced 
the overbearing Chinese representatives without yielding in the 
slightest. She remained unswayed even when the Chinese side 
criticized her by name. No wonder even those on the Chinese 
side have said privately: sure enough, she deserves the name of 
the iron woman of Hong Kong. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20519 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mainland Intellectuals View Colony's Future </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0170B Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
85, 1 Jan pp 74-75 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0170B </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yu Ming (0060 2494): "Hong Kong Is Quite Likely </F>
To Have a Better Future--Hong Kong's Future in the Eyes of 
Mainland Intellectuals"] 
  [Excerpts] Amid the hubbub of Sino-British political 
disputes, an educated man, who had struggled for decades and 
achieved some success in his career in Hong Kong, finally 
decided, after a lot of hesitation, to emigrate to the country 
of the maple leaf. He said, "I have no confidence in the 1997 
changeover. I cannot bet my remaining years on fate." [passage 
omitted] 
  Recently, a mainland scholar came to Hong Kong for a 
visit. He was surprised at the anxious expression of his 
friends. "What do you worry about?" he asked. "The critical year 
of 1997? I am afraid that the Communist Party cannot survive to 
that year." 
  According to this scholar, the Chinese communists' current 
policy on Hong Kong, strictly speaking, is Deng Xiaoping's 
personal policy, and their rule-by-man tradition is that when 
the strong man exists, his policy prevails, and when he is gone, 
his policy is no longer valid. Once Deng Xiaoping passes away, 
the Hong Kong issue will take a turn for the better. Certainly, 
the Hong Kong people need not worry too much, says this scholar. 
  Currently, all speeches on the Hong Kong issue made by 
high-level officials of the Chinese communist regime are 
strongly worded, and there appears to be no difference in view 
among them. Especially in the recent past when the Chinese 
communists were hurling Cultural-Revolution-type criticisms at 
Chris Patten, almost all the top leaders came forward to 
denounce him, either orally or in writing, sharing a bitter 
hatred against this enemy. Nonetheless, as revealed by 
mainlanders who are well aware of the inside story, the above 
phenomenon in no way means that the Chinese communist leaders 
are taking an entirely identical stand without the slightest 
difference on this issue. 
  According to their observation, some of the speeches 
did come from a strong nationalist sentiment, but more of them 
were a declaration to Deng Xiaoping of the speakers' stance on 
the issue.. Declaring your stance on an external issue, 
they say, will not involve you in any factional struggle or 
rivalry for interests within the party. Since the big boss has 
set the keynote, there should be no opponent at the high stratum 
in the Chinese communist regime. 
  Even so, however, some top Chinese communist leaders still 
refrain from commenting on the Hong Kong issue, sources in 
Beijing point out. The most noteworthy examples are Qiao Shi and 
Tian Jiyun, chairman and first vice chairman, respectively, of 
the National People's Congress [NPC], both of whom have the 
authority to comment on the issue. Yet, since the Sino-British 
political dispute began last year, neither Qiao nor Tian has 
uttered a single word about the Hong Kong issue. All those in 
diplomatic circles in Beijing regard this as food for thought. 
[passage omitted] 
  Liberal intellectuals in Beijing believe that the young 
generation of Chinese communist leaders, even including Jiang 
Zemin and Li Peng--who are most disliked by the Hong Kong 
people--are more pragmatic and know the trend better than old 
leaders like Deng Xiaoping. Once Deng dies, they say, adjustment 
of the Hong Kong policy may not be an unrealistic illusion. 
  As they point out, Hong Kong's future is principally 
dictated by the changes that will take place on the mainland. In 
the next two to three years, or around 1997, with the end of 
old-man politics, the Chinese mainland will certainly undergo an 
earth-shaking change, and the intensity of this change may even 
outstrip the one triggered by Mao Zedong's death. Now, they say, 
political circles in Hong Kong are vehemently arguing over the 
Legislative Council's through-train issue [meaning that members 
of Hong Kong's last Legislative Council may, upon confirmation 
by the SAR Preparatory Committee, become members of the first 
Legislative Council of the SAR on 1 July 1997]. Their argument 
is based on the premise that the present political situation on 
the mainland will not change. This is a moderate thinking, but 
using it as a premise shows an inadequate understanding of 
China's reality and a lack farsightedness about its future 
development. 
  In a very affirmative tone, a liberal intellectual has 
made this remark: If the Chinese communist power is 
shaken, the Hong Kong Basic Law, which the Hong Kong people have 
now been forced to accept, will be radically changed. It may be 
even replaced by a new law to conform with the Hong Kong 
people's wish for democracy and autonomy. 
  According to this intellectual, when talking privately, 
mainland scholars who are concerned about the Hong Kong issue 
look at the Hong Kong basic law drafting and advisory committees 
as copies of the mainland's NPC and the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC]. With their operations 
controlled by the Chinese communists, they are merely Beijing's 
rubber stamps disguised as organizations of voices of the 
people. Therefore, some people call them "small NPC" and "small 
CPPCC." It is doubtful that they can truly represent the will of 
the mainland and Hong Kong people. At least, they are far from 
legally sound as lawmakers. The new basic law in the future 
should not contain the extremely absurd concept of "one country, 
two systems." The gist of the new law should be the protection 
of Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy, not anything like the 
capitalist system remaining unchanged for 50 years. This way, 
the dispute over the political system will be automatically 
resolved. 
  Another liberal intellectual says that the main reason for 
the Chinese communists' strong stance on the Hong Kong issue is 
not that they want to totally control Hong Kong's politics after 
1997. It is rather because they are afraid that a Hong 
Kong effect will appear on the mainland. The Chinese communists 
regard Britain's new policy of accelerating the democratic 
reform in Hong Kong as a bridgehead used by the West in laying 
an all-out siege to Red China in the post-Cold War era. 
[passage omitted] 
  The Chinese communist authorities and dissident 
intellectuals, he says, take diametrically opposite stands on 
the Hong Kong issue. The latter view Hong Kong as a forward 
position to introduce democracy into the mainland. They have a 
very good opinion about Chris Patten and his political reform 
package, and support the democrats in Hong Kong. 
  An academically prestigious magazine on the mainland, 
DUSHU, carries an article on the Sino-British Opium War in its 
last March issue. The viewpoint of the article is diametrically 
opposite to the official stand. It says that the objective 
result of the Opium War "was in essence the triumph of 
modern society over medieval society and western capitalism over 
eastern feudalism." This is a relatively powerful criticism 
of the nationalist hysteria that the Chinese communist 
authorities have energetically exhibited since the start of the 
Sino-British political dispute. 
  With regard to Hong Kong's future, some mainland academics 
studying the Hong Kong and Macao questions hold that the degree 
of autonomy enjoyed by Hong Kong in relation to the mainland and 
the method of autonomy to be adopted will depend mainly on 
economic rather than political factors, or more specifically, 
the economic link between Hong Kong and the mainland, especially 
southern China. Judging from the present situation, they believe 
that the Hong Kong and mainland economies are closely linked and 
interdependent and are on the road of common prosperity. Because 
of this, it is almost impossible for Hong Kong to divorce itself 
from China and become independent even in case the Chinese 
communist regime collapses. 
  These academics are rather interested in Hong Kong's legal 
system and political operations as well as its fledgling party 
politics. They say: As for political construction in the 
future, two systems are available for the mainland's reference: 
One is to learn from Taiwan; the other is to learn from Hong 
Kong. Hong Kong's political system has the same advantages as 
the British political system. For instance, it is rational, 
moderate, corruption-resistant, and governed by legality. This 
can make up for the insufficiency of China's traditional 
culture. 
  According to their forecast, in the future Hong Kong may 
have a bipartisan system like Britain, that is, a Conservative 
Party and a Labor Party. The present Liberal Party may play the 
role of the Conservative Party, while the United Democrats of 
Hong Kong may act as the Labor Party. The Pro-China Democratic 
Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, though presently 
believed to have a great potential, may lose its position and 
disappear from Hong Kong's political arena as time passes by. 
  They further point out that the Democratic Alliance for 
the Betterment of Hong Kong now exists by attaching itself to 
the Chinese Communist Party. At present, it has the advantage of 
acting as a middleman between Beijing and the public of Hong 
Kong. If there is a change in China's situation in the future, 
this advantage will no longer be available. It appears that if 
the Communist Party collapses, the Democratic Alliance may 
follow the example of the communist parties in Eastern Europe to 
take the road of a socialist party and act as a spokesman for 
the working people. Such a road has proved feasible in Europe. 
In China, however, because the communist authorities have, for 
more than a decade, attached much weight to the capitalist side 
in implementing their united front strategy, the Democratic 
Alliance, which rose up by developing the worker movement, will 
find itself in a dilemma if it takes the above-mentioned road. 
Moreover, the United Democrats of Hong Kong, another party which 
represents the public at the middle and low strata and which has 
the character of a labor party, has quickly grown strong amid 
the democratic tide. Even if the Democratic Alliance would turn 
around, it would not be able to rival the United Democrats of 
Hong Kong. 
  In contrast, the Liberal Party, though seemingly in 
a somewhat awkward position at present, will have a very 
promising future, according to mainland academics. In Hong 
Kong's modern industrial and commercial society, the middle 
bourgeoisie is a strong class. It is a firm supporter for the 
free economy. Most people of this class do not oppose democratic 
politics, but they may not necessarily approve of the 
free-lunch-type social well-being advocated by the United 
Democrats of Hong Kong. In view of this, after the Chinese 
communists' threat has disappeared, the Liberal Party, which 
represents the interests of the middle bourgeoisie as well as 
small and medium capitalists, will grow in strength. 
  Even when there is no threat from the Communist Party, 
disparities in culture and systems will still perplex Hong Kong. 
This, the mainland academics say, will be a long-lasting problem 
difficult to overcome. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20520 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Deng Liqun Deemed `Leftist,' `Political Timebomb' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0184A Hong Kong PAI HSING in Chinese No 36, 1 Feb 94 pp 
10-11 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0184A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong PAI HSING </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu Keng (7120 6972): "Deng Liqun, a </F>
Timebomb--Why Did Deng Xiaoping Visit Chen Yun?"] 
  [Text] Foreign wire services often come up with "marvelous 
news." An example was a 12 January dispatch from Shanghai by 
Japan's KYODO News Agency. It said: Top Chinese communist leader 
Deng Xiaoping yesterday met with Chen Yun, a conservative 
veteran and former chairman of the CPC Central Advisory 
Commission. 
  It is said that KYODO obtained this information from an 
informed Chinese communist source. The 11 January Deng-Chen 
meeting lasted about an hour and a half. Chen Yun has been in 
Shanghai ever since last summer. 
  KYODO added an extra remark to the report: What they 
talked about is still unknown. 
<H5>  A Two-King Meeting Is Rather Rare </H5>
  It is a rare thing that "a king meets with another king." 
One of the rules in Chinese chess is that the marshals of the 
two sides cannot face each other directly. To do so is a big 
taboo. No matter how a chess game goes, the marshal should 
always be shielded by guards, ministers, chariots, horses, 
artillery, or soldiers. He should not be exposed in such a way 
as to appear face-to-face with the enemy's marshal. If he has to 
do so, that means surrender. 
  Deng Xiaoping is the supreme leader of the Chinese 
communists today. But in terms of "seniority," Chen Yun is above 
Deng. The lineup of the standing committee members of the CPC's 
Political Bureau elected at the Eighth National Party Congress 
was: Mao, Liu, Zhou, Zhu, Chen, Lin, and Deng. As can be seen, 
Chen held the fifth place and Deng the seventh. When the Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee called for 
"clarifying confusion and bringing things back to order," it was 
Chen Yun who took the lead in saying that "Mao Zedong was a 
human being, not a god." In addition, Chen Yun is a man with a 
strong sense of principle. For example, in the 1988 
rectification movement, the Organization Department of the CPC 
Central Committee wanted to expel Li Rui, Li Chang, Yu Haocheng, 
and Du Runsheng from the party. Chen Yun disagreed, thereby 
preserving the party membership of these four people. However, 
Chen Yun himself has a mentality based on "the orthodox 
Marxist-Leninist ideology." He insists on taking the socialist 
road and upholding the dictatorship of the proletariat. This has 
given ultra-leftists a protective umbrella. Deng Liqun, known as 
the "Leftist Lord," is still very arrogant today simply because 
he has a strong backing--Chen Yun. 
  As the saying goes, "no one would go to the temple for 
nothing." This being so, what was the purpose of Deng Xiaoping's 
visit with Chen Yun? It appears that the visit had something to 
do with the recent vigorous campaign on the mainland to mark Mao 
Zedong's 100th birthday led by Deng Liqun. 
<H5>  Mao Zedong's Soul Revives </H5>
  Anyone with a discerning eye can see the main reason that 
Mao Zedong's soul can revive and whip up a gust on the mainland 
is the planning and manipulation by Deng Liqun. Take the 
theoretical seminar in commemoration of Mao Zedong's 100th 
birthday held in Changsha, Hunan, as an example. The sponsor was 
the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, whose party committee 
secretary is Wang Renzhi, a pawn of Deng Liqun. In name, the 
seminar was held to commemorate Mao Zedong; in reality, it was 
aimed at criticizing Deng Xiaoping. Its real purpose was to 
criticize all those reform-and-opening advocates headed by Deng 
Xiaoping for their divorce from Marxism-Leninism and betrayal of 
Mao Zedong Thought. 
  Another example was the three-day "Contemporary Literature 
and Art Seminar on Mao Zedong and China" held in Beijing, 
beginning 22 December last year. This was a significant event 
amid the activities to mark Mao Zedong's 100th birthday carried 
out across the mainland. "Leftist Lord" Deng Liqun and "Leftist 
Generals," including He Jingzhi and Lin Mohan, all attended this 
seminar, whose theme was to hold high the banner of Mao Zedong's 
Yanan Forum on Literature and Art and criticize the so-called 
"unhealthy trends and evil practices" that had appeared with 
reform and opening. The spearhead was also directed at Deng 
Xiaoping. 
<H5>  Young Deng Antagonizes Old Deng </H5>
  Deng Xiaoping was, of course, unhappy about the acts of 
respecting Mao in name and criticizing Deng in essence. He knows 
clearly that Deng Liqun is acting against him. At present, Deng 
Liqun's official title in the CPC Central Committee is merely 
the "deputy head of the Leading Group for Party History 
Research," but actually he is playing a commander-in-chief role 
in controlling the whole ideological sphere. For this reason, 
Beijing's intellectual circles, leftists, middle elements, and 
rightists alike, all see him as the "underground general 
secretary of the Chinese Communist Party." 
  Perhaps, someone may ask: How can Jiang Zemin, general 
secretary of the CPC Central Committee, turn a blind eye and a 
deaf ear to this? The answer is that Deng Liqun planted his men 
long ago on the theoretical, propaganda, and cultural work 
fronts. These people have long been accustomed to implementing 
Deng Liqun's instructions and styling themselves as protectors 
for Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought. They overtly obey but 
covertly oppose all other instructions; the only thing they 
really follow is Deng Liqun's order. And, in the eyes of the 
"Left Lord" and "Left Generals," Deng Xiaoping's "socialism with 
Chinese characteristics" is "sham" socialism but "real" 
capitalism. 
  Confronted with this challenge, Deng Xiaoping, of course, 
wanted to fight back. The best strategy was to "deprive the 
opponent of backing." In view of the fact that he and Chen Yun 
had shared the same view about Mao Zedong's nation-devastating 
Cultural Revolution, it would appear that only by obtaining Chen 
Yun's concurrence could he now suppress Deng Liqun's arrogance 
and stop the frantic Maoist wind, which would be no good to all 
if allowed to blow unchecked. 
<H5>  Chen Yun Supports Deng Liqun </H5>
  Deng Xiaoping is adept at employing the outflanking 
tactics. If the KYODO report on the Deng-Chen meeting in 
Shanghai is true, the only explanation is that Deng Xiaoping 
hoped to have another round of cooperation with Chen like the 
one resulting in the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee. This cooperation would prevent Deng Liqun and 
his ilk from continuing their all-out efforts to stir up left 
winds. 
  Nonetheless, Chen Yun, who has always styled himself as an 
orthodox Marxism-Leninism protector, may, in all probability, 
appreciate Deng Liqun's strategy of using dead Mao to curb 
living Deng. In no way would he agree with old Deng if the 
latter wanted to subject young Deng to disciplinary action! 
Then, how come Deng Xiaoping, who is so wise, tried to seek such 
a rebuff for himself? 
  It seems that only Mao Mao [Deng Xiaoping's daughter and 
author of "My Father Deng Xiaoping"] can truly answer this 
question. 
  A view shared by Chinese and foreign observers alike is: 
After Deng Xiaoping's death, China will not fall into great 
disorder, but inevitably a strong quake will take place in the 
CPC's central leadership because too many bombs are buried 
around Zhongnanhai. 
  Deng Liqun is a very destructive timebomb. Though he has 
no gun in hand, he is self-assured because he has the Marxist 
theory as his invincible weapon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20521 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Communist Youth League Lacks Membership </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0160A Beijing ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN [CHINESE YOUTH] in 
Chinese No 1, 1 Jan 94 pp 43-44 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0160A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN [CHINESE YOUTH] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu Kangqin (7120 1660 0530): "Facing the </F>
Challenges and Exploring New Paths -- Sidelights on a National 
CYL Organizational Work Conference"] 
  [Text] The CYL Membership in Rural Areas Throughout 
China Actually Being Lower Than Overall Party Membership Is an 
Unparalleled Warning Signal, Admonishing the Whole CYL To Pay 
Attention to CYL Organization-Building 
  Facing up to our magnificent goals for the transition to the 
new century by exploring new ways of CYL organization-building 
for the new age was the theme of the "National CYL 
Organizational Work Conference" held in early November 1993 in 
Wuxian County, Jiangsu. 
  In the course of building and developing our socialist 
market 
economy, CYL organization-building is obviously facing many new 
challenges, as well as the need to respond to many new 
questions. China now has 56.8 million CYL members, only a few 
million more than overall party members; but in China's rural 
areas, CYL membership is actually millions lower than party 
membership. As to the ratio of national CYL members to all 
youth, the CYL organizational system's database on youth show 
this to be 19.9 percent; but this figure seems to inadvertently 
show a sizeable mistake, as the CYL organization's data on the 
overall number of youth throughout China is 70 million less than 
that of the State Statistical Bureau [SSB], so that taking SSB 
data on the number of youth, this ratio of CYL members to all 
youth is even harsher at only 5.8 percent. And if we shift our 
attention to the new economic groups that have grown up in 
recent years, we will be startled to discover that in the new 
economic growth zone, such as the three kinds of foreign trade, 
wholly foreign-owned, private, and township enterprises, the 
zones and parts with CYL organization-building gaps are even 
larger. While these figures and data are quite abstract, they 
are certainly like an unparalleled and harsh warning signal, 
admonishing the whole CYL that we must pay attention to and 
intensify CYL organization-building. 
  We need to face up to the immediate need for courage, 
as well as to the fact that reality is sometimes a bit painful, 
particularly since we have done our utmost to emphasize in 
recent years the rectification of grassroots CYL organizations. 
Faced with China's ever-more dynamic economic and social 
development, we absolutely must soberly and reasonably examine 
and consider CYL-organization building, development, reform, and 
progress. 
  Of course, self-knowledge is wisdom. Just as we were 
facing such challenges, not long after the CYL Central 
Secretariat had conducted a large nationwide investigation and 
study, we held the "National CYL Organizational-Work 
Conference," where CYL Central Secretariat Standing Secretary 
Liu Peng [0491 7720] set forth on behalf of the secretariat the 
basic future missions of national CYL organizational work: To 
conscientiously meet the needs of our socialist market economy, 
by actively pushing forward with CYL building and reform, 
focused on increasing CYL membership, in order to build a CYL 
membership corps that is great in numbers and capable of playing 
an exemplary role; to aim at producing more talent, in order to 
train CYL cadres into multi-talented personnel who meet CYL work 
realities and our socialist modernization needs for the next 
century; to focus on promoting social and economic development 
and serving youth development and progress, by taking a new CYL 
grassroots-building route, and gradually establishing 
CYL-organization operating forces that are on track with our 
socialist market-economy system, in order to pave the way for 
national CYL work to rise to new heights and create a new 
order. 
<H3>  CYL Organizations in Places Such as Jiangsu, Shanghai, 
and Gansu Are Facing the Challenges, Exploring New Routes, and 
Making New Responses in CYL Organization-Building </H3>
  Faced with challenges, the CYL has never lost its 
confidence and nerve, with CYL vigor and vitality also growing 
and developing precisely in the midst of challenges. 
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, Jiangsu has developed its industrial and 
agricultural production very quickly, with its industrial and 
agricultural output value ranking foremost in China, to create 
the nationally-noted "southern-Jiangsu model" -- a rural 
economic-development model marked by collective industry. In 
Jiangsu's economic development process, the CYL's Jiangsu Party 
Committee has always paid attention to building the CYL 
membership ranks among township enterprises in rural areas. 
CYL Jiangsu Party Committee Secretary Xu Ming [1776 7686] 
gives the following briefing: While statistical difficulties 
have kept us from yet making a full investigation of township 
enterprises throughout Jiangsu, samplings show Jiangsu's 
township enterprises to have a CYL-organization rate of 80-85 
percent, far higher than the CYL average for township 
enterprises. In the course of CYL-building in township 
enterprises, the CYL Jiangsu Party Committee has acted in line 
with industrial needs to flexibly set up CYL organs, through CYL 
leadership of villages, village leadership of the CYL, or 
CYL-enterprise mergers, to gradually grow and steadily achieve 
its current heartening successes. Since 1993, they have been 
focusing on the large army of youth among transient workers. 
They began with the inflow sites, first organizing after-hours 
recreational and sports activities to attract young workers from 
other provinces to take part in CYL activities; then, to raise 
the quality of young workers to meet enterprise development 
needs, they launched all sorts of technical-training and 
competitive activities; finally, they actively built up CYL 
membership among young workers, conscientiously carrying out 
CYL-building. While this task has just begun, it has already 
received the attention and support of all areas of society. 
  The CYL's Shanghai Party Committee has also shown 
unique foresight in building the CYL membership ranks, which CYL 
Shanghai Party Committee Deputy Secretary Xue Chao [5641 3390] 
sums up as "moving to the forefront, and providing early 
guidance." In CYL membership expansion, they emphasize sources, 
by expanding CYL membershp among high school, technical high 
school, and technical school students; in industrial 
distribution, by emphasizing places where new organs and 
employees in economic development congregate, and by conducting 
active CYL-building in financial institutions that are springing 
up in large numbers, such as foreign banks and securities and 
trust investment companies, as well as industries, such as 
hotels and tourism. The CYL Shanghai Party Committee holds 
that these industries have rapid youth mobility, high employee 
quality, and a large guidance role of work and life styles on 
youth in other industries. Moreover, in the course of 
developing Shanghai into an international financial and trade 
metropolis, as the number of youth employed in these new lines 
will continue to grow, Shanghai's CYL membership-building has 
had to "move to the forefront, and provide early guidance," in 
order to keep the initiative. 
  In training "multi-talented" CYL cadres, the CYL 
Shanghai Party Committee is also in the CYL front ranks. 
Having summed up experiences in recent years in this area, 
they hold that "multi-talented" CYL cadres should be defined as 
combinations of political and economic quality, practical 
grassroots work experience and leadership management skills, and 
different positions and experiences. So the training of 
"multi-talented" CYL cadres is aimed at overall political 
quality, appropriate work skills, rational knowledge structure, 
and rich practical experience. As to training ways, the CYL 
Shanghai Party Committee has created a style combining 
diversified forms, such as on-the-job training, work-release 
for study at party schools, commissioned training at 
specialized schools, job-related training for CYL cadres, and 
job rotation and exchange of CYL cadres. 
  While Gansu is an inland province with a relatively 
undeveloped economy, the CYL Gansu Party Committee has also made 
its own successes and explorations in grassroots CYL-building. 
Based on the demonstration counties that they have established 
in CYL grassroots organization in recent years, they have 
proceeded from the grassroots-building goal of "permanent 
invigoration," combined with local economic-development 
realities, to conduct an experimental "youth S&amp;T development 
zone establishment" in Gansu's Yumen City and Gaolan County. 
After CYL Party Committee help in getting loans as starter 
funds, organizing various specialized joint-production 
collectives in the form of rural youth share cooperatives, 
investment-project declarations by various CYL branches, and 
examination and approval by departments, such as municipal and 
county CYL committees, they selected feasible and practical 
S&amp;T 
projects for development in industries, such as breeding, 
cultivation, manufacturing, and cultural activities, organizing 
youth to get rich through work and S&amp;T. This developed the 
local 
economy by enriching CYL youth, while strengthening CYL 
grassroots cohesion. These two places' CYL rates are now up 
from the former 11-12 percent to 19-20 percent. Moreover, as the 
establishment and development of these applied S&amp;T projects 
were 
all controlled by the CYL organization, their operating 
efficiency has sharply added to the CYL's economic might. Xu 
Weizhong [1776 4850 1813], director of the CYL Gansu Party 
Committee Organization Department, predicts that the original 
goals for participaion in this project, of rural CYL branch 
income of 1,000 yuan a year, township CYL Party Committee income 
of 50,000 yuan a year, and CYL Yumen City Party Committee and 
CYL Gaolan County Party Committee income of 200,000 yuan a year 
each, will be realized. 
  So while the CYL is certainly facing severe 
organization-building challenges in our establishment and 
development of a socialist market economy, our creative CYL is 
also responding with new explorations and successes. And while 
we certainly do not expect CYL organization-building to be 
accomplished in one stroke, to reach our goal in one step, or to 
accomplish our heavy CYL organization-building task once and for 
all, CYL members will continue to fight, advancing steadily to 
lay a fine organizational foundation for CYL work to reach new 
heights and create a new order. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20522 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  5 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Strengthening Party in Foreign-Owned Enterprises </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0192A Beijing DANGXIAO LUNTAN [PARTY SCHOOL TRIBUNE] in 
Chinese No 12, 5 Dec 93 pp 49-51 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0192A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing DANGXIAO LUNTAN [PARTY SCHOOL TRIBUNE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Peng Xin'an of the Party School of the CPC </F>
Municipal Committee of Xiamen, Fujian Province, edited by Zhou 
Xiaozhong: "The Building of Party Organizations in Solely 
Foreign-Owned Enterprises"] 
  [Text] The building of party organizations in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises is a matter which has a strong policy 
element, which greatly affects relations with foreign entities, 
and which is politically sensitive. With the deepening 
development of reform and opening up, the number of solely 
foreign-owned enterprises is rising daily, and the number of 
their employees is also rapidly growing. Consequently, party 
building work in this area is arousing increasingly strong 
attention from party organizations at all levels. Solely 
foreign-owned enterprises are characterized by a unique 
environment which is fundamentally different from that in 
state-owned enterprises and collective enterprises, and is 
markedly different even from that in Chinese-foreign joint 
ventures and cooperative enterprises. In such a unique 
environment, it is very difficult to operate on the basis of the 
traditional enterprise party-building model. It is now 
absolutely necessary to actively explore new approaches to the 
building of party organizations in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises on the basis of proceeding from complex realities. 
  I. The Current State of and Problems in the Building of 
Party Organizations in Solely Foreign-Owned Enterprises. 
  The party member employees in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises come from all social strata and from across the 
country, and the individuals are very different in terms of 
their experiences and levels of ideological competence. After 
leaving their previous work posts and coming to work in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises, they would inevitably make 
adjustments with regard to their pervious party organization 
ties. But in reality some party members do not want to bring 
their party organization ties to the new work environment. Some 
party members do not want make their party member status public. 
As most foreign-owned enterprises are small and medium-sized 
enterprises, there are few party members among the employees, 
and the party members are scattered. As a result it is very 
difficult to arrange for them to take part in party member 
activities. Party members in some solely foreign-owned 
enterprises are even in a situation of being supervised by no 
one. 
  The establishment of party organizations in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises has allowed many party members to 
return to the embrace of the organization and to hear the voice 
of the organization, thereby enhancing party members' sense of 
organization and sense of the glorious mission of the communist. 
As the situation of the functioning of party organizations in 
solely foreign-owned enterprises shows, it is true that party 
organizations in some enterprises have begun to operate in a 
normal manner and accumulated work experience, while winning 
understanding and support from the foreign businessmen involved. 
Nevertheless, in terms of the overall situation, it is still 
necessary not to overlook the fact that it is very difficult to 
carry out party building work in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises. The main difficulties in the work include: 1) There 
is a lack of explicit legal safeguards and policy protection for 
the existence of party organizations in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises, and the "underground party" phenomenon cannot be 
completely eliminated; 2) activities of party organizations 
cannot be covered by the general framework of enterprise 
activities, and the role and status of party organizations in 
solely foreign-owned enterprises are very unclear; 3) as the 
mobility of party members is high, it is difficult to grasp the 
people to be targeted in the work, and as a result grassroots 
organizations are unstable; 4) activities of party organizations 
cannot be scheduled to take place within the legal eight-hour 
work period, while it is often difficult to ensure that 
activities can be carried out in other time; 5) it is difficult 
for party branches to carry out joint collective activities, and 
it is even more difficult for a small number of party members 
who have become part of party branches of other units to have 
normal organizational life; 6) there are still some problems in 
the supervisor-subordinate relations and unified management of 
party organizations in solely foreign-owned enterprises, and the 
phenomenon of "management in name but not in substance" is 
rather serious; 7) working in an entirely new environment, party 
members in solely foreign-owned enterprises are affected by bad 
tendencies, and thus they are strongly inclined to consider 
money to be all-powerful and have a weakening sense of 
organization, making it very difficult to conduct ideological 
and political work; and 8) activities of party organizations are 
greatly restricted in terms of time and space because some 
foreign businessmen fear that the enterprises' operations would 
acquire political colors. 
  II. The Difficulties Facing the Building of Party 
Organizations in Solely Foreign-Owned Enterprises Call For Deep 
Thinking. 
  According to the traditional model of party building work in 
enterprises, the party organization is the political core of a 
state-owned or collective enterprise; specialized work offices 
of the party organization need to be established and there need 
to be a certain number of party affairs cadres; the enterprise 
would make available activity time, activity space, and activity 
funds in a unified manner. The Chinese partner controls a 
certain proportion of the shares of a joint-venture or 
cooperative enterprise which thus is still publicly owned to 
some extent, with the employees remaining masters of the 
enterprise in some sense. The participation of the Chinese 
partner and its supervisory agency in the operations of a 
joint-venture or cooperative enterprise also creates some 
conditions for the building of party organizations in the 
enterprise. But things are very different in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises. Foreign businessmen assume 
independent responsibility for the operations of the enterprises 
and make independent decisions on operations, employment, and 
the distribution system, while party organizations are unable to 
play a role in important matters. Party organizations have no 
power or position in solely foreign-owned enterprises. 
Consequently there are many problems which should be thought 
about in a profound manner: What role do party organizations 
play in solely foreign-owned enterprises? What is the goal of 
party organizations' work? As the means of production of solely 
foreign-owned enterprises are owned by foreign businessmen as 
private individuals, employees are no longer masters of the 
enterprises, and the employee-employer relationship between 
labor and management is very clear. In such an environment, how 
should party organizations in the enterprises handle their 
relationships with foreign businessmen? How to carry out work 
among employees? 
  According to some people, the party organization in a solely 
foreign-owned enterprise cannot become the political core of the 
enterprise. It lacks rallying power, combat effectiveness, and 
cohesive power, and thus will not be able to play an important 
role. According to some others, the Communist Party is the 
ruling party and the representative of the interests of workers. 
The party organization should become a political core of and 
battle bastion in a solely foreign-owned enterprise. According 
to some people, employees of solely foreign-owned enterprises 
are all wage laborers, and as owners of the enterprises foreign 
businessmen are in essence exploiters; therefore party 
organizations at the enterprises should not serve the foreign 
businessmen. According to some others, party organizations 
should proceed from the overall situation, and make active 
efforts to ensure that workers support the work of foreign 
businessmen. Various ideological and practical problem such as 
these have not yet been resolved in practice. 
  III. It Is Necessary To Explore New Approaches To 
Building Party Organizations on the Basis of Proceeding From the 
Unique Environment in Solely Foreign-Owned Enterprises. 
  First, it is necessary to face up to realities and transform 
the traditional ideas on and methods of party building work. 
Solely foreign-owned enterprises are different from state-owned 
enterprises and collective enterprises as well as joint ventures 
and cooperative enterprises. Foreign businessmen manage their 
own enterprises in accordance with the state's relevant laws and 
regulations and international practices, and would not establish 
offices exclusively engaged in party affairs work, maintain 
full-time party affairs cadres, or make time, place, and funds 
available for activities of party organizations in a unified 
manner. To do a good job of carrying out the work of party 
organization building in solely foreign-owned enterprises, it is 
necessary to discard old working models and methods and 
transform old ideas; it is necessary not to blindly follow the 
customary methods used in party building work in state-owned 
enterprises. Party organizations and party members in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises should gradually adapt to the unique 
environment in solely foreign-owned enterprises; should, in view 
of the characteristics of solely foreign-owned enterprises, 
carry out their work by having part-time party affairs cadres, 
by conducting activities after work, and by conducting 
small-scale and scattered collective activities; and should 
combine principledness with flexibility, and gradually 
accumulate experience on party building work in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises. The idea, based on disregarding the 
unique realities in a solely foreign-owned enterprise, of asking 
the party organization to become the leading organ and political 
core in the structural framework of the enterprise and to 
acquire such duties and power as entailing direct participation 
in enterprise decision making as a matter of course represents a 
dream totally divorced from realities. 
  Second, some important problems of principle on the building 
of party organizations in solely foreign-owned enterprises must 
be further clarified in the party's policies, the state's 
policies, and the relevant laws. Whether party organizations 
should be established in solely foreign-owned enterprises, 
whether party organizations should be allowed to be established 
in such enterprises, and what the scope, mode, and goal of the 
operation of party organizations in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises should be are all important problems of principle. 
Without clear legal and policy interpretations, party 
organizations in solely foreign-owned enterprises would lack 
legal and policy guarantees, and their existence and development 
would exhibit a strong tendency to be changeable and be 
characterized by willfulness. For instance, the Foreign-Funded 
Enterprise Law of the People's Republic of China adopted by the 
National People's Congress in April 1986 and the Rules 
Implementing the Foreign-Funded Enterprise Law promulgated by 
the State Council in December 1990 do not explicitly stipulate 
that grassroots organizations of the CPC may be established in 
solely foreign-owned enterprises in accordance with the law; as 
a result there has emerged a situation where the establishment, 
existence, and development of party organizations in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises are to a large extent dependent on the 
foreign businessmen's attitude toward and understanding of the 
issue. A small number of foreign businessmen who are opposed to 
establishing party organizations in enterprises would fire party 
members as soon as they are discovered, and clear away party 
organizations; meanwhile grassroots party organizations are at a 
loss what to do. The demand for explicit legal and policy 
provisions for the legality and rightfulness of the existence of 
party organizations in solely foreign-owned enterprises does not 
entail the demand for giving party organizations in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises the status and power similar to those 
enjoyed by party organizations in state-owned enterprises, but 
entail the demand for providing necessary safeguards for the 
existence and development of party organizations under the 
preconditions of respecting the international practices 
regarding the management of foreign-funded enterprises and of 
respecting the legitimate rights and interests of foreign 
businesses. 
  Enterprise employees have the right to participate in legal 
political parties. This is a legal principle followed both at 
home and abroad. But there is a large difference between 
socialist and nonsocialist countries in the status and operating 
methods of grassroots enterprise organizations of political 
parties (especially the ruling party). Foreign businesses' 
biggest worry is that enterprises' party organizations would 
acquire the power similar to that enjoyed by party organizations 
in state-owned enterprises by exploiting the ruling party status 
of the CPC, thereby threatening foreign businessmen's 
independent management of private enterprises. If we make 
appropriate legal and policy rules which explicitly stipulate 
that the existence and activity mode of party organizations in 
solely foreign-owned enterprises should not affect foreign 
businessmen's independent management of enterprises, and if we 
establish party organizations and carry out party work in an 
active and steady manner, then we are sure to secure 
understanding and support from foreign businessmen. 
  Third, party organizations in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises should enhance leadership over trade union 
organizations in enterprises, and should be good at using the 
trade-union battle position in an effort to conduct their own 
work, consolidate their political position, establish their 
political prestige, and increase party organizations' cohesive 
power and rallying power. The lawful status of trade unions, as 
employee organizations in enterprises, in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises is protected by various enterprise laws and 
regulations. Trade unions' carrying out work and the 
participation of trade unions in enterprise management are in 
accord with international practices, and are thus understood and 
respected by foreign businessmen. To have party organizations 
actively promote the establishment of trade union organizations 
in solely foreign-owned enterprises and to have party 
organizations participate in enterprise management through trade 
union organizations represent a very realistic approach. 
  According to the Marxist theory, trade unions constitute a 
tie and bridge linking up the masses of workers with the party. 
Through having party members work in trade unions, party 
organizations influence the broad masses of employees, make 
propaganda on the party's line and general and specific 
policies, raise the ideological consciousness of the masses of 
workers, and get employees organized in activities to maintain 
their own legitimate rights and interests, thereby increasing 
the party's influence and strength. This theory provides an 
important guiding idea on the work of party organizations, 
including party organizations in solely foreign-owned 
enterprises. In solely foreign-owned enterprises, party 
organizations can still become political cores, but such 
political core status is not just given to them on the basis of 
legal and policy protection or guaranteed through the 
distribution of enterprise management power and the deployment 
of cadre personnel, but is embodied in the party organizations' 
own work. The chief way to play the political core role is to 
provide effective leadership over, and to organize, trade union 
work. 
  Fourth, while carrying out trade union work in solely 
foreign-owned enterprises, party organizations should pay 
attention to enhancing multichannel communication and 
cooperation with foreign businessmen, and secure understanding 
and support from foreign businessmen, so as to create a good 
enterprise environment for the building of party organizations. 
The existence of solely foreign-owned enterprises is the product 
of our party's reform and opening up policy. It is our policy to 
develop the national economy, to introduce advanced technical 
equipments, and to learn advanced management experience of 
foreign countries through utilizing foreign businesses' 
investing in establishing enterprises. In carrying out work, 
party organizations in solely foreign-owned enterprises should 
be guided by the aforementioned policy, seek common grounds and 
keep differences in the process of communicating and cooperating 
with foreign businessmen, seek effective ways of cooperation 
under the precondition of adhering to principles, and utilize 
trade union organizations in adjusting labor-management 
relations, in organizing labor contests, and in providing 
technical and management training, so as to promote the 
development of the enterprises in the right direction. Party 
organizations can secure understanding and support from foreign 
businessmen through carrying out practical work, being sincere, 
organizing activities, and giving play to party member's pioneer 
and model role, thereby creating a vast space for the building 
of party organizations. 
  Fifth, to enhance the building of party organizations in 
solely foreign-owned enterprises, it is necessary to proceed 
with efforts at both the upper and lower levels simultaneously. 
On the one hand, enhance sector-based management, establish 
effective management institutions, and overcome the phenomena of 
disorderly sector-based supervisory relationships and of 
"management in name but not in substance"; on the other hand, in 
grassroots organizations, make further efforts to do a good job 
of building organizations and institutions and carrying out the 
work of party members' ideological education, enhance party 
members' sense of organization, and prevent the lowering of the 
political quality, so that the building of party organizations 
in solely foreign-owned enterprises can proceed in a normal and 
regular manner. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20523 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  30 September 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xu Jiatun's Memoirs on She Mengxiao </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0175A Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 27, 28, 29, 30 
Sep 93 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0175A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installments No 146-149 of the serialized memoirs of Xu </F>
Jiatun: "Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
<H5>  [27 Sep 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] The Situation Was Unusual (Part One of Four) 
-- Zhou Nan [0719 0589] Transferred She Mengxiao Back Through 
Creating an Excuse, Thereby Removing the Obstacle To Persecuting 
Me; A Friend Advised Me: "Be Careful Because Their Eyes Are 
Watching You" 
  In April 1990, as I was attending a session of the National 
People's Congress [NPC], the CPC Central Organization Department 
asked She Mengxiao, deputy director of the Hong Kong Branch of 
the XINHUA NEWS AGENCY, to come to Beijing to have a talk. He 
was summoned to a meeting on the day of his arrival in Beijing, 
and was criticized for not reporting Xu Jiatun's three 
"unauthorized trips to Hong Kong" which he had known. It was 
said that the criticism was based on Zhou Nan's report to 
responsible persons at the center, and that Zhou Nan had learned 
the three trips to Hong Kong only from Hong Kong's newspaper 
reports and had been "greatly astonished." 
  She Mengxiao had been notified that he would be transferred 
back to Beijing immediately and be assigned another job. 
  Actually She Mengxiao had told Zhou Nan about my three trips 
to Hong Kong before there had been reports in publications. And 
the Taiwan Affairs Office at the center had also sent a telegram 
beforehand, which Zhou Nan had seen. 
  She Mengxiao's reaction was: "Incomprehensible, 
unacceptable." Those who were talking to him were unable to do 
anything about such a situation, and said that decision would be 
made after reporting to the Standing Committee of the CPC 
Central Committee. 
  The next day they talked to She Mengxiao again, saying: "The 
responsible persons of the center have decided that the decision 
on the transfer back to the hinterland be not changed." However 
they changed their tone, saying: "A normal transfer. Not related 
to Zhou Nan's report." She Mengxiao continued to argue that such 
would be even more incomprehensible, and that if a normal 
transfer was involved, then his term had not expired according 
to regulations on personnel stationed abroad for he had been on 
the job for only a little over a year. Those who were talking to 
him then brandished the big "organization" flag, criticizing She 
Mengxiao for having a bad attitude. Under the high pressure, She 
Mengxiao could not but comply. 
  She Mengxiao had previously been deputy secretary general of 
the Central Political-Legal Steering Group and the Central 
Political-Legal Commission of which Qiao Shi had been head and 
secretary respectively. Many of Qiao Shi's speeches had been 
drafted by She Mengxiao, who had been a talented "scholar." He 
was wrongly accused in such a manner just a little over a year 
after he came to Hong Kong. This case caused widespread 
indignation among some senior cadres in Beijing, who believed 
that it was just intolerable that some people at the center had 
gone so far in disregarding the party's spirit of seeking truth 
from facts and organizational principles and in turning matters 
of right and wrong upside down. Feeling that She Mengxiao had 
been treated unfairly, some people went to see Qiao Shi. Qiao 
Shi said that he sympathized with She Mengxiao but could get no 
audience when arguing She's case in the Standing Committee, and 
that there was no way of protecting She. I felt very sad upon 
hearing the story. 
  Then Song Ping [1345 1627] "talked" to me. After a few words 
of greeting at the beginning of the meeting, he officially 
notified me: "The Standing Committee has decided that you come 
back to live in Beijing." In this way it was finally made clear 
that I was not permitted to stay in Shenzhen. I already knew 
that Zhou Nan had asked a responsible person of the center not 
to allow me to live in Shenzhen, arguing that his work would be 
affected. Therefore I had already been psychologically prepared. 
I said calmly: "I understand the Standing Committee's decision. 
I don't want to come to Beijing. It is better to let me go back 
to Nanjing." Song Ping first said that he personally agreed to 
the suggestion, but that it was necessary to seek the Standing 
Committee's approval. Then he indicated that he would 
immediately tell Jiangsu to prepare housing for me, and he also 
said: "The CPC provincial committee will welcome you back." 
  Then Song Ping changed the subject, and said, showing his 
"concern" for me: "I would like to make some personal, critical 
observations of you." It was normal for the head of the 
Organization Department to show concern for cadres and to 
criticize cadres. I nodded and listened attentively. Song Ping 
said: "Some people have criticized that article on renewing our 
understanding of capitalism. Might it not be advisable that you 
reconsider the article?" He also asked: "Was it Ren Zhongyi 
[0117 0112 1138] who put forward the idea of renewing our 
understanding of socialism?" I was surprised to see that they 
had been so annoyed by Ren Zhongyi also. I made no reply to the 
question. 
  I expressed my appreciation of his good intention in warning 
me, and replied: "Thank you for you concern. To this day I still 
believe that while the language in a few places perhaps should 
be reconsidered, the article as a whole is not wrong." I also 
said: "I have already heard that a member of the Standing 
Committee of the CPC Central Committee has specially assigned 
people to write criticizing articles. I am already prepared to 
be publicly criticized." Song Ping hurriedly explained: "Such is 
not true." 
  In passing I also mentioned the case of Zhou Nan's 
distorting 
the facts to make false accusations against She Mengxiao and of 
the Organization Department's transferring back She Mengxiao 
anyway in a failure to uphold justice, and expressed my opinion, 
indicating my resentment. Song Ping listened in a gracious 
manner, and made no explanation at all. This talk made both of 
us unhappy. 
  It was only later that I realized that Zhou Nan's 
transferring back She Mengxiao through creating an excuse had 
been for the purpose of removing an obstacle to "preparing" 
material on me. 
  Some of my friends asked about the contents of my "talk" 
with 
Song Ping. After learning the contents, they earnestly warned: 
"Be careful. Their eyes are watching you!" 
  Those several friends were rather informed of the "situation 
at the top." I figured that if even a man who had already 
decided to retire would not be tolerated, then I would not live 
in Beijing after going back to Jiangsu but rather be a hermit in 
my native place Rugao County, and that as I would not be 
involved in any "worldly affairs," you must then be willing to 
leave me alone. I still entertained this naive illusion. I 
cancelled the plan to visit Jiuzaigou, Sichuan, after the NPC 
session, and immediately went to Nanjing. After getting approval 
from the CPC Jiangsu Provincial Committee, I immediately went 
back to Shenzhen in order to get prepared to move back to my 
native place. 
  After Zhou Nan took over in early February, one "strange 
thing" after another happened. The more I thought about them, 
the more they appeared to me to be related to "the eyes watching 
you." 
<H5>  [28 Sep 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Thee Situation Was Unusual (Part Two of Four) 
-- Zhou Nan Submitted "Material" On Me, Resulting in My Fear of 
Becoming a Second "Liang Xiang" [2733 3276]. 
  In February Zhou Nan stopped paying my salaries and my 
wife's 
salaries in Hong Kong. My wife was very angry but I just 
responded with a smile. According to normal practices, salaries 
would be paid by the receiving unit only after the 
organizational introduction letter reached the receiving unit. I 
would not leave office until mid-February, and the CPC Hong Kong 
and Macao Work Committee had not yet written my organizational 
relation introduction letter to the receiving unit. And the 
letter could not be written then because the center had not made 
clear where I would live after being transferred back to the 
hinterland. It was laughable that Zhou Nan was in such a hurry 
to drive me out of Hong Kong. 
  Before Zhou Nan assumed his office, I had already moved out 
of the Hong Kong Branch of the Xinhua News Agency Building, and 
my personal belongings had also been shipped to Beilingju (the 
XINHUA NEWS AGENCY'S base in Shenzhen), Shenzhen. Among the 
belongings were dozens of cases of books, journals, and 
documents (mainly copies of the texts of my speeches at some 
meetings, of which the general office kept the originals or 
transcripts on file). But, while I was attending meetings in 
Beijing, Zhou Nan had the general office order my secretary "to 
sort out" the documents, and had my documents taken away, 
including the drafts of my statements made at the 
"heart-to-heart talk" meetings in Beijing and the transcripts of 
their statements at the meetings. The secretary resignedly told 
me on the phone: that Zhou Nan had insisted that these had all 
been "state secrets" documents and must be take away to be 
"placed on file." As they were now in power and as I was then in 
Beijing, I could not but tell the secretary to let them take the 
documents. I intended to reason with them once I was back in 
Shenzhen. 
  In early March many colleagues in the branch told me that 
toward the end of February Zhou Nan had set up a task force 
headed by Xu, director of the general office, "to prepare" 
material on me. Zheng Hua was in overall charge of the task 
force, which had already begun "investigations" into my 
"personal, financial, and material" situation in Hong Kong. At 
first I did not believe the rumor, but later, after many of 
those investigated told me about the investigations directly or 
indirectly, I realized that all this was true. According to the 
rules made by the CPC Central Committee, "investigations" on the 
number one men of the provincial and ministerial level could 
proceed only with the approval given collectively by the 
Standing Committee of the CPC Central Committee or by the 
general secretary. Obviously Zhou Nan had received from the top 
leadership in Beijing instructions on or approval for taking 
this unusual action shortly after taking office. Although I had 
a clear conscience, I still sensed: that I probably would not be 
allowed to have a "safe landing." 
  On 22 April I returned to Shenzhen. In the early hours of 
the 
next morning, the director of the Shenzhen Office of the XINHUA 
NEWS AGENCY came to Beilingju. With a look on his face saying 
that he was powerless regarding the matter, he told me that the 
general office had transmitted Zhou Nan's "instruction" to have 
the car used by the "director" taken back to Hong Kong in the 
afternoon. I said, giving a forced smile: "It is all right if 
the car needs to be taken back." I gave a special dinner to say 
farewell to the driver Master Xu, thanking him for his service 
over the several years. I realized only afterwards that the car 
had a license plate allowing it to go to Hong Kong and Macao and 
come back freely. Zhou Nan was preventing me from passing Man 
Kam To (the checkpoint for automobiles going between Hong Kong 
and Shenzhen) so as to prevent me from going to Hong Kong 
"privately" again. 
  On the 24th I was informed by a reliable source that Zhou 
Nan 
had written an official report on my "problems" based on the 
"material" on me and submitted the report to the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council. Zhou Nan's "decisiveness" and 
"high efficiency" in accomplishing this task and the various 
signs detected over the several months suddenly woke me up and 
shattered the illusion about a "safe landing," waking me up from 
my dream of living in my native place. Becoming a "second Liang 
Xiang" or even meeting a worse fate than Liang Xiang was no 
longer impossible, but would become the reality facing me! How 
to handle the situation? I went into very complicated and 
painful thinking. 
  In the name of the CPC Central Committee and the State 
Council, Li Peng used the excuse of studying the development of 
Yangpu Port of Hainan to have Liang Xiang, governor of Hainan, 
and Xu Shijie [6079 1102 2638], secretary of the CPC Hainan 
Provincial Committee, fly to Beijing on a special plane. 
Immediately after getting off the plane, Liang Xiang was put 
under house arrest, thereby losing his freedom. It was only then 
that Li Peng sent a task force headed by Supervision Minister 
Wei Jianxing [1414 0256 5887] to conduct investigations in 
Hainan Province. Three months later the results of the 
investigations showed that Liang Xiang had not been the main 
initiator and leader in the so-called "anticenter" incident in 
which a telegram in the name of the CPC Hainan Provincial 
Committee and the Provincial Government of Hainan had been sent 
to the CPC Central Committee and the State Council to show 
support for Zhao Ziyang's policy on handling the student 
movement, and that the accusations about Liang Xiang's "economic 
problems" brought by some people to the center were also flimsy. 
As he had been unable to find the "criminal evidence" needed by 
Li Peng, this minister complained privately to some responsible 
persons of Hainan Province, before returning to Beijing to 
report on his work: "The result would not be acceptable to my 
superior." 
  There was then a rumor in Beijing: that in view of Liang 
Xiang's achievements in implementing the reform and opening 
policy and developing the special economic zones, Deng Xiaoping 
had instructed Jiang Zemin and Li Peng "to do everything 
possible to spare" Liang Xiang. But in the end Jiang and Li 
still relieved Liang Xiang from all his duties inside and 
outside the party on the basis of the unwarranted charge of 
"using office for personal gains." And they would not let the 
matter drop, but continued to have a task force conduct 
investigations in Hainan and Shenzhen. As those knowledgeable 
people told me, in the "investigations" even the "chickens 
produce eggs and eggs produce chickens" method for settling 
accounts with landlords which had been considered wrong even 
during the land reform was used in an attempt to uncover Liang 
Xiang's so-called "problems" over the years. It was completely 
an act of using office for personal gains to use such a method, 
based on the total disregarding of facts as well as the party's 
discipline and the state's laws, for treating a senior cadre of 
the party and state who had joined the revolution for many years 
and who had worked diligently and made achievements! It was 
unfortunate that the erroneous practice of ruthless struggle and 
mutual persecution in the party reemerged after the June 4th 
Incident, making me feel greatly pained. (147) 
<H5>  [29 Sep 93 p 1] </H5>
  [Text] Chapter 16. Events Shortly Before and After I 
Left My Country 
<H5>  IV. The Situation Was Unusual (Part Three of Four) </H5>
  Xu Jiatun reveals how he left his country secretly: I 
kept the secret from my wife. When passing the checkpoint at Lo 
Wu Bridge in the course of leaving Shenzhen, I was recognized by 
a guard. An old friend used his "sedan" to help me, picking me 
up halfway so as to avoid my getting off at Kowloon. 
  It was only after thinking over the matter again and again 
for a whole day on the 25th that I made up my mind: in order to 
ensure my right to defend myself and to make it possible for me 
to use my remaining energy in my later years to do some work for 
society, I would "put up with light punishment but leave in the 
face of severe punishment"; I would let everything I had now be 
lost for the time being. I decided "to leave my country" and to 
wait for the opportunity to return. I did not lose hope about my 
country and nation, neither was I totally disappointed in the 
Communist Party of China. I was just forced by the situation to 
make this "bad move." 
  On the afternoon of the 25th I telephoned a friend whom I 
had 
known for many years and whom I could trust, asking him to come 
to Shenzhen for farewell-saying purposes on the ground that, "I 
would leave Shenzhen for Nanjing right away." On the 26th he 
crossed Lo Wu Bridge and came to see me early in the morning. He 
listened sympathetically to my decision, and expressed his 
willingness to help me "leave my country." On the morning of 
the same day he returned to Hong Kong and applied for a tourist 
visa on my behalf to the U.S. Consulate-General in Hong Kong. I 
requested that efforts be made to enable me to leave on the 
28th. After applying to the U.S. Consulate-General, the friend 
telephoned me, saying: "The thing cannot be bought on the 28th 
and has to be bought on the 30th." I was worried that the delay 
could result in my plan being detected by the Hong Kong Branch 
of the XINHUA NEWS AGENCY, thereby making me unable to leave. 
  That old friend also telephoned Master Hsingyun of the 
Hsilai 
Monastery in Los Angeles for my sake (Hsingyun was then in 
Hawaii), telling him that at his invitation Xu would come to the 
United States shortly. Hsingyun readily expressed his warm 
welcome and indicated that he would ask Lu K'eng to meet me at 
the San Francisco airport. Hsingyun expressed his understanding 
of my request that "there be no contacts with anybody" and that 
"the stay be purely for the purpose of having a rest," replying: 
"Mr. Xu will not be forced to do anything he does not want to 
do." On the phone that old friend told me only: "The matters 
involving friends have all been settled. The details will be 
related on the 30th." 
  After Zhou Nan came to Hong Kong, my wife Gu Yiping 
immediately left Hong Kong and lived in Shenzhen afterwards. She 
had been busy packing for several days, and had decided to go to 
Nanjing by train on the 30th together with the luggage. In order 
to avoid any unforeseen problems caused by emotional factors and 
to try to prevent her from being implicated later, I had kept 
the "secret" from her throughout the process of making this 
momentous decision. As my bodyguard had some personal matters to 
deal with at home, I also took the opportunity to ask him to go 
to Nanjing ahead of me. 
  Having made appropriate arrangements on everything, I 
decided 
to leave Shenzhen for Hong Kong on the 30th and "to leave my 
country" for the United States on 1 May. My old friend had 
already purchased the plane ticket to Los Angeles. 
  On the evening of the 29th I said "farewell" to my wife and 
my daughters in Shenzhen. They did not detect in any way my 
emotional agonizing at the imminent departure. I said to them: 
"In the future you should live well by yourselves!" They still 
failed to detect any implied message. I was sleepless for 
another night. 
  At about 1900 on the afternoon of the 30th, my wife embarked 
on her train journey to Nanjing as previously planned. I lied to 
her, saying: that I would take a civil aviation plane to Nanjing 
in two days. Recalling this episode would make me feel very 
guilty! 
  Two hours later I left Shenzhen, crossed the border at Lo Wu 
Bridge, and boarded the train from Lo Wu to Kowloon. In the past 
I would always be accompanied by people when crossing the 
border. As I would have to pass the Customs all by myself, I was 
worried for a time that there would be suspicions. As expected I 
was recognized by a border guard when passing the checkpoint. He 
even said: "Director, are you going Home? You look even younger 
than on television!" I nodded to greet him smilingly, and 
successfully passed the checkpoint. 
  My old friend used his "sedan" to pick me up at Sheung Shui 
(the first stop for the train from Lo Wu to Kowloon). For if I 
should get off at Kowloon, I might be detected by people. 
Therefore I specially asked my old friend to personally drive a 
car to pick me up halfway. Some friends in Hong Kong also got 
into trouble for being suspected by the Hong Kong Branch of the 
XINHUA NEWS AGENCY to have helped me leave my country. After 
learning that I would publish my Hong Kong memoirs, that old 
friend asked me many times about how my departure would be 
written, requesting that I not mention his name. I replied that 
I would never requite kindness with ingratitude, asking him to 
set his mind at ease. Only when a "clean" political situation 
should emerge in China would I reveal his name. My old friend 
laughed heartily and said: "Very good. I hope you will then 
connect my small name to your `leaving the country' so that I, 
an ordinary person, may have a place in history." I also laughed 
and replied: I will obey your command and this mystery will have 
to be solved later. (The last segment will be seen tomorrow.) 
(148) 
<H5>  [30 Sep 93 p 1] </H5>
  [Text] IV. The Situation Was Unusual (Part Four of 
Four) 
  Xu Jiatun would not have been able to escape if his 
move had been delayed for two hours! Correct judgment and 
thrilling departure. 
  That night, at my old friend's home I wrote a letter to Deng 
Xiaoping, Yang Shangkun, and the CPC Central Committee. In the 
letter I stated: This time I have been forced "to leave my 
country" because of a storm in Beijing. But the stay will be 
temporary and I will return. I will declare publicly that I am 
"taking a rest by making a tourist trip." 
  Although I "left my country," I still believed in Marxism 
and 
in the Communist Party of China, and still respected Deng 
Xiaoping. I just did not trust some members of the Standing 
Committee of the CPC Central Committee. I related the incidents 
in which Li Peng, Zhou Nan, and others had tried to conduct 
"post-autumn-harvest account settling," saying that I had made 
this painful choice because I would not want to be a "second 
Liang Xiang." I also made four promises: no attempt to seek 
political asylum; no disclosing of state secrets; no openly 
published articles and no public speeches; and no contacts with 
the democracy movement elements. 
  Finally I asked some members of the Standing Committee of 
the 
CPC Central Committee not to persecute my family so as not to 
force me to make further choices that I did not want to make 
after "leaving my country." 
  As I was unable to have the letter copied, I made three 
handwritten copies. One was sent to the Hong Kong Branch of the 
XINHUA NEWS AGENCY to be transferred to Beijing; one was sent to 
the General Office of the CPC Central Committee in Beijing; and 
one was sent to a friend who was in touch with a top leader in 
Beijing and who was asked to deliver the letter to Beijing. 
  A few days after arriving in the United States, there was a 
report from a source in Hong Kong: that after I had left 
Shenzhen for Hong Kong, at around 2030 on the afternoon of 30 
April Qin Wenjun, deputy secretary of the CPC Shenzhen Municipal 
Committee, had come, under instructions, to the place where I 
had been staying in Shenzhen to relay the telegram order sent by 
the CPC Central Committee which had asked me to go to Beijing 
immediately. Qin had arrived at my place of lodging two hours 
after my departure. Seeing that I had left, he had waited until 
very late into the night and than begun making inquiry phone 
calls to every place hurriedly. This episode had proved that my 
earlier judgment had been correct. 
  At 9:25 [AM or PM not specified] U.S. western time on 1 May, 
the plane arrived at the San Francisco airport on time. Lu K'eng 
and Ts'ui Jung-chih were already waiting at the airport. Lu 
K'eng then immediately flew with me to Los Angeles. In this way 
I became Master Hsingyun's guest. Their warm and attentive 
reception made me feel grateful. 
  After arriving in Los Angeles I immediately contacted Ma 
Yuzhen, Chinese consul general in Los Angeles, and met with him 
in the Hsilai Monastery soon afterward. I told him face to face 
my reason for "leaving my country," and repeated the four 
promises. Ma Yuzhen had already been instructed to persuade me 
to return home, and promised that there would be no "trouble" 
after my return to China. I thanked him for his good intention. 
Not long afterward Zhu Qizhen, Chinese ambassador to the United 
States, was also instructed to meet with me in Los Angeles. He 
made further efforts to persuade me to return home, promising 
that there would be no "trouble" after my return to China. Could 
I believe the promise that there would be no trouble after my 
return to China? In reply I told Zhu Qizhen that I would not be 
going back for the time being but would keep the four promises, 
asking him to tell Beijing to set its mind at ease. I also 
indicated my attitude toward Beijing's "promise": "With Li Peng 
in power, who can ensure that promises are kept? Even if Li 
Peng would not make any trouble, who will be able to ensure the 
keeping of the promises when some people should proceed to make 
troubles?" 
  During this period, on three occasions I took the initiative 
in having meetings with the consul general and the vice consul 
general in Los Angeles. Zhu Qizhen had been instructed to meet 
with me, and I did not take the initiative in this instance. 
  During Yang Shangkun's visit to four Central and South 
American countries, Zhu Qizhen transmitted the messages 
contained in the phone call made by Yang Shangkun from Mexico, 
which expressed the hope that I would go back to China together 
with Yang Shangkun on the same plane at the end of his trip. 
There was also the promise that "I would be treated well." I 
thanked him for his kindness, and indicated that I had no 
confidence in the promise about the way I would be treated after 
going back to China. 
  In late February 1991 I asked Consul General Ma Yuzhen for a 
meeting (I already knew by then that Jiang Zemin and Li Peng 
would take further "actions" on my leaving the country), and at 
the meeting I asked Ma to transmit my message: "Whatever they 
say and do, I have the right to publicly defend myself, and 
history will reach a correct conclusion." Ma Yuzhen might not 
have known then the situation, and asked me if I had heard 
something. He said: "This may not necessarily be true." 
  As expected, making use of the power in their hands, Jiang 
Zemin and Li Peng destroyed my way home. On 19 February the 
Standing Committee of the People's Congress of Guangdong 
Province dismissed me from my post as a deputy to the NPC; the 
Xinhua News Agency's news on 2-3 March also contained the 
announcements that I had been dismissed from my post as a member 
of the NPC Standing Committee, that I had been expelled from the 
Communist Party of China, and that I had been dismissed from my 
post as a member of the CPC Central Advisory Commission. I had 
already expected that this would happen, and was psychologically 
prepared. Friends would say that I had been unfairly treated, 
and suggested that they would raise the issue. After thinking 
over the matter again and again, I decided to write, firstly, "A 
Preliminary Analysis of Peaceful Evolution," and, then, my 
memoirs. 
  History, I believe, will use facts to show that it is true 
that some people have betrayed the people and Marxism, but that 
I have not done so. Even if I will not be able to see the beauty 
of China, the mother who has experienced all kinds of 
tribulations--the motherland--will let the soul of a son who has 
shared her worries and happiness return. (The end of Chapter 16, 
"Events Shortly Before and After I Left My Country.") (149) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20524 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liu Guoguang on Enterprise Reform, Shareholding </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0334A Chongqing GAIGE [REFORM] in Chinese No 1, 20 Jan 
94 pp 5-9 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0334A </F>
<F P=104>  Chongqing GAIGE [REFORM] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Professor Liu Guoguang by Xiao </F>
Meng and He Dexue on 5 December 1993, place not given: 
"Construct Solid Actors in the Socialist Market Economy--An 
Interview With Professor Liu Guoguang, a Prominent Economist"] 
  [Text] As pointed out by the Third Plenum of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee, it is necessary to establish a modern 
enterprise system appropriate to a socialist market economy. 
However, people's understandings of a modern enterprise system 
are not very clear and uniform; in addition, people are also in 
the process of exploring and studying some concrete ideas on the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system. Therefore we 
specially interviewed Professor Liu Guoguang, a prominent 
economist, who participated in the drafting of the Decision on 
the Several Issues Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist 
Market Economic System. 
  [Xiao and He] Enterprise reform has been going on for over 
ten years in our country. Why was the idea of establishing a 
modern enterprise system raised just now? Would you please 
discuss the background involved. 
  [Liu] The Third Plenum of the 14th CPC Central Committee 
formulated the basic framework of a socialist market economic 
system, and a very important pillar and pivotal point is the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system. As we all know, to 
establish a socialist market economic system, it is first of all 
necessary to have fully developed actors engaged in market 
activities. And among various kinds of market actors, 
enterprises are the most basic and important ones. Over the past 
ten-odd years, while always situated at the center of our 
country's economic structural reform, the reform of state-owned 
enterprises has all along been one of the difficult problems 
puzzling the reformers. As should be recognized, the reform of 
state-owned enterprises has proceeded mainly in the direction of 
expanding enterprise autonomy, and the approach used has been 
one of "delegating power and giving away gains"; some progress 
has been made, thereby providing some foundation for 
enterprises' entry into the market. Nevertheless, up to now, the 
reform measures concerning state-owned enterprises have not 
deviated from the line of thought characterized by the idea of 
"delegating power and giving away gains," neither have they 
constituted breaking away from the confines of traditional 
ideas--taking the initiative in actively proceeding with the 
reform of the traditional enterprise system. Consequently such 
problems besetting state-owned enterprises as the failure to 
separate government from enterprises, the unclear property 
rights relationships, enterprises' lack of the right to freely 
enter the market, and soft financial-budget constraints have 
remained unresolved throughout all these years. The "one-third 
each" situation in which nationwide one-third of state-owned 
enterprises are making losses, one-third potential losses, and 
one-third profits means that the situation of low efficiency in 
state-owned enterprises has not been fundamentally improved. The 
economics community has been engaged in exploratory discussions 
of the issue of the necessity to fundamentally reform the system 
of state-owned enterprises, and has now reached rather unanimous 
understandings, that is, that to further proceed with the reform 
of state-owned enterprises, it is necessary to resolve 
deeper-level contradictions, turning from using the policy which 
mainly entails "delegating power and giving away gains" into 
carrying out enterprise system innovations which mainly include 
clarifying property rights relationships. In other words it is 
necessary to reform the form of embodiment of state ownership 
and the ownership framework governing state-owned enterprises, 
establishing an enterprise system of a new type which is mainly 
based on the system of corporate legal entities. This is the 
modern enterprise system clearly set forth in the Decision. 
  [Xiao and He] Many people have now put forward the concept 
of 
"turning entities into corporations." As we read not long ago, 
when interviewed by a reporter of ZHONGHUA GONGSHANG SHIBAO, you 
also said that it was necessary to establish the system of 
corporate legal entities. What do you believe to be the main 
characteristics of the corporate system as a modern enterprise 
system? 
  [Liu] The corporate system is a modern enterprise system; it 
is the product of prolonged development of modern market 
economics and socialized large production, an achievement of 
human civilization, and a part of mankind's common wealth. Since 
we have decided to establish a socialist market economic system, 
it is necessary to transform state-owned enterprises which 
constitute such a large proportion of the national economy into 
actors appropriate to a modern market economy. In my view, 
turning entities into corporations is also the process of 
transforming traditional state-owned enterprises. The corporate 
system has the following several main characteristics: First, 
property rights relationships are clear. It is thus possible to 
achieve the separation of the investors' ownership rights from 
the enterprise legal entities' property rights, so that 
enterprises may become legal entities with civil law rights and 
civil liability and actors in market competition, on the basis 
of corporate properties formed by investments from enterprise 
investors. Second, rights and responsibilities are clear. By 
having legal entity properties, corporations would both acquire 
effective independent management power, and have increased 
responsibility, to investors, for their own profits and losses 
and for preserving and increasing the values of assets. On the 
one hand an investor enjoys the owner's rights on the basis of 
the amount of capital he has invested in the enterprise, 
including those relating to returns on assets, important 
decisions, and the selection of enterprise managers, but does 
not directly intervene in the enterprise' management activities; 
on the other hand the investor assumes limited liability for 
debts on the basis of the amount of invested capital when the 
enterprise goes bankrupt. Third, there is a standardized 
corporate governing structure, that is, that a balancing and 
constraining mechanism which adjusts relationships among owners, 
representatives of the legal entity, managers, and the employees 
as a group will be established through the forming and 
functioning of such corporate governing institutions as the 
general meeting of shareholders, the board of directors, the 
board of supervisors, and executive departments (management 
departments). Fourth, the system is conducive to raising funds, 
thereby presenting a good way to increase the scale of 
production and to socialize capital. Having state-owned 
enterprises turn into being based on the modern corporate system 
will provide a foundation for severing the umbilical cords 
linking up enterprises with government, rectifying the 
relationships of property rights over state assets, and 
achieving the transformation of state-owned enterprises' 
mechanisms, and also increase the scope of fund raising, thereby 
promoting the development of socialized large production. 
  [Xiao and He] What specific ideas do you have on 
transforming 
various enterprises in the various industries in our country 
into corporations? 
  [Liu] In order to standardize corporations' governing 
structure and operating mechanisms, it is obviously necessary to 
diversify shareholding by having multiple shareholders. Overall, 
this objective can be achieved through transforming entities 
into multiple-shareholder corporations through issuing shares on 
the basis of the existing assets of state-owned enterprises, 
issuing additional shares on the basis of increases in their 
assets, selling or transferring their shares, or forming joint 
ventures. It is proper to determine the proportion of shares to 
be held by the state in an differentiating and flexible manner 
on the basis of such factors as the industries involved, the 
distribution of shares, and the situation of the financial 
market. More specifically, first, generally, practice sole state 
ownership and adopt the corporate-system management approach 
with regard to enterprises involving national security, 
sophisticated technologies, and special products; transform such 
enterprises into solely state-owned limited liability 
corporations, do not set up the general meetings of 
shareholders, and let the relevant agencies who have been 
entrusted to manage and supervise the enterprises' state assets 
send representatives to supervise the preserving and increasing 
of the enterprises' state assets. Second, with regard to the 
backbone enterprises in the basic and pillar industries, it is 
proper to gradually transform the solely state-owned 
corporations into state holding companies, so as to gather more 
social funds to be invested in key industries; the proportion of 
state-held shares should be determined by the position of the 
relevant enterprise in the national economy and by the degree of 
dispersion of the shares involved. Third, it is proper for the 
state not to hold controlling shares but just some shares of 
enterprises in ordinary competitive industries, and for the 
state to carry out market operations in view of the financial 
and fiscal situation, so as to invigorate state shareholding and 
ensure the preserving and increasing of the value of state 
assets. As should be noted, experience abroad shows that 
excessive dispersion of corporate shares is prone to make 
enterprises pay attention only to short-term returns but 
disregard long-term development interests, and would also result 
in the weakening of the constraining role in terms of providing 
effective supervision of enterprise operations. 
  [Xiao and He] Some people worry that having state-owned 
enterprises turn into being based on the modern corporate system 
will inevitably weaken the leading role of the state sector 
because of the diversification of shareholders, or even result 
in a situation in which the relevant enterprises are in danger 
of being privatized. What are your thoughts on this issue? 
  [Liu] I was going to discuss the issue of "privatization." 
Not only do some people have worries in this respect, but even 
more people believe that the idea of a modern enterprise system 
is not clear enough, and that it would be better to adopt the 
approach of privatization of state-owned enterprises. Or there 
may be many people who, while not speaking out publicly, believe 
in private that only "privatization" can save state-owned 
enterprises. I believe that both views are slanted. Perhaps some 
people would say that I am an eclectic, but this is not true. 
  In my articles published in 1989, I already explicitly 
pointed out that it was no longer workable to continue to use 
the old "delegating power and giving away gains" approach to 
reforming state-owned enterprises, and that it was necessary to 
transform and restructure the system of state ownership, so as 
to resolve the aforementioned problems. Now I am even more 
adamant in holding this view and have further developed my 
understanding. In my view, through diversifying shareholders, 
having state-owned enterprises turn into being based on the 
modern corporate system can result in extensively gathering 
social funds for industries needed to be developed by the 
country, so as to make up for the insufficiency of state funds. 
If only the state can maintain its position as the holder of 
controlling shares in terms of the total amount of a 
corporation's capital, the leading role of the state sector not 
only will not be weakened, but will be strengthened, and the 
impact of the state sector will also expand. In the process of 
turning state-owned enterprises into corporations, while the 
state will retain some shares, some shares (shares based on 
existing assets or shares based on increases in assets) need to 
be sold to legal entities or individuals. But this would do no 
harm to state assets, neither should this be considered 
"privatization." This development would constitute the change of 
the form of state assets, turning shareholding into monetary 
funds; the value remains in the hands of the state. Surely it is 
necessary to emphasize here that in evaluating state assets in 
the process of transforming state-owned enterprises into 
corporations it is necessary to carefully inventory and evaluate 
assets so as to prevent the phenomenon of state asset washout 
caused by undervaluation of state assets. It is now clear that 
the inactivity of state assets under the old system was not good 
for preserving and increasing their value. Changes in the form 
of state assets and the flow of state assets, as a factor of 
production, are conducive to preserving and increasing their 
value and to reinvigorating the economy. 
  On the other hand, I also have to point out that 
privatization may not necessarily be a shortcut, and would 
involve rather large difficulties and risks. In terms of 
experience around the world, the lessons of unsuccessful 
privatization in some transitional countries have begun to be 
noticed. 
  [Xiao and He] If so, what do you believe to be the difficult 
issues which need to be urgently considered in the initial stage 
of the transformation of entities into corporations? 
  [Liu] In my view, in reforming state-owned enterprises, it 
is 
necessary to think about: Making clear who will preside over the 
transformation of a state-owned enterprise on behalf of the 
original owner; and making clear who will be the representative 
of the state-held shares in the future corporation. Both issues 
will lead to many specific operational problems, and are 
therefore very complicated. It is necessary, I believe, to make 
clear theoretically that the function of the state as the owner 
of state assets and the political authority function of the 
state as the social and economic regulator should be separated, 
that is, that government and assets should be separated from 
each other. Each status of the government has its different 
purpose. If government and assets are not separated, then the 
government's command signals sent to enterprises would tend to 
be mutually contradictory and chaotic; nevertheless the 
administrative command nature of those signals would tend to 
make it difficult for enterprises to refuse to implement them. 
Therefore the failure to separate government from assets and the 
failure to separate government from enterprises are inherently 
linked together. If the problem of government's remaining not 
separated from assets is not resolved, then it would also be 
difficult to achieve the separation of government from 
enterprises. It is necessary to establish and strengthen the 
authority institutions exclusively engaged in performing the 
function of managing the ownership rights over state assets, 
changing the preexisting situation in which state assets are 
managed by multiple bodies but in which no one is actually 
responsible for the assets. Otherwise the phenomenon of the 
"absence of the owner" of state-owned enterprises will remain 
unresolved. This is the most difficult problem in the current 
efforts to reform state-owned enterprises. With regard to this 
problem, the Decision states that "it is necessary to actively 
explore the right form and way of managing state assets and of 
conducting business operations based on state assets." The 
statement is concise but comprehensive, giving reformers a large 
space and room for manoeuver. In my view, the management of 
state assets and business operations based on state assets 
should also be separated. Agencies managing state assets perform 
the function of administrative management of state assets. At 
the same time, it is proper to consider having state-asset 
management agencies authorize or entrust parent companies in 
some large enterprise groups, investment companies, and large 
enterprises capable of making the investments needed to get 
controlling shares so that they may become holding companies, 
performing the function of carrying out business operations 
based on state assets within a certain scope. It is also proper 
to establish some companies designed to engage in business 
operations based on state assets, mainly those of small and 
medium-sized enterprises and those in the form of value. 
Currently, for transitional purposes, the state may entrust some 
specialized economic agencies with the task of establishing 
state-asset supervision agencies which will supervise the 
subordinate enterprises with regard to the preserving and 
increasing of the value of the enterprises' state assets. With 
the dismantling of specialized economic agencies, those 
supervisory agencies should also be gradually turned into 
institutions carrying out business operations based on state 
assets. The existing national general corporations in the 
various sectors should be gradually transformed into several 
enterprise group corporations and state-asset business 
corporations of a holding-company nature, in accordance with the 
requirements of the modern enterprise system. Currently the 
situation of washout of state assets is serious. In turning 
entities into corporations, it is all the more necessary to 
adopt effective measures to prevent the situation where 
asset-based shares are characterized by low prices and where 
shares are sold at low prices or even given away free to 
individuals. It is necessary to plug loopholes in all aspects so 
as to ensure that state assets and the related rights and 
interests are not encroached upon. 
  [Xiao and He] There exists now an argument that after 
becoming corporations enterprises may acquire their own property 
rights. What is you view? 
  [Liu] In this respect, I believe, there exists a 
misunderstanding with regard to whether enterprises may hold 
shares of their own enterprises. This issue should be clarified. 
According to some comrades, after the "change from making 
appropriations into giving loans," the assets formed on the 
basis of state loans to enterprises after the repayment of debts 
are no longer state investments but should belong to the 
enterprises. Those assets should be considered the basis of 
shares owned by enterprises themselves when shares are issued on 
the basis of assets in the process of turning entities into 
corporations. Our view should be that the ultimate ownership of 
an enterprise's assets belongs to the investors, including the 
state's ownership rights. Enterprises themselves have 
legal-entity property rights formed on the basis of the 
investments made by the ultimate investors. Whether the assets 
involved are formed on the basis of profit retention under the 
situation of enterprises' shouldering all responsibility for 
their profits or losses or are enterprise assets after the 
repayment of debts relating to the practice of changing from 
giving appropriations into giving loans, ultimately the 
properties belong to the original owners, assuming the form of 
increases in the value of the stocks or increases in shares. 
Enterprises may not hold their own shares. Allowing an 
enterprise to hold "its own shares" would result in those 
running business operations based on state assets violating the 
rights of the owner, making it impossible to safeguard the 
owner's rights. If the owner holds shares by itself in addition 
to legal-entity property rights, then shareholding rights would 
represent both legal-entity property rights and ultimate 
ownership rights; as a result relationships between the owner 
and the actor carrying out business operations based on the 
assets involved will inevitably become disorderly, leading to a 
situation where the interests of the actor carrying out business 
operations based on the assets are promoted at the expense of 
the interests of the owner. Such a situation will not meet the 
requirements of a modern enterprise system. However they are 
produced, all increases in assets are manifested as investors' 
gains, and the right to returns on assets belongs entirely to 
the investors. Surely in the process of development enterprises 
need to provide drive-increasing incentives, but this issue is 
resolved through incentive mechanisms such as the systems of 
salaries and bonuses for management personnel and of wages and 
bonuses for workers. With regard to enterprise employees' 
holding a certain proportion of the shares of their enterprise, 
such shareholding should be limited and should not exceed a 
certain proportion. In order to develop, an enterprise needs to 
have funds and has to retain profits and keep common purpose 
funds, but the ultimate ownership rights involved belong to 
investors. An enterprise may carry out independent operations 
based on the shareholders' funds, and assume independent 
responsibility for profits and losses. Successful operations 
will be manifested as increases in the market value of the 
shares held by investors. In such a situation new shares may 
also be issued, but only to the existing investors instead of 
the enterprise. An enterprise has legal-entity property rights, 
and may control all the invested capital and carry out business 
operations based on such capital; if the operations are 
successful, the board of directors can reward and promote 
management personnel; the management personnel who have 
performed poorly will be dismissed. An enterprise may also make 
investments; however it may only invest, as a legal entity, in 
other enterprises and hold the shares of the enterprises 
receiving the investments, but may not hold its own shares. This 
misunderstanding should be eliminated; otherwise it can easily 
lead to a situation where those carrying out business operations 
based on assets encroach upon the rights of investors. 
  By the way, another misunderstanding should also be 
eliminated. Some comrades believe that the basic content of the 
transformation of entities into corporations is to have shares 
embody property rights and to have corporations listed, 
regarding the move as an expedient way to gather funds and 
create new enterprises. The operating mechanisms of some listed 
corporations remain as before. This situation does not meet the 
requirements of the modern corporate system. According to 
experience abroad, the number of corporations listed in 
securities exchanges is very small; those corporations account 
for only approximately 1-2 per thousand of the total number of 
corporations. In the Western developed market-economy countries, 
the stocks of most limited-liability joint-stock companies are 
traded on trading markets outside the stock exchanges, and only 
the stocks of a small number of large corporations are listed 
and traded in securities exchanges. For instance, in the early 
1980s only less than 2,000 of the approximately 2.5 million U.S. 
companies are listed in securities exchanges. Thus this 
misunderstanding has resulted in the distortion of stock market 
behavior. As state-owned enterprises have not completed the 
transformation into corporations in a standardized manner and as 
their accounting and auditing systems are not fully developed, 
the stock market has not only failed to perform a positive 
function, but on the contrary has to some extent induced 
excessive speculation and the "bubble" phenomenon. Such a 
situation is not conducive to the effort to transform entities 
into corporations. The chief goal of the effort to transform our 
country's enterprises into corporations is to transform 
mechanisms but not to gather funds. For a long time to come, 
enterprises' main fund-gathering method should be based on 
indirect fund gathering through banks, with direct fund 
gathering on the securities market serving as a supplementary 
means. Consequently, while it is proper to conduct active 
experiments on limited-liability joint-stock companies listed on 
the stock market, activities in this direction should not become 
the focal point of our country's current effort to transform 
entities into corporations. 
  [Xiao and He] It seems that the property rights system is 
the 
link most critical to establishing a modern enterprise system. 
Is this your view? 
  [Liu] I do not believe that it is proper to have such a 
simplistic understanding of the issue. Transforming state-owned 
enterprises into modern legal-entity enterprises based on the 
corporate system is a very complicated and difficult process. 
Rectifying property rights relationships is surely a critical 
link of the reform of state-owned enterprises, but many other 
problems currently besetting state-owned enterprises cannot be 
resolved through rectifying property rights relationships; on 
the other hand, if those problems are not resolved, it would be 
difficult to proceed with the rectification of property rights 
relationships in a successful manner. It can be said that the 
problems can be resolved only through adopting relevant 
comprehensive and mutually supportive policy measures and reform 
measures. Those problems include: State-owned enterprises' heavy 
tax burdens, a serious situation of unauthorized fund gathering, 
unauthorized levies, and unauthorized fees, growing burdens 
created by enterprises' retirees and surplus personnel, and 
enterprises' burdens caused by their role in providing various 
social-welfare services. For example, some people have suggested 
the use of the method of share-debt transformation for resolving 
problems such as those of how to get rid of the enterprises' 
historical burdens, how to shed the enterprises' burdens 
resulting from their role in providing social services, and how 
to resolve the widespread problem of debt burdens in state-owned 
enterprises. It is necessary to study whether such a suggestion 
is feasible. 
  [Xiao and He] You suggest that social security matters be 
removed from the enterprise system, that state-asset holding 
companies be established, that reforms of the taxation system 
and the financial system be also carried out, etc. Would such 
measures not make the reform of state-owned enterprises have too 
widespread implications? Would people not be unwilling to wait 
for such a comprehensive reform, resulting in a failure to carry 
out the reform? 
  [Liu] The reform of state-owned enterprises is certainly a 
very difficult reform. There is no doubt about that. Anyone 
saying that the state-owned enterprises with thousands of 
billions of yuan in assets can easily turn into being based on a 
true modern corporate system is, I believe, being irresponsible. 
With regard to some reforms such as the reform of the fiscal and 
taxation system, the separate taxation system used by market 
economy countries provides ready experience, and it would be 
fine to just proceed on the basis of referring to the 
experience; of course it is necessary to proceed in a way in 
line with our country's realities. The situation is the same 
with the reform of the financial system. The central bank's task 
is to control money, maintaining stability and formulating a 
right interest-rate policy and policies on open market 
operations, but should not engage in commercial operations. To 
commercialize specialized banks, it is necessary to separate the 
policy nature from the commercial nature. These macroeconomic 
regulation and control measures do not involve the issue of 
ownership to a great extent, and there exists ready experience 
to be referred to. But when the issue of transforming the 
ownership system is involved, what is at stake is something 
essential to socialism, that is, the leading role of public 
ownership. If we are unable to successfully restructure the 
state-owned enterprises' ownership framework and if we, 
following fashionable ideas, let some people use a "deceptive" 
approach to turn the enormous amount of state assets into 
private assets in a "deceptive" manner, injustice and corruption 
will become rampant across society. If such a method of cryptic 
transition is used, powerful people and swindlers will become 
very rich, whereas honest people and ordinary people will become 
very poor. Such a society is sure to be unstable, and political 
turbulence will be unavoidable. In such circumstances, what 
socialist market economic system is there to speak of! 
  We should fully understand the difficult nature of the 
reform 
of state-owned enterprises. For not only does the transformation 
of entities into corporations itself have widespread 
implications, but the standardized operational designs of the 
corporate system themselves will encounter the issue of 
contrasting and competition among various interest 
relationships. Past reform measures were mostly the product of 
"one on one" bargaining; as a result contradictions and 
conflicts among different interests were often alleviated or 
delayed. But if all of the state's properties are to be 
redistributed, dodging interest contradictions might not work. 
Nevertheless, in any case the decision made by the Third Plenum 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee has described in a theoretical 
manner the contour and direction of the reform of state-owned 
enterprises in our country. An economist's responsibility should 
be to make more people understand what a modern enterprise 
system is so as to prevent the occurrence of the "deception" 
situation, and produce a rational, orderly, thorough, and 
feasible operational plan on the reform which turns entities 
into corporations, so as to produce a good foundation for the 
first-step reform, thereby creating conditions for further 
reform steps. Only in this way will we be able to accomplish the 
transition from traditional enterprises to the modern corporate 
system and to successfully reform state-owned enterprises at low 
costs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20525 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  13 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic Departments Consider Loss Reduction Measures </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0238C Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 13 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0238C </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Correspondent Ding Genxi (0002 2704 0823): "The </F>
Economic and Trade Commission and the Ministry of Finance Put 
Forward New Measures To Turn Deficits Into Profits; Arousing 
Positive Factors; Adopting Effective Measures; Operational Loss 
of Budgetary Industrial Enterprises Throughout the Nation Will 
Decline 5.5 Percentage Points and the Amount of Loss, 10 Percent 
Next Year"] 
  [Text] Facing the new situation of 1994 when a series of 
financial, tax, monetary, investment, and planning system reform 
measures will be introduced, the State Economic and Trade 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance urged all areas and 
departments throughout the nation to arouse all positive 
factors, adopt all effective measures, and go all out to do a 
good job in turning deficits into profits, and ensure that in 
1994 the operational loss of state budgetary industrial 
enterprises decline 5 percentage points and that economic loss 
decline 10 percent, compared with 1993. 
  In recent years, especially since the beginning of 1993, all 
areas and departments throughout the nation have done a great 
deal of work to turn deficits into profits and have achieved 
definite results. In the first half of 1993, budgetary 
industrial enterprises throughout the nation continued to 
maintain a declining trend of deficits after reducing the range 
of loss by 4.2 percentage points and the amount of loss by 3.6 
percent in 1992. By the end of June, 1993, the range of loss was 
reduced by 0.9 percentage points and the amount of loss, 2.605 
billion yuan or 16.5 percent. But, in the second half of 1993, 
the range and amount of loss increased as a whole due to the 
occurrence of some new situations in the movement of the 
national economy, especially the price increase of energy, 
transportation, and raw materials, the rise of interest rates, 
the sliding of market, and poor management of some enterprises. 
As of the end of October, the range of loss increased 7.3 
percent and the amount of loss, 14.9 percent. 
  The State Economic and Trade Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance pointed out that judged from the current situation, the 
deficit situation of China's state-owned enterprises is fairly 
serious. But because measures adopted by different regions and 
departments are different, progress has been uneven. As of the 
end of October, the range of deficit of 12 areas, including 
Beijing, Liaoning, Heilongjiang, Anhui, Hubei, Hunan, Sichuan, 
and Guizhou, was higher than the national average whereas 
Fujian, Xiamen, Guangdong, Guangxi, and some central departments 
successfully reduced deficits. Industries such as coal, 
petroleum, and tobacco, reduced deficits by 5.2 percent, 26.8 
percent, and 66.4 percent respectively as compared to that in 
the corresponding period of 1992. 
  To ensure that new progress is made in the work of turning 
deficits into profits in 1994, the State Economic and Trade 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance set forth five measures, 
urging all areas and departments to do a down-to-earth job. 
  Strengthen the responsibility of turning deficits into 
profits and do a good job in classified guidance. All areas and 
departments should strengthen leadership in the work of turning 
deficits into profits, establish the target-oriented 
responsibility system, delegate the targets of turning deficits 
into profits to each and every level of departments and 
enterprises, and ensure that objectives are clear, targets are 
assigned to every position, and responsibilities are delegated 
to individuals. Enterprise supervising departments should make a 
list of major money-losing units, investigate and study each and 
every such unit, and adopt measures to solve their problems. 
They should ensure that each plant has its own measure for 
reducing and turning deficits into profits within a limited time 
period. All money-losing enterprises must establish a 
loss-bearing mechanism, adopt a measure to link employees' 
interest to the amount of deficits reduced or transformed in 
their enterprise, and give out awards or penalties in strict 
accordance with the measure. Economic and trade commissions, 
financial, auditing, and enterprise supervising departments at 
all levels should carry out supervision and inspection on a 
regular basis. 
  Strengthen enterprise management and tap internal potential. 
Currently, we should stress the basic management, cost 
management, and team building of enterprises. In accordance with 
advanced domestic and foreign standard of enterprise management, 
we should establish and perfect various quota control, rules and 
regulations, and standards, and carry out strict evaluation. 
Pursuant to "General Rules for Enterprise Financial Affairs" and 
"Enterprise Accounting Standards," we should improve the 
internal economic accounting of enterprises, strengthen 
financial budget control and financial discipline, and reduce 
cost and expenses. 
  Extend proper support to money-losing enterprises which are 
expected to turn deficits into profits. Where conditions permit, 
areas and industry supervising departments should continue to 
raise and utilize existing deficit-transformation funds, use 
such funds mostly for inexpensive technological transformation 
projects and other "short, even, and fast" projects which can be 
completed and put into operation within a year, and support 
money-losing enterprises in developing new products and their 
needs for working funds. When allocating funds for various 
technological transformations, economic and trade commissions 
(economic commissions and planning and economic relation 
commissions) and financial and banking departments at all levels 
should set aside some funds to be used to support money-losing 
enterprises to turn deficits into profits. After assisting 
money-losing enterprises in property inventory and investment 
verification, we should help them get rid of their bad credit 
history in a planned manner. After exercising the asset-to-debt 
ratio control over loans, banks should adopt a transitional 
method to help promising enterprises carry out production 
operations and stress support for money-losing enterprises to 
speed up the readjustment of product mix. 
  Speed up the tempo of changing enterprise management 
mechanism. Those enterprises, which have complied with state 
industrial policies, are expected to turn deficits into profits, 
and have bright market prospects, should be leased, transferred, 
or merged. Those enterprises which have been losing money for a 
long period of time, are not expected to turn deficits into 
profits, have more debts than assets, should be firmly bankrupt. 
This is a fundamental solution for the mechanism issue of 
money-losing enterprises. 
  Vigorously promote the technological progress of 
enterprises, 
do a better job in quality work and the activity of "double 
increases, and double festivals." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20526 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  17 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Materials Distribution System To Undergo Changes </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0238A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 17 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0238A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Ding Genxi (0002 2704 0823) and intern </F>
Tang Lu (0781 3873): "The Reform of Supplies System Will Take 
Major Steps"] 
  [Text] In the new year, the national supplies system will 
consider nurturing capital goods markets as the key, will 
intensify the reform of supplies enterprises, will increase the 
ability to exercise macroeconomic regulation and control over 
the circulation of supplies, and will enable the supplies 
circulation system to take major steps toward the socialist 
market economic system. This is the latest news provided for 
reporters by the Domestic Trade Department. 
  Continuing to reduce materials distributed by the state 
command plan. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee, especially the last few years, the supplies 
department has undergone a series of reforms, allowing many 
capital goods to enter the market. In the past, the number of 
materials allocated directly by the state command plan was as 
high as 256. After years of reform, the number has been reduced 
to 27. In 1994, the number will be further reduced to 10--steel 
products, timber, cement, coal, heavy oil, copper, lead, truck, 
electric wire and cable, and other. All products, except for the 
above 10, will be allowed to enter the market. Even of these 10 
products, the quantity, ratio, and variety to be allocated plan 
will all be reduced substantially. The quantity of steel, iron, 
coal, and other major supplies to be allocated accounts for less 
than 50 percent of total such resources. The quantity of such 
allocation will be reduced by another 20 percent in 1994. 
  Conscientiously strengthening the building and management of 
the capital goods market. The Domestic Trade Department has 
determined that efforts will be made to do a good job in the 
layout, location, and building of national and regional key 
capital goods wholesale markets. By the late Ninth Five-Year 
Plan period, we should strive to build about 10 large 
influential capital goods markets throughout the nation. At the 
same time, we should speed up the building of several new 
capital goods wholesale markets, do a good job in experimenting 
with capital goods futures market, and ensure that each and 
every experiment is successful. With regard various types of 
established capital goods markets, it is necessary to strengthen 
management and ensure that they are functioning properly. 
Currently, efforts should be made to connect the network of 
central and peripheral markets, and domestic and foreign market. 
We should stress linking the network of Beiyang (Tianjin) steel 
marke, expand the scope of influence, and develop the group 
function. 
  Further deepening the reform of capital goods enterprises 
and 
creating conditions for establishing modern enterprise system. 
Next year, all capital goods enterprises must march toward the 
direction of establishing a modern enterprise system in 
accordance with the demand of "clear property rights, definite 
right and responsibility, separated government and enterprise, 
and scientific management." The Ministry of Domestic Trade is 
preparing to experiment with a reform in its subsidiary 
companies that ensure the selection of managers and the 
appreciation of capital. Under this experiment, all powers and 
responsibilities specified in the "Stipulations" will be granted 
to enterprises. All capital goods supply departments will do the 
same. At the same time, efforts should also be made to 
vigorously push the shareholding system and expand the scope of 
experiment. Next year we should try to select as many as 
possible high-return, strong, well-managed capital goods 
enterprises to carry out the reform of shareholding system and 
promote closed corporations where employees are shareholders so 
as to speed up the transformation of mechanism of capital goods 
enterprises. 
  Strengthening macroeconomic regulation and control to ensure 
the normal operation of capital goods market. Currently, China's 
system is at a stage where the old is being replaced by the new 
and China's economic development is at the stage of rapid growth 
with soaring demand. Resources are relatively tight, market 
development is very immature, and macroeconomic regulation and 
control is particularly indispensable in regard to capital 
goods. The supply and demand situation, price level, and the 
direction of allocation of important capital goods needed for 
production and construction all require macroeconomic regulation 
and control. In the second half of 1993, when the capital goods 
market was sliding, in order to support production enterprises, 
state-owned capital goods enterprises procured and stored 
800,000 tons of steel products, 40,000 tons of nonferrous metal, 
and a number of automobile, thus making positive contributions 
to the development of the national economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20527 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Output of Light Industry, January </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK0103124294 Beijing CEI Database in English 1 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0103124294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list of the output 
of China's light industry in January 1994, released by the State 
Statistical Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Item              |Unit              |1/94              |1/93              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bicycle           |10,000s           |323.60            |260.80            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sewing machine    |10,000s           |65.17             |65.83             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Watch             |10,000            |666.84            |475.44            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Camera            |10,000s           |51.86             |26.10             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|TV set            |10,000s           |258.94            |163.55            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Color TV          |10,000s           |149.24            |63.55             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Video recorder    |10,000s           |9.59              |5.00              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Radio             |10,000s           |198.72            |118.32            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tape recorder     |10,000s           |385.27            |185.33            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hi-fi             |10,000pc          |61.92             |17.45             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Washing machine   |10,000s           |90.35             |55.39             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electric fan      |10,000s           |426.73            |378.37            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Refrigerator      |10,000s           |60.76             |28.48             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Freezer           |10,000s           |16.45             |8.60              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Air conditioner   |10,000s           |22.65             |14.12             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Vacuum cleaner    |10,000s           |11.91             |8.54              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electric cooker   |10,000s           |130.26            |114.70            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sugar             |10,000t           |154.92            |176.80            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Salt              |10,000t           |50.31             |51.24             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cigaret           |10,000c           |278.02            |246.62            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Beer              |10,000t           |64.48             |53.57             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Liquor            |10,000t           |53.09             |45.79             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Canned food       |10,000t           |15.11             |11.94             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dairy products    |t                 |19716             |18405             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Feed              |10,000t           |168.94            |182.20            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Machine-made and  |10,000t           |109.74            |92.06             | 
|kraft             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Newsprint         |10,000t           |5.46              |4.66              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Relief Printing P-|10,000t           |4.93              |4.47              | 
|aper              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Synthetic Deterge-|10,000t           |14.21             |9.30              | 
|nt                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Daily fine alumin-|t                 |6461.00           |4476.00           | 
|ium products      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Plastic products  |10,000t           |36.47             |30.49             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Farming film      |10,000t           |4.20              |5.73              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Notes: s -- set,  |                  |                  |                  | 
|pc -- piece, t -- |                  |                  |                  | 
|ton, c -- carton, |                  |                  |                  | 
|m pc -- million p-|                  |                  |                  | 
|iece              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20528 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  3 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   January Light Industrial Output by Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK0303114094 Beijing CEI Database in English 3 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0303114094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list of the light 
industrial output value by area in China in January 1994 
released by the State Statistical Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |                  |                  |(Unit: 100 millio-| 
|                  |                  |                  |n yuan)           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Area              |1/94              |1/93              |Change over 1/93 (| 
|                  |                  |                  |percent)          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total             |1403.08           |1019.75           |37.6              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Beijing           |31.50             |22.18             |42.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tianjin           |27.04             |21.06             |28.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hebei             |40.29             |33.60             |19.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shanxi            |10.31             |9.70              |6.3               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Inner Mongolia    |9.87              |7.64              |29.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Liaoning          |36.28             |29.27             |23.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jilin             |16.25             |14.52             |11.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Heilongjiang      |21.91             |20.29             |8.0               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shanghai          |96.27             |73.37             |31.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jiangsu           |227.54            |169.40            |34.3              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Zhejiang          |137.04            |86.72             |58.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Anhui             |43.29             |27.15             |59.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fujian            |45.52             |30.09             |51.3              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jiangxi           |22.26             |15.79             |41.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shandong          |140.28            |90.46             |55.1              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Henan             |52.25             |35.24             |48.3              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hubei             |47.90             |36.70             |30.5              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hunan             |28.85             |20.44             |41.1              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guangdong         |206.00            |141.61            |45.5              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guangxi           |35.51             |28.70             |23.7              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hainan            |5.62              |4.88              |15.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sichuan           |53.67             |45.15             |18.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guizhou           |7.24              |5.89              |22.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yunnan            |21.19             |18.89             |12.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tibet             |-.-               |-.-               |-.-               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shaanxi           |16.60             |12.99             |27.8              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gansu             |7.00              |5.5825.4          |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Qinghai           |0.96              |0.91              |5.5               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ningxia           |1.34              |1.12              |19.6              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Xinjiang          |13.23             |10.34             |27.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20529 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  3 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   January Industrial Output by Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK0303113994 Beijing CEI Database in English 3 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0303113994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list showing the 
industrial output value by area in China in January 1994 
released by the State Statistical Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |                  |                  |(Unit: 100 millio-| 
|                  |                  |                  |n yuan)           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Area              |1/94              |1/93              |Change over       | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |                  |                  |1/93 (percent)    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National total    |2903.26           |2179.10           |33.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Beijing           |84.74             |65.20             |30.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tianjin           |69.03             |55.13             |25.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hebei             |98.68             |80.94             |21.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shanxi            |47.33             |41.30             |14.6              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Inner Mongolia    |25.99             |20.80             |25.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Liaoning          |145.14            |120.79            |20.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jilin             |49.38             |43.91             |12.5              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Heilongjiang      |73.87             |68.52             |7.8               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shanghai          |215.37            |173.65            |24.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jiangsu           |435.18            |330.09            |31.8              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Zhejiang          |210.60            |138.64            |51.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Anhui             |80.57             |53.29             |51.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fujian            |68.62             |46.43             |47.8              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jiangxi           |49.28             |35.69             |38.1              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shandong          |279.99            |182.99            |53.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Henan             |109.75            |78.36             |40.1              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hubei             |113.78            |85.28             |33.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hunan             |68.08             |50.34             |35.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guangdong         |301.00            |207.67            |44.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guangxi           |60.48             |45.34             |33.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hainan            |7.68              |6.37              |20.6              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sichuan           |138.57            |108.36            |27.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guizhou           |21.22             |16.93             |25.3              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yunnan            |40.44             |34.64             |16.7              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tibet             |-.-               |-.-               |-.-               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shaanxi           |43.11             |33.84             |27.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gansu             |27.79             |23.18             |19.9              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Qinghai           |5.15              |4.75              |8.4               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ningxia           |7.60              |6.11              |24.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Xinjiang          |24.58             |20.30             |21.1 Note: Indust-| 
|                  |                  |                  |rial output value | 
|                  |                  |                  |in 1992 is measur-| 
|                  |                  |                  |ed in 1990's cons-| 
|                  |                  |                  |tant yuan.        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20530 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Increase Credit To Develop Rural Enterprises </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0288A Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0288A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by He Linxiang (0149 2651 4382), deputy director, </F>
Agricultural Bank of China: "Increase Credit Investment, Promote 
the Healthy Development of Township Enterprise"] 
  [Text] Since 1979 when the Agricultural Bank of China was 
reinstated, it and credit cooperatives have loaned a cumulative 
total of more than 1.3 trillion yuan to rural enterprises. 
Through the end of 1993, the annual increase rate of loans to 
rural enterprises was 35.9 percent, up 63 times over the period 
just after Agricultural Bank rehabilitation. The Agricultural 
Bank and credit cooperatives have loaned to more than one 
million of these enterprises. This includes a group of backbone 
enterprises with total annual output value of several 100 
million to several billion yuan which constitute the nuclear 
force of rural enterprises. 
  In the development process, the contradiction of a shortage 
of funds in rural enterprises is fully prominent, becoming an 
issue to which everyone pays attention. The reasons for this 
problem are: 
  One, excessive fixed asset investment, with the pace 
of development surpassing the capacity funds can bear. Two, 
disorderly financial order with rural funds seriously 
split. Random fund accumulation and lending against regulat 
ions not only blindly expanded the scale of investment, 
increased the need for circulating funds, and slowed savings 
deposit increases by banks and credit cooperatives, but also 
affected rural enterprise loan supply progress. 
  Three, some rural enterprises have economic results 
that are not ideal. This is reflected in bank credit. The issues 
of overly tight credit, slow turnover, poor results and great 
risk still are relatively prominent. Overdue and idle loans and 
bad debts continue to increase and the principle and interest on 
a considerable portion of loans cannot be repaid on time. 
Rural enterprise idle loans and bad debts have reached a certain 
proportion affecting loan turnover utilization. 
  According to the spirit of the 1993 annual national rural 
enterprise work conference, important links to promote the 
healthy development of rural enterprises are doing all to 
relieve the current contradiction of funds in short supply and 
improve fund utilization results. Toward this end, the 
Agricultural Bank and credit cooperatives bear an extremely 
heavy and arduous burden. We will adopt several main measures: 
  1. Hold steadfastly to both collecting funds, taking 
stock of funds, and expanding the dynamics of credit input. 
Utilize interest rate readjustment and financial order 
rectification, mobilize rural workers to save actively and 
expand fund sources. At the same time, strengthen accounting 
services for rural enterprises that continuously expand new 
accounts, do a good job of enterprise time deposits and public 
deposits and one of peasant household fund accumulation 
management, increase the useable amount of rural credit funds, 
and strive to realize funds needed within plans on the scale of 
rural enterprise loans. 
  Look within to resolve the funding difficulties of rural 
enterprises, ferret out potential, accelerate turnover of the 
more than 210 billion in credit and improve fund utilization 
results. Definitely take stock of sedimentary credit funds, 
recoup overdue and idle rural enterprise loans. Make credit 
funds flow back smoothly, accelerate turnover with one yuan of 
money playing the role of several yuan. An important way to 
ameliorate rural enterprise funding difficulties is to use fund 
increase superiority to spur on taking stock of savings to 
create a good credit and enterprise fund input and output cycle. 
  2. Firmly uphold the principles of suiting measures to 
local conditions and divided guidance. Further improve regional 
credit policies. Actively support rural enterprises, 
particularly accelerating the development of rural enterprises 
in central and western China. Rural financial sectors must 
adhere to state unifie d planning and the principles of suiting 
measures to local conditions, a rational division of labor, each 
developing its strengths, and all developing together under the 
premise of respecting economic laws. Further improve and 
implement regional credit policies. The economic backwardness of 
the central and western areas compared to eastern China is 
caused by a lack of talent, transportation and communication 
difficulties, closed off information, and rather low degrees of 
market development. In these areas, the Agricultural Bank and 
credit cooperatives must fully develop the role of credit 
levers, coalesce all efforts, create conditions and help improve 
the development environment. For credit support in the central 
and western areas, we must "stress priorities and regard the 
rest equally," giving key support to national agricultural 
product production bases, poor areas, and national minority 
areas, fully developing the relatively ample and advantageous 
conditions of agricultural, mineral, water, land and human 
resources. Develop variegated forms of rural enterprises by 
using local materials at hand, having work suit workers, 
agriculture suit agriculture, and business suit business. While 
supporting existing enterprises well, act according to 
capabilities, develop strengths, and stress support of new 
projects such as agricultural and sideline food product 
processing, fund development and rural energy. 
  The "sprinkling pepper" method [spreading investment among 
many small-scale projects] must be changed to suppport central 
and western rural enterprise development. Moderately accumulate 
funds, support enterprise on the road of concentrated, 
collective operations and development by joining together 
disparate areas. Stress support of and reliance on existing 
towns and enterprises as well as using the advantageous 
conditions of river coastal, coastal lines, and coastal borders. 
Backbone enterprises of a certain scale developed according to 
economic principles and various forms of enterprise groups spur 
on development of surrounding areas. Strictly control lending to 
blind establishment of small industrial development zones which 
ignore conditions, seize farmland, compete and rush headlong 
into action. 
  China's east coast has become the most vital area for rural 
enterprise development. The Agricultural Bank and credit 
cooperatives develop their ov erall capabilities under the 
premise of implementing gross national credit readjustment and 
control policies, providing prefer ential loans for enterprises 
or projects which have low asset debts, good returns of scale, 
are high science and technology and high export earners, 
matching local and outside monies. Trial shareholding systems 
and cooperative shareholding systems plus collectively operated 
enterprises must gather experience and be boldly supported so 
that they are perfected more with grand plans restarted. To 
develop the east's leading role and promote regional economic 
and technological unity, the State Council proposed an important 
"east-west rural enterprise cooperation project" which the 
Agricultural Bank and credit cooperatives must investigate and 
study, actively participate in planning and select from these a 
group of projects with great influence, good results and 
comparatively strong radiating and attracting power. Unite these 
with adoption of combined loans, bank group loans, specific 
project loans, foreign exchange loans to promote regional 
economic coordination and promote rational economic compositions 
and development of overall strengths. 
  3. Firmly uphold the principles of differential 
treatment and supporting the best, and support industrial 
structure readjustment. Centered around improving economic 
results, prominently support key enterprises and projects, and 
implement the policy of supporting the strong and limiting the 
weak. Give preferential support in terms of loan scales and 
funds to industrial enterprises that accord with state 
industrial policies and produce saleable items, foreign exchange 
earning export enterprises and energy and raw materials projects 
of priority national development. Projects have to be ranked and 
arranged in categories. Support of projects with good market 
prospects and high forecasted economic results must be continued 
to ensure they are put into operation on time. There should 
firmly be no new loans to enterprises which have no future or 
make products that cannot be sold. Strictly control new projects 
and do not lend to projects which cannot raise their own funds, 
have poor results or reconstruct. Centralize funds to resolve 
the need for rational circulating funds of existing enterprises. 
At the same time, greatly support loans to enterprises with 
authority to import and export, use well special laons for 
"trade, industry and agriculture" export bases, spark plans and 
earmarked "scientific and techological development" project 
loans, and unite such loans with general loans for greater 
results. At the same time, greatly collect foreign exchange 
funds, enhance international accounting, and provide to export 
enterprises comprehensive, top quality, inexpensive, highly 
efficient financial services. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20531 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guizhou Private Enterprises Increase </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344E Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 27 Feb 94 
p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0344E </F>
<F P=104>  Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] According to incomplete statistics, at the end 
of 1993 Guizhou Province had over 3,730 private enterprises, an 
increase of 1,330, or 50.9 percent over 1992. Private 
enterprises employed 61,675 people, a 40 percent increase; and 
had 9,371 investors, a 15 percent increase. Registered capital 
totaled 574,450,000 yuan, fixed assets totaled 274,330,000 yuan, 
and operating funds totaled 300 million yuan, increases of 94.2 
percent, 70.7 percent, and 122 percent respectively over 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20532 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Proposes Import Agent System for Pricing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0294A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 22 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0294A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Fan (2799 1581): "On Reform of China's </F>
Foreign Trade Pricing System." The author is from the Foreign 
Economic and Trade University's International Trade Research 
Institute] 
  [Text] Foreign trade pricing encompasses the domestic 
procurement prices of export commodities, their foreign sale 
prices, domestic sale prices of imported commodities, and their 
foreign purchase prices. What affects the overall price level is 
the exchange rate; what affects the pricing structure is 
import-export tariffs, export tax rebates, and government 
financial subsidies. Reform of the foreign trade pricing system 
refers mainly to the reform of the domestic procurement prices 
of export commodities and the domestic sale prices of imported 
commodities. 
<H5>  I. Foreign Trade Pricing Under the Planned System </H5>
  Under a planned economic system, we have domestic and 
foreign 
price differential and currency differential. Domestic and 
foreign price differential refers to the situation where the 
prices of domestic agricultural products, energy, 
communications, real estate, and services are lower, while the 
prices of processed goods are higher, than those in the 
international markets. If we apply the law of market value to 
regulate import and export, the cheaper resources at home will 
flow away from the domestic market, and large volumes of cheap 
international processed goods will be imported. This not only 
will result in negative balance of international payments but 
will also undermine the domestic industries. Therefore, the 
state must monopolize foreign trade and use mandatory planning 
to control import and export, especially to guarantee the 
completion of export plans to earn foreign exchange. 
  Given the state's backward economic conditions, the most 
serious problem we face is the chronic shortage of foreign 
exchange. Therefore, exporting becomes a compelling task. Export 
planning makes up the most important part of economic planning. 
To guarantee export, the whole economy must serve foreign trade. 
So long as a product sells, we will find domestic sales yielding 
to foreign sales. Planned measures are used to centralize all 
domestic resources to guarantee export. Complementing this is a 
fixed exchange rate system. The fixed exchange rate system in 
fact forces us to pay the price of unstable domestic economy to 
guarantee foreign trade stability. If we want to avoid 
fluctuations in the domestic economy, in addition to the fixed 
exchange rate, we must impose strict foreign exchange control 
and over-evaluate the RMB exchange rate. This results in the 
domestic and foreign exchange differential. 
  The foreign trade mechanism that truly plays a role in a 
planned economic system is mandatory planning. The huge losses 
generated by the domestic and foreign price differential is 
remedied by government subsidies. The pricing mechanism has no 
essential function. It is just a means of calculation. Foreign 
trade companies cannot take responsibility of their own profits 
or losses. They are responsible only for the plans. 
  This kind of planned foreign trade system naturally relies 
on 
planned and financial measures and completely alienates the 
domestic and foreign pricing relations. The domestic procurement 
prices of export commodities and domestic sale prices of 
imported goods must comply with the principle of "using domestic 
planned prices as the norm. Goods of the same quality are priced 
the same; goods of better quality are priced higher." All losses 
are subsidized by the Financial Ministry. Price fluctuations in 
the international markets cannot affect the domestic economy, 
and there can be no direct link between enterprises, so that 
foreign trade is "cut off." At the developmental stage when 
foreign trade volume is small and the economy is backward, such 
mechanism can facilitate the centralization of domestic 
resources for export to earn foreign exchange, facilitate the 
concentrated use of our limited foreign exchange, and help 
stabilize the domestic economy. Its drawback is the huge 
government subsidies and slowly diminishing economic efficiency. 
When the foreign trade volume expands and the domestic economy 
undergoes reform, this system can no longer be sustained. 
<H3>  II. The Agent System -- A Method of Linking the Domestic 
Sale Prices of Imported Goods to Their International Levels </H3>
  A basic way to link imported prices and international prices 
is to implement the import agent system. This means using the 
import CIF price as base and converting that to RMB according to 
the exchange rate. This gives us the CIF price in RMB, and the 
domestic sale price of the import is derived by adding to it the 
import tariff and the value-added tax--to be imposed by customs 
on behalf of the state--and other state taxes and fees. Import 
agent price in fact sets the domestic price based on the 
international price level. The import agent system is a way to 
link domestic and foreign prices via importing. 
  In 1985, China began a large scale conversion to the import 
agent system. Today only grains and chemical fertilizers are not 
using that system. [blank space] By 1992, 90 percent of the 
imported commodities have implemented the agent system. The most 
direct consequence is reduced government subsidies, and it also 
reduces some unnecessary imports. Its negative effect is that it 
has raised the domestic price level. In recent years, higher 
international prices of imported commodities, depreciation of 
the RMB, elimination of import subsidies, and the imposition of 
several taxes and fees by the state have led to a substantial 
increase in the prices of imported commodities, and that in turn 
has triggered a rise in the prices of related domestic products. 
This is how international inflation finds its way into the 
domestic economy. When implementing the import agent system, we 
must fully utilize the tariffs lever to greatly reduce or exempt 
taxes on imported means of production to minimize the impact on 
domestic product prices. 
  The elimination of import subsidies raises the domestic sale 
prices of imported commodities, which functions to reduce 
imports. But China's import-mix is relatively backward. Eighty 
percent of the imported goods are capital goods for which there 
are few domestic substitutes, and their demand is fairly 
inelastic, and despite the higher prices, we must still import 
them, and the result is a general rise in the price level at 
home. 
  The implementation of the import agent system basically 
links 
domestic and foreign prices by way of the imports. The pricing 
mechanism thus becomes the basic mechanism for regulating 
imports. In other words, reform of import prices is basically 
complete. Today we still have a problem with high tariffs and 
import quotas with respect to a handful of products, and they 
are keeping us from giving full play to the pricing mechanism. 
In the wake of the imminent resolution of our "return to GATT," 
and because of the many tariff reductions and exemptions in 
recent years, we are collecting less than half of the tariffs we 
are entitled to, and adding the rampant smuggling and the loss 
of control over imports, the pricing mechanism is playing a 
bigger regulatory role in reality than in theory. Henceforth, we 
should primarily perfect pricing's role in regulating imports: 
We should develop the production of import substitutes to 
increase the price elasticity of imported commodities, lower 
nominal tariffs and reduce various non-tariff barriers, develop 
commodity futures and linking them to spot trade, strengthen 
tariff's role in regulating imports, crack down on smuggling, 
eliminate the mixed-bag of tax reductions and exemptions, and 
standardize the import market to enable the pricing mechanism to 
regulate imports even more fully and systematically. We want to 
be able to export whenever domestic prices are lower, and import 
when they are higher, than international prices. 
<H3>  III. Accelerate the Pace of Conversion to the Agent System 
in the Importing of Grains and Chemical Fertilizers </H3>
  Currently, only the importing of grains and chemical 
fertilizers are still being subsidized by the state to the tune 
of around 12 billion yuan a year. The prices of chemical 
fertilizers make up part of the cost of producing grain, and 
therefore it is primarily the importing of grains and their 
prices that affect the state's agricultural subsidies. 
  China's grain production has been increasing for the last 
three years in a row. Importing has become less critical. 
Primarily, it is the Beijing-Tianjin-Shanghai area and Liaoning 
that are the major importers. They import around 15 million tons 
of wheat each year. But in the long-run, China's grain supply 
will still fall short of demand, and before the year 2000, our 
normal demand will increase at a rate of 2.56 percent a year, 
while extraordinary demand may increase at 4.3 percent a 
year--topping 1.04 trillion and 1.30 trillion jin, respectively, 
and meanwhile grain production will increase 2.1 percent at the 
most, which will be fairly close to the normal demand but will 
be 300 billion jin short of the extraordinary demand. We will 
have to import at least 100 billion jin, which is equivalent to 
approximately 10 percent of the domestic grain production. 
  Currently, domestic grain prices are below that in the 
international markets. Cost of production for domestic grains 
has increased at an average rate of 7-8 percent a year over the 
last 12 years, while international cost has increased only 1-2 
percent. At this rate, by the year 2000, domestic grain prices 
will exceed that in the international markets. However, there 
are two trends pulling in the opposite direction: First, 
international agricultural products are heavily subsidized. Each 
year, the United States spends $80 billion, Europe spends $80 
billion, and Japan spends $10 billion on subsidies. But such 
subsidies are gradually being cut back. Second, the yuan is 
being devaluated. Based on the 1993 list price, as a result of 
depreciation of the yuan, $1 which used to fetch 1.7 yuan is now 
fetching 5.8 yuan. The yuan has depreciated 240 percent over the 
last 15 years, at an average rate of 10 percent a year. 
Meanwhile, using the regulation price, the value of the yuan has 
dropped to 10.8 yuan, falling 540 percent, at a rate of 15 
percent a year. It is estimated that in the next decade, the 
yuan will continue to depreciate at a rate of 10-15 percent a 
year, which is faster than the rate of increase in the cost of 
grain production. Therefore, the domestic and foreign grain 
price differential will only increase rather than decrease, and 
import subsidies will have to double and redouble. We must 
accelerate the pace of converting to the import agent system in 
grain and chemical fertilizer importing. Our strategy should be 
to proceed while domestic grain prices are being raised. The 
domestic sale prices of grains have been decontrolled since 
1993, but procurement prices are still being adjusted according 
to plans and are raised annually. We must quicken the pace of 
converting to the grain agent system to solve the problem of 
rising government subsidies and losses incurred in chemical 
fertilizer production. As for their causing a general rise in 
the domestic price level, this is a price we have to pay. It is 
the price we have to pay for reforming the entire import pricing 
system. In essence, we are replacing government price subsidies 
with price increases to free the pricing mechanism from the 
bondage of economic planning, so that it can truly play a role 
in regulating import. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20533 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  31 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Problems With Foreign-Funded Enterprises </TI></H3>
<H4>   Variety of Problems Found in FFEs </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0295A Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 31 Dec 93 
p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0295A </F>
<F P=104>  Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gu Jian (0657 1696): "Problems in the Three </F>
Kinds of Wholly and Partially Foreign-Owned Enterprises--A Look 
at the FFE's `Six Problems'"] 
  [Text] This author recently conducted a study of the three 
kinds of wholly and partially foreign-owned enterprises [or 
foreign-funded enterprises, FFEs] in northern Jiangsu and 
southern Jiangsu and discovered six common problems among them 
which urgently need the close attention of leaders at all levels 
as well as those working with the FFEs. 
  1. There are too many enterprises being set up but too 
few actually going into production. This is a fairly common 
phenomenon in the course of developing FFEs. Often after an 
enterprise is approved, both the Chinese and the foreign sides 
cannot come through with the capital funds; sometimes the 
Chinese side has the money, but the other side does not, or 
sometimes both sides have part of the money, but the amount 
falls far short of what is stipulated in the contract, so that 
the enterprise cannot open as scheduled. Consequently, there are 
many FFEs that exist in name only or are only "half-baked" 
companies, and ultimately, they become a burden for both sides. 
Sometimes the foreign businesses change their minds; they lose 
confidence in their investments. For example, a certain city 
approved the setting up of 85 FFEs, but the actual start-up rate 
was only 17 percent, and only 6 actually put any effort into 
construction and installation; the rest are still in a 
semi-suspended state. 
  2. The contracts count on substantial foreign capital 
while little is actually available. Today many localities 
treat their contracted amount of foreign capital as their 
"precious babies." They brag about them whenever they have a 
chance. Some even treat them as a great accomplishment and put 
them in their reports. Little do they know that the success rate 
of utilizing the contracted foreign capital is actually very 
low, and sometimes no money will come through at all. For 
example, in 1990, a certain county signed a contract worth $30 
million with a foreign business. Today, only $150,000 have come 
through. This writer has learned that the foreign business has 
already cancelled the investment plan. The contracted amount of 
foreign capital at best only reflects a trend as we make 
contacts with the outside world. Today most foreign businesses 
make their investments in the form of equipment purchases on 
behalf of the Chinese side. The FFEs rarely make direct use of 
foreign capital. For example, a certain city has been listed as 
an open city by the State Council back in 1987. Up to the end of 
November of this year, it had $85 million in foreign capital 
available on contract, but only $6.4 million have come through 
so far, and 80 percent of that investment were in the form of 
equipment purchased by foreign businesses on behalf of the 
Chinese side. 
  3. There is ample designed, but little actual, 
productive capacity. Today's FFEs generally have limited 
productive capacity. Their output value is usually only around 
20 percent of their designed capacity. Most operate only 
intermittently or are in a trial production stage and cannot 
engage in batch production. Some cannot begin production because 
they have brought in substandard equipment. For example, the 
FFEs in a certain township have a total investment of $350 
million. At a 1:2 input-output ratio, their output value should 
reach $700 million, and even at a 1:1 ratio, they should be able 
to produce $350 million's worth of goods. But today, their 
output value is only a little over $50 million. Looking at the 
14 enterprises already in operation, all but two are operating 
at below capacity; some are in a state of "shock." Their 
profitability is unpredictable: Only one is making a profit, and 
the rest are barely breaking even. 
  4. There are too many low-to-intermediate grade 
projects and too few advanced, delicate, state-of-the-art 
projects. Looking at the types of projects undertaken by 
the FFEs, most are light industrial and textile projects or 
labor-intensive type projects. There are few mechanical, 
electronic, or delicate chemical industry-type projects, and 
most of their products are in short supply. For example, up to 
the end of November of this year, a certain county has set up 15 
departments, and the towns and townships have also set up 21 
departments, in the FFEs, and there are more than 100 projects 
of all types, but not one is a technology-intensive, 
state-of-the-art project. 
  5. A lot of foreign equipment are being brought in but 
there are few advanced equipment to help make them work. 
The success rate of most equipment brought into this country by 
foreign businesses on our behalf is low; most do not meet 
contract specifications. Sometimes the parts do not fit--we 
either have "a horse pulling a wheelbarrow" or "a pony pulling a 
big trailer," and therefore enterprises cannot go into operation 
on time. Sometimes the equipment is obsolete, with standards 
dating back to the 1950's and 1960's by Chinese standards or 
even the 1940's and 1950's compared to international standards. 
Some are just "scrap metal" welded together; some are not 
designed for use around here because of our production methods 
and therefore cannot function properly. For example, a certain 
enterprise spent $800,000 and asked a foreign business concern 
to bring in a set of equipment from somewhere, but according to 
the Commodities Inspection Administration the equipment had 
standards dated back to the 1940's. It had no automatic or 
safety features; it did not even have transmission and required 
a manually installed gear box. It was appraised to be worth 
$100,000 at the most. 
  6. Most enterprises still use the old set of management 
methods and few have adopted the latest management 
techniques. 
  Today most FFEs are directly managed by the Chinese side, 
and even though a handful of them have foreign representatives 
taking part in management, they are mainly for the purpose of 
supervising us and tend to overlook, either intentionally or 
unintentionally, the importance of studying and bringing in 
foreign advanced management techniques. Most enterprises still 
continue to use the old piece-work pay system and have not 
learned the kinds of approach that show concern and care for the 
staff and workers or try to improve workers' benefit and 
welfare; but when it comes to other people's seldom-applied 
method of deducting wages and penalizing and firing workers, we 
not only have learned but are quick to apply those rules. 
  The above six conditions have serious consequences and are 
dangerous. They waste resources, render a lot of funds in 
disuse, dampen the foreign investors' enthusiasm, and undermine 
the confidence of some units and leaders in doing a good job 
with the FFEs, and meanwhile, some bad companies have become 
heavy burdens to the local economies. The main reason for all 
these lies in our guiding ideology that is too impatient for 
quick success and produces haphazard--calling every feathered 
object a duck--behavior. When it comes to selecting equipment, 
we blindly trust the middlemen, which has resulted in failures 
in our import endeavors. In utilizing enterprise personnel, we 
lack a scientific attitude, which has resulted in errors in the 
enterprise construction and operation processes. With respect to 
fund utilization, we fail to follow through to the end, so that 
after a project is started, it often runs into difficulties. 
Thus, in the future, when we develop FFEs, we should insist on a 
development route that emphasize both intensive and extensive 
reproduction. We must revolve around the "three rates and one 
increase" (raising the foreign capital realization rate, the 
business start-up rate, and the production completion rate, and 
increase the total use of foreign capital); we must concentrate 
on what is important, provide different guidance under different 
conditions, seize the critical points, and push the FFEs' 
development onto a higher plane. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20534 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  3 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Problems With Foreign-Funded Enterprises </TI></H3>
<H4>   Anecdotal Accounts of Problems in FFEs </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0925B Shenyang JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 3 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0925B </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Not Everything Is Coming Up Roses"] </F>
  [Text] In recent years, in the wake of China's continuous 
reform and open up, many foreign businesses have come to China 
to invest and open factories and so on. Nationwide, the three 
kinds of wholly and partially foreign-owned enterprises have 
emerged like "bamboo shoots after a spring rain." They have 
become an indispensable part of our symphony of reform and 
opening up. 
  But there are a few discordant notes in this symphony. 
<H5>  Profit Is Being Shifted Elsewhere </H5>
  A certain province once examined its 1,090 FFEs' income tax 
and found that 544 were losing money to a tune of 327 million 
yuan, with losses extending to 50 percent of the FFEs. 
  Why are these FFEs losing money? There are many reasons. It 
is learned that many of the foreign investors in the FFEs often 
use prices to shift their profit around and artificially jack up 
their cost to eat up our side's profit, creating book-losses to 
take advantage of the state's tax exemption or reduction 
benefits. 
  According to one tax department, in 1990, a foreign business 
came to China to set up a limited liability company jointly with 
a township enterprise in the garment business. This foreign 
company had sales channels abroad, and the high quality suits 
made by the joint venture cost about 150 yuan to produce, but 
the foreign staff paid only 110 yuan a piece and sold them 
through their retail network abroad. Internally, they said it 
was because of the market slump which forced them to cut price. 
As a result, for each suit we sold, we lost approximately 40 
yuan. The company's Chinese manager even went to the tax 
department to ask for a tax reduction or exemption (in fact, 
even the Chinese manager was deceived by those people). 
  Supposedly, in this kind of situation where more production 
and sales only bring more losses should prompt the enterprises 
to readjust their product mix and change their management 
thinking. But the other side do not care, and in fact the more 
money we lose, the more they step up production. It is only 
after a period of time that the tax department gets suspicious 
and sends people out to investigate and then the whole act is 
exposed, and the Chinese side eventually recovers millions in 
tax revenue and lost profit. 
<H5>  The Funds Fail To Come Through </H5>
  Among some FFEs, often times the foreign funds fail to come 
through on time if at all, and as a result, some enterprises are 
forced to take out large loans from the domestic banks. In 
1986, a certain Chinese hotel negotiated with a foreign company 
to jointly set up a hotel here with total investment of $15 
million, each side controlling 50 percent of the stocks. But 
more than a year later, the foreign partner still could not 
deliver all the money, nor could they come up with the foreign 
unguaranteed loans it had agreed to in the contract. The 
building project has become just an empty promise. 
  In the years that followed, the Chinese side waited and made 
concessions. In November of 1990, the Chinese side put up 10 
million yuan of the 52.296 million yuan the old hotel was valued 
at to buy more shares and lent the remaining 42.296 million yuan 
to the other side in the form of an extra investment. Thus the 
Chinese side, so proud and eager to get into this joint venture 
to build a new hotel, ended up throwing in the old building too. 
But that was not all. In order to complete this joint-venture 
hotel as soon as possible and get the utilities and roads ready 
and purchase some electricity bonds, the Chinese side even threw 
in a 16 million yuan loan they had raised on their own. 
Remodeling the old building cost them all of their 5.64 million 
yuan of the registered capital plus a 20 million yuan RMB loan 
from a domestic bank the Chinese side took out a loan in the 
name of the joint venture. To date, the foreign partner's 
unguaranteed loan still has not shown up, and there is no point 
talking about the new hotel. 
  Today, interest payments alone cost the joint venture hotel 
more than 5 million yuan a year. The Chinese side is stuck. What 
will the final outcome be? Who knows. 
  How come the foreign capital often fails to come through? 
Some people hit the nail in the head when they point out that, 
first, certain foreign businesses have very poor credit and do 
not have much money of their own, and no foreign bank would lend 
them money. 
  Second, some foreign business have no serious intention of 
cooperating and never expect to come up with their own money; 
they only want to use the joint venture to borrow money from 
China. Third, the contract terms are not tight enough and are 
not enforced vigorously; there is no deadline for delivering the 
money, leaving a loophole for the foreign businesses to take 
advantage of. Fourth, from the time the contracts are signed to 
the time of their execution, the exchange rates have changed, 
which can affect the foreign business's timely payment. Lastly, 
the Chinese side often makes mistakes. 
<H5>  Making Money by Importing Equipment </H5>
  Study shows that currently many FFEs are importing their 
major pieces of equipment and raw materials (or the foreign 
companies are importing them as their share of the investment), 
and since the Chinese side is not familiar with the foreign 
markets, most importing is naturally handled singlehandedly by 
the foreign businesses who simply take advantage of this 
weakness to make money off of the equipment and raw materials. 
Incomplete data compiled by a relevant department for Yunnan, 
Jiangsu, Fujian, Tianjin, Zhejiang, Guangdong, and Jiangxi 
showed that machinery and equipment reported as foreign 
investments worth $68.8643 million were appraised by the 
Commodities Inspection Administration to be worth $52.3463 
million. They have overstated the value by $16.6857 million, or 
24 percent. In some cases, they have overstated the value of a 
single piece of equipment by 12.7 times, which is most shocking. 
Sometimes they substitute old equipment for new or inferior 
quality for good to cheat the Chinese side. 
  There is another kind of foreign businessmen who have 
neither 
capital nor real technical qualifications; their standard is far 
below that of some of our domestic enterprises, but they have 
come all the way to China to work on joint ventures. They 
neither provide money nor talent, but they take advantage of the 
fact that the Chinese don't know how to get into the 
international markets, and they just help us sell some goods. Do 
you call that joint venture? It is but a typical business 
relationship, but some people willingly let them take away our 
profit. 
<H5>  Getting Out of the Swamp </H5>
  In more than a decade of reform and opening up, the FFEs 
have 
played a valuable role. This we must acknowledge. But some 
domestic enterprises that went into a joint venture just for its 
own sake have paid dearly for the lesson. The relevant 
departments should be concerned. 
  One, some domestic enterprises must correct their guiding 
ideology with respect to "joint ventures." They must take 
responsibility for what they do. Two, the relevant department 
must promptly formulate and perfect the laws and regulations 
that not only protect our rights but also the foreign investors' 
enthusiasm and plug all loopholes at the same time, so that the 
FFEs can embark on a healthy developmental track. Three, before 
getting into a joint venture, domestic enterprises must go 
through different channels to investigate and get to know the 
other side. They must have a good grasp of the foreign 
business's ability to fulfill their contracts and their business 
reputation and demand that they provide proof of their 
credibility. Four, we must perfect the contract terms and leave 
no loophole for others to take advantage of. Five, relevant 
personnel must study hard and learn more about international 
economics and finance and business in particular, and they must 
find ways to obtain international market price information on 
equipment and raw materials and so on, so that foreign 
businesses cannot give us false information. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20535 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  5 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> TRANSPORTATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Transportation Industry Grows </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0305A Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO in Chinese 5 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0305A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gu Tong (6253 0681)] </F>
  [Text] [Staff report] Since the advent of the 1990's, the 
buildup in the transportation and telecommunications industry 
which has played an important role in developing the national 
economy has entered a stage of accelerated growth. Since 1993 in 
particular, the scope of capital investment and the rate of 
growth in many new projects have been heightened, and the 
macroeconomic picture looks good. This indicates that the 
buildup in China's transportation and telecommunications 
industry has made a big leap into another phase. 
  Large-Scale Capital Investment and Accelerated Growth. By 
the end of 1993, investments by state units in the 
transportation and communications industry have broken through 
the hundred billion yuan mark, while reflecting a more than 
one-fold growth, an increase of 44 percentage points over that 
for the same period a year ago. The proportion of capital 
investment also rose from 16 percent for the same period a year 
ago to 21 percent in 1993. Among these, investment in new 
projects in basic construction and improvements for the 
transportation and telecommunications industry costing more than 
5 million yuan each totalled 41.5 billion yuan, also more than 
one-fold over outlays for the previous year. Its proportion of 
the total capital investment also rose to 20.9 percent from the 
14.6 percent figure for the previous period a year ago. The 
scope of capital investment and the rapid rate of growth are 
unprecedented. 
  Numerous Completed Projects With Good Macroeconomic 
Benefits. Up to the present time, important projects already 
completed and placed into operation include the Wujiaba airport 
in Kunming, the Gongyi airport in Lhasa, the Tianho airport in 
Wuhan, a new passenger terminal in Shenyang, the second phase of 
the Da-Qin [Dalian to Qinhuangdao] railway, the Xuan-Hangzhou 
[Xuancheng to Hangzhou] dual line, the Jiejiang-Jiangxi dual 
line, the Jiao-Zhi dual line, the Bin-Zhou [Haerhbin-Manzhouli] 
dual line, the Guang-Mei-Shan [Guangzhou-Meixian-Shantou] line 
etc. The 318-kilometer highway from Jinan to Qingdao, built at a 
cost of 3.1 billion yuan, is the single largest investment item 
in China's highway construction history. Of sound quality 
construction, its completion in record time for automobile 
travel is highly significant toward furthering economic 
development on the Shandong peninsula and stepped-up opening and 
exploration of its western part, with circulation of 
commodities, construction and exploration of the Shengli 
oilfields, and development of the Huang He delta. It has become 
an important conduit linking China's interior with its coastal 
region. The Qingdao-Jinan highway can accommodate as much as 80 
million tons of freight annually, comparable to one and one-half 
times that carried on the Jiao-Jinan rail link. Social benefits 
derived from this operation are increased by 5 billion yuan 
annually. The macroeconomic advantages are outstanding. 
  Rapid Progress on Current Projects. Ongoing large projects 
at present include electrification of the Beijing-Guangzhou 
Railroad, construction of the Western Passenger Terminal in 
Beijing, the Lan-Xin [Lanzhou to Xinjiang] dual line, the 
circumferential highway on Hainan Island, and the first phase of 
an engineering project on the bay approaching the port of 
Qingdao, the second phase of projects at the port of 
Zhangjiagang, and Miaoling at the port of Lianyungang. For the 
Beijing-Kowloon Railway that has attracted worldwide attention, 
403 kilometers of track have been laid down and completed. By 
the end of October, 6.1 billion yuan of investment capital have 
been expended, and 94.5 percent of the annual plan has been 
completed. Among ongoing projects, 184 kilometers of track has 
been laid on the Jing-Heng [Beijing-Hengyang] segment, while 217 
kilometer has been laid on the Heng-Shang segment. 
  An Optimistic Future. Not long ago, the State Council 
approved for immediate startup, a series of structural 
construction projects for use in transportation and 
telecommunications. For example, a capital investment of 3.5 
billion yuan to lay down 369 kilometers of track for the 
Bao-Cheng [Baoji-Chengdu] dual line, which is an important 
transportation channel for southwestern China, has been planned. 
A capital investment of 2.5 billion yuan on a project to 
electrify the Chengdu-Kunming line, laying tracks on all 1,100 
kilometers of its length will, upon completion, improve its 
transportation capacity more than three times over its present 
level. Furthermore, an overall investment of 2 billion yuan to 
lay 251 kilometers of track on a second line traversing southern 
Fujian province, as well as a capital investment of 1.6 billion 
yuan for building the Fushan-Kaiping highway have been planned. 
Construction on these projects foretell another giant step 
forward made by China's transportation and telecommunications 
industry, and its important effect on furthering economic 
development in the national economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20536 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  26 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangxi To Increase Sugarcane Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344G Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGJIHUA BAO in Chinese 26 Feb 
94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0344G </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGJIHUA BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 the sugarcane area in Guangxi will reach 
6 million mu, an increase of 270,000 mu over 1993, and produce 
2.3 million tons of sugar. In 1995 sugar output will reach 2.5 
million tons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20537 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wu Xiang, Provincial Officials View Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Interview With Wu Xiang </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0282A Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 15 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0282A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mao Xiaorui (3029 2556 3843): "What Is Causing </F>
Farmers' Continued Low Income? An Interview With the Well-Known 
Economist Wu Xiang"] 
  [Text] Abstract: The sluggish increase in farm 
incomes is the key to our rural problems, one which affects 
development of the national economy. Why is this happening? The 
cause lies in our inability so far to understand, either in 
theory or in practice, that increases in farm income and labor 
force transfers are key points of agricultural problems, rural 
problems, and farmers' problems. The obstacle to understanding 
comes from the thinking and concepts produced under the planned 
economic system, expressed chiefly in the attitude toward the 
development of township enterprises. In addition, some people 
are expressing the view that transfer of the rural labor force 
will affect agriculture's stable development. However, many 
years' experience with reform proves that the development of 
enterprises is of considerable benefit to the stable development 
of agriculture; therefore, bringing up the prerequisite that 
"without agriculture there is no stability" should now be 
"without industry there is no stability in agriculture." How to 
resolve rural problems, agricultural problems, and farmers' 
problems, while carrying out further rural reform? Renewed 
concepts and changed ideas are the preconditions for resolving 
rural problems, while at the same time unifying understanding 
from upper leadership to localities, ensuring that the general 
goal of the next step in rural reform is to increase farmers' 
income and implement transfer of the rural labor force. With 
this objective, we must widen our sights in developing 
agriculture, paying attention not just to agriculture itself, 
but rather stressing the simultaneous development of 
agriculture, township enterprises, and small towns. There must 
be total support for and development of private enterprises, 
individually owned enterprises, and the joint-stock system. We 
must establish and perfect the various key markets. Looking at 
the goal of achieving a comfortable standard of living in the 
1990s, the next six years presents a rather heavy assignment, so 
it is urgent that we promptly establish appropriate objectives 
and missions for further rural reform, as well as formulate 
supportive policies. 
  This reporter had been planning for quite some time to 
interview the economist Wu Xiang [0702 6272], who had 
participated in the work of formulating the primary policies for 
rural reform. When the figure of an average increase of 2 
percent for farmers was announced, it gave me the impetus to 
turn this plan into reality. 
<H3>  Sluggish growth in farmers' incomes is the key rural problem 
and the key factor affecting the domestic economy. </H3>
  Agriculture is in good shape at present, if we are looking 
at 
the supply situation for agricultural products and by-products 
in urban and rural markets. However, if we go deep into the 
countryside, we will find that there are many problems there and 
with agriculture--the comparative benefits of farming have 
declined, with low enthusiasm and heavy burdens. Such phenomena 
as irregular circulation channels, "sales difficulties" and 
"payment in IOUs" appear frequently. Sixty percent of the 
counties exist on financial subsidy from the central government, 
some not affording salary payments. Relations are tense between 
cadres and the masses. Wu Xiang stated that these problems were 
closely related, but the key point was the sluggish growth in 
farmers' income. 
  In his opening remarks, and without prior consultation, Wu 
Xiang agreed with the topic of my interview. He said that the 
growth in farmers' incomes was not only related to the 
development of the countryside, but also directly affected the 
development of the national economy. Foreign media have 
commented recently that the economic power of the developing 
areas along China's coast, such as Guangdong, has been quite 
close to that of the four Asian dragons, with the difference 
that behind the coastal areas, there is a rural market of nearly 
800 million population. Also, based on national investigation 
documents: at present, 50 percent of farm families can sustain a 
livelihood only through what they produce on the farm, with a 
zero commercial rate; 35 percent of the farmers are able to 
market less than 30 percent of their total agricultural produce, 
just maintaining simple reproduction; only 15 percent of farmers 
have a commercial rate higher than 30 percent. Wu Xiang said 
that this document shows that the majority of China's farming 
families can only maintain simple reproduction, carrying out 
exchange of produce on a small scale and allocation and 
consumption within their families. The extensive countryside 
that foreign nations call "precious land" is actually just a 
piece of virgin land. We must understand clearly the farmers' 
level of prosperity, and make correct evaluations in order to 
establish better policies. 
<H3>  Transferring the surplus labor force is the key to 
increasing farmers' income. </H3>
  [NONGMIN RIBAO] According to your meaning, the goal of 
further reform in the countryside is to increase farmers' 
income. On this point, the central government has all along made 
many policies; but why have there been no substantial gains? 
  [Wu Xiang] That is so. After the masses of farmers had 
resolved the problem of having sufficient food and clothing, 
they went after currency instead of agricultural products. But 
the real result was that increasing production did not increase 
income. The average annual income gain of Chinese farmers from 
1989 to 1991 was only 0.7 percent, lower than the average rate 
before rural reforms were implemented. To increase farmers' 
income, the state has repeatedly raised grain prices, but the 
fact is, while the cost of agriculture has accelerated growth, 
the profits from price rises in the end have not gone to the 
farmers. On the other hand, prices of most agricultural products 
have opened up, some of them approaching the international 
market. Once China is officially back in GATT, the prices in the 
international market will be close to the maximum price of 
agricultural products in the domestic market..., there is plenty 
of evidence that there is only a slight possibility of raising 
farmers' incomes through large scale hikes in the price of 
agricultural products. Therefore, to increase farmers' income we 
should look for ways which lie outside agriculture, and these 
ways are: adjust the industrial structure, vigorously developing 
secondary and tertiary industry, transfer the surplus rural 
labor force, and then gradually enlarging the operational scale 
of agriculture. 
  There is a mutual cause and effect relationship between 
growth in farm income and transfer of the surplus labor force: 
these are two aspects of the same problem, the key to ongoing 
rural reform and development. The more fully we understand this 
problem, the better its resolution, and we can establish good 
circulation within a shorter time. Otherwise, not only 
agriculture, but the rural economy and even the entire nation's 
economic development will suffer serious disruption, making the 
realization of a well-off living standard and the four 
modernizations just empty talk. Moreover, various contradictions 
which affect stability and unity will be more intense, and if 
they pile up, there will be danger of an explosion. This is 
absolutely not an exaggeration just to scare people. At present, 
in China's rural areas there is a surplus labor force of as much 
120 million people, and it is estimated that this will reach 200 
million people by the end of this century. They are desperate to 
leave their hometowns and lands to seek higher incomes, but our 
lack of definite knowledge concerning this aspect has led to, on 
the one hand, the "tide of flowing workers" becoming stronger 
every year, and bringing massive social problems with it. On the 
other hand, the majority of farmers must remain in the 
countryside against their will, and keep on planting. This often 
creates misconceptions, hiding the seriousness of the problem; 
indeed, this is exactly where the danger lies. It is high time 
that we give a great deal of attention to this problem and deal 
with it. 
<H3>  The labor force transfer problem is unclear, regardless of 
whether it is in our understanding or in practice. </H3>
  [NONGMIN RIBAO] The calls for transfer of the labor force 
and 
conversion of the industrial structure are not weak; to what do 
you want us to pay greater attention? 
  [Wu Xiang] Since the 14th Party Congress of the CPC fixed 
the socialist market economy as our target model of reform, the 
voices calling for us to pay attention to the problem of 
farmers' income growth have become stronger. The central 
government and the State Council have issued repeated 
injunctions to reduce farmers' burden and increase investment in 
agriculture. This session of the central government's conference 
on rural work again stressed the problems of agriculture, the 
countryside, and farmers. Therefore, resolution of the problems 
is getting closer. But one point that has not been clarified and 
resolved completely is that farmers' income growth and transfer 
of the rural labor force are the keys for agriculture, the 
countryside, and farmers; therefore, it is really impossible to 
resolve the problem through agricultural slogans. 
  [NONGMIN RIBAO] What do you think is blocking people's 
understanding of the problem? 
  [Wu Xiang] Generally speaking, concepts and ideas produced 
under the planned economy system still exercise a malign 
influence, the only difference being that it pops up in 
different forms at different times. 
  From the first organization of cooperatives to just before 
rural reform, millions of farmers contributed firsthand an 
accumulation of 600 billion to 800 billion yuan, but they were 
unable to share in the civilization and development brought on 
by industrial development. Under the dual urban-rural structure 
established in this way, farmers have no freedom to move and 
select their jobs, and even the children of farmers are bound to 
the land with their parents, bringing on a situation whereby 800 
million farmers, engaged in making the food we eat, do not have 
enough to eat or wear themselves. This remains fresh in our 
minds. We must take serious reference from this historical fact. 
Fundamentally, the key point in China's reform is to break the 
dual structure which separates urban and rural, and transfer 
large batches of the surplus rural labor force from agricultural 
production. But in practice, there are still some leading cadres 
who just do not understand this. 
  In 1985, there was a several tens of billion jin drop in 
grain production, followed by three years of rising and falling. 
Cities and some leading departments reacted strongly to this; 
they thought that the problems stemmed from agricultural, even 
rural, policies; some people even argued that these ups and 
downs in grain production was actually following the ups and 
downs in policies. 
  But farmers had a totally different reaction, because the 
drop of grain production was compensated for by the rapid 
development of township enterprises, so farmers' incomes still 
showed some increase. What is more important, millions of 
farmers found new hope in the development of township 
enterprises. China's farmers have surmounted massive obstacles 
by their surprising indomitability and will, they have supported 
development of township enterprises, and have been called "an 
abruptly emerging new force," but some comrades are still 
suspicious of township enterprises, even looking down upon them 
or speaking accusingly of them. 
  In fact, the bulk of farmers' income growth has come from 
township enterprises, this has been proven by practice: "without 
industry, there is no prosperity." But people who hold the old 
concepts of the planned economy system can't see the positive 
aspects of developing township enterprises, and of course they 
find it impossible to put the emphasis in developing the 
countryside and the rural economy on developing township 
enterprises, transferring the labor force, and increasing 
farmers' income. 
<H3>  The prerequisite of no stability without agriculture is "no 
agricultural stability without industry." </H3>
  [NONGMIN RIBAO] Quite a few people think that so much 
emphasis on farmers' income growth and transfer of the rural 
labor force will affect grain production's lasting and stable 
growth. What is your thinking on this? 
  [Wu Xiang] My answer is don't worry. Everyone knows that the 
problem of feeding over 1.1 billion people is a huge task, one 
that cannot be sluggish at any time. If there should be any 
trouble in grain production, no one can help us. The problem is 
how to guarantee the continuous and stable development of 
agriculture and grain production. Practice has proven that 
producing grain solely with grain production in mind, or farming 
solely with farming in mind, will just lead us down a narrow 
path, and this doesn't work, especially under market economic 
conditions. When there were major problems with township 
enterprises, there were some people accusing it of being the 
evil root of the rise and fall in grain production, their reason 
being that the best labor in the countryside all moved to 
industry to make money. In fact, there is no evidence for this 
talk. In some developed coastal regions, with cuts in the amount 
of land for grain, total grain production dropped, but there was 
a rise in the per mu average production, not a decline. 
Furthermore, there was a dramatic rise in agricultural 
productive value. In the Wenzhou area, among more than six 
million people, the average land owned was just over four fen. 
This is even less than in southern Jiangsu and the Pearl River 
Delta. Despite the vigorous development of family industry and 
township enterprises, the agricultural productive value still 
rose continuously, both the average production per mu and total 
production. The three years of rising and falling grain 
production which began in 1985 involved complex, multifaceted 
problems which require detailed analysis. I won't talk about 
that here. But it is certain that the fundamental root of 
China's poverty and backwardness is that we have 900 million 
farmers engaging in producing food grains. Wherever there are 
fewer farmers directly engaged in the food grains business, 
where the labor force has transferred, and township enterprises 
are developed, then farmers' income have increased, and there 
has been hope for agricultural modernization. So, I believe the 
prerequisite of "no stability without agriculture" should be "no 
agricultural stability without industry." 
  If we really want to guarantee the continuous and stable 
development of agriculture and grain production, and not just 
talk about it, we must "play the pipe backwards"; that is, first 
to pay attention to developing agriculture, developing township 
enterprises, transferring the surplus labor force, adjusting the 
industrial structure, and gradually enlarging the operational 
scale of agriculture. 
<H5>  What should the future course be? </H5>
  [NONGMIN RIBAO] In your opinion, how should we be dealing 
with the current problems in the countryside, in agriculture, 
and with farmers. And how to get started? 
  [Wu Xiang] Based on the facts mentioned above, I suggest 
such countermeasures as: 
  1) While emphasizing that the problems of agriculture, the 
rural areas, and farmers are relevant to the fundamental 
problems of the entire situation of the party and the state, we 
should be emphatic that farmers' income growth and transfer of 
the rural labor force is the key to these problems; it should be 
taken as the starting point of all rural policies, and be put in 
the forefront of all rural work. Leading organs and cadres at 
all levels should take this as their guiding thought. There 
should also be education in this for all rural cadres, for 
renewed concepts and changed ideas are prerequisite to resolving 
these problems. 
  2) To guarantee continuous and stable growth in agriculture 
and grain production, we should discontinue the old way of 
farming just with farming in mind, and producing grain with just 
grain production in mind. We must gradually reduce and even stop 
the administrative interference of planned economics, taking new 
measures appropriate to the laws of economics, to protect grain 
planting families from loss, and insure that grain-selling 
regions make profits. Implement an agricultural development 
policy of high production, excellent quality, and high 
efficiency. I believe that putting excellent quality ahead of 
high production is more scientific in many respects. 
  3) Enlarge our vision of agricultural development: we should 
go from the small scale of 1.5 billion mu of cultivated land to 
the large scale of 9.65 million square kilometers. Vigorously 
develop agriculture, carry out construction in mountainous 
areas, engage in the breeding business and the processing of 
agricultural products and by-products; in this way a certain 
amount of the labor force will be absorbed in local areas. 
Providing work as a form of relief and constructing roads in the 
near future can not only add job opportunities but also create 
the conditions for selling agricultural products and 
by-products. We should extend the concept of capital 
construction on farmland to capital construction in agriculture, 
making for continuous improvement in the rural infrastructure. 
  4) The vigorous development of township enterprises and 
small 
towns is the major channel for increasing farmers' income and 
transferring the rural labor force. The eastern region should 
pay more attention to developing export-oriented enterprises, 
improving their technical level, striving for high level, big 
scale, and excellent quality. The central and western regions 
absolutely must not stop developing because of their poor 
foundation and past lack of success; rather, they should 
organize cooperative projects between the eastern and western 
regions which are based on local situations, attracting capital 
and technology, developing competitive products, converting 
their resources advantage into a merchandizing advantage. Small 
towns are the seat of secondary and tertiary industry, and it 
just won't do to not develop small towns, especially when it 
comes to developing service industries. Counties are the link 
between urban and rural, models for small town development 
throughout the whole county. Doing a good job of comprhensive 
reform and county construction at the county level is of extreme 
importance in developing the rural economy. 
  5) There must be deeper reform, and accelerated market 
development. Without a pluralistic market entity, there will be 
no market economy. Therefore, we should encourage simultaneous 
development of the State owned, collective, privately owned, and 
individual economies. Defining the property rights for 
individual and privately owned operations, powerful competition, 
and substantial efficiency wil have an outstanding effect in 
absorbing surplus labor. We should develop these with complete 
confidence. The joint-stock system is just unfolding in the 
countryside, we should give full support to promoting its 
further healthy development, maximizing its role of allocating 
social resources. As for developing the commercial market, we 
should establish markets for the various key factors, especially 
the labor force market and financial market, develop various 
intermediary organizations, cooperative organizations, and 
scientific and technical service organizations, linking the 
markets and the farmers. This will contribute to improving 
farmers' income. 
  Calculating by what is needed to accomplish the goal of 
being 
well off, the annual rate of increase in farmers' income should 
be 5 percent in the 1990s, but due to deficits in the first four 
years of the decade, it will be harder in the next six years. 
Therefore, we should not miss the opportunity to establish 
correct targets and missions for further rural reforms. 
Moreover, it is urgent that we adopt take appropriate 
corresponding policies, for we absolutely cannot lower our guard. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20538 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wu Xiang, Provincial Officials View Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<H4>   Provincial Officials Views </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0282B Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 15 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0282B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mao Xiaorui (3029 0879 3843) and Wang Yanyan </F>
(3769 3601 3601): "Adjusting the Structure, Empowering, Changing 
Habits of Thought, Considering the Overall Situation--Directors 
of Some Provincial Agricultural Bureaus Discuss the Problem of 
Farmers' Income"] 
  [Text] Developing township enterprises is the key to 
increasing farmers' income 
  Yu Jingzhong [0151 2417 1813], Director of the Jiangsu 
Agricultural Bureau: The average income of farmers in the 
Suzhou, Wuxi, and Changzhou areas of Jiangsu is currently over 
2,000 yuan, while in northern Jiangsu it is less than 1,000 
yuan. The difference is due to township enterprises. Practice 
proves that developing township enterprises is the key to 
increasing farmers' income. 
  One argument is that developing township enterprises will 
affect agricultural production, but really, this is totally 
untrue. My province is the birthplace of township enterprises, 
and currently, the gross productive value and export for earning 
foreign exchange by township enterprises in the province 
occupies 50 percent of the province's total productive value and 
export for earning foreign exchange respectively. It really is 
like "half of the country." Meanwhile, township enterprises in 
Jiangsu Province have created the means by which industry can 
help agriculture. This is especially the case in southern 
Jiangsu where, annually and per capita, every township employee 
contributes 120 yuan to the agriculture development fund, 60 
percent of agricultural expenditures comes from township 
enterprises, and agriculture and industry in southern Jiangsu 
have entered a "period of mutual assistance." Agricultural 
products continue to increase. Southern Jiangsu's experience 
proves that there is "no agricultural stability without 
industry." 
  At present, the biggest problem in Jiangsu is how to improve 
farmers' income in the northern part of the province. Our 
general thinking is to do our utmost to go the way of merging 
trade, industry, and agriculture in order to develop agriculture 
as we link up the northern and southern parts to develop 
township enterprises, develop multiple operations which will 
promote sideline industries, supplying their primary 
accumulation to township enterprises in northern Jiangsu. The 
vegetable processing company run by the Agriculture Bureau in 
Lian Yun Gang municipality selected the "company plus farming 
families" way. It created over $7 million in 1993 from exports, 
with a gross profit of 15 million yuan. Farmers' income 
increased dramatically. 
  In 1993, township enterprises in Jiangsu absorbed as many as 
10 million people from the surplus labor force. 
<H3>  We must correctly handle the contradiction between making 
farmers prosperous and making contributions to the state. </H3>
  Deng Daokun [6772 6670 0981], Director of the 
Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Bureau of Hubei: If 
farmers are not prosperous -- then they will themselves be 
lagging in their contributions to agriculture, and stable 
development of agriculture will be impossible; it will also make 
it hard to work the rural market, which will affect the working 
of the entire domestic economy; meanwhile, it will cause a lot 
of political problems. So, the problem of increasing farmers' 
income is not only an economic problem but also a political 
problem. Due to the relatively low profitability of agriculture, 
farmers now have little enthusiasm for planting grains. The key 
to resolving this problem is to balance the contradiction 
between making farmers prosperous and making contributions to 
the state. I think we must do the following several things well 
right now in order to resolve this contradiction: 
  1) Under the prerequisite of complying with value laws, 
implement efficient market adjustment for agricultural products. 
  2) To guarantee efficient supply and accomplish 
macroadjustment and control, we must set up a storage system for 
major agricultural products, and carry out adjustment by means 
of such economic means as benefits, taxes, and prices, along 
with relevant polices. This will guarantee the current profits 
of producers of major and big agricultural products, and make 
their income no lower than that of others engaged in 
nonagricultural industries. 
  3) As major agriculture producing areas still require 
stronger adjustment of their industrial structure, develop "one 
excellent and two high" agriculture, to increase the incomes of 
farmers in major producing areas. 
  4) Establish a protective agriculture risk fund system, to 
protect major and big agricultural products and by-products from 
substantial price fluctuations. 
  5) Vigorously develop secondary and tertiary industry, 
transfer the surplus labor force, accomplish intensive farming 
in agriculture, and operate on a scale which will improve 
current labor productivity. In addition, we must perfect the 
market system. 
  If we do not take efficient steps to increase the income of 
grain planting farmers, it will be hard to continue agricultural 
production. 
<H3>  The key point in increasing farmers' income is to establish 
extensive agriculture concepts. </H3>
  Zhao Xiaodao [6392 1420 6670], Director of the 
Agriculture Bureau of Zhejiang: the key to growth is to 
adjust and perfect the agricultural structure. We must 
establish extensive agricultural concepts, adjust the structure 
and develop "one excellent two high" agriculture, including 
development of secondary and tertiary industry. It won't work if 
grain production just has grain production in mind; we must look 
at agriculture via the market economy concept. 
  The per capita annual income of Zhejiang farmers is 1,600 
yuan, but there are still some farmers making between 400 and 
500 yuan, including over 2 million farmers who still have 
trouble obtaining sufficient food and clothing. Due to the 
development of secondary and tertiary industry, 15 percent of 
farmers have an income of over 3,000 yuan. So the key to 
increasing farmers income is to develop secondary and tertiary 
industry. 
  Based on the current situation, what is important is to 
resolve the problem of low comparative profits from grains, 
cotton, and vegetable oil, while developing secondary and 
tertiary industry. Chiefly, the price reforms for agricultural 
products and by-products must support each other; on the one 
hand, we should put price subsidies on productive links, clarify 
property rights, stabilize contracted rights, make operational 
rights more flexible to promote operation of scale, and change 
the situation of inefficient agricultural operation of scale. 
Taking the road of capital construction has prompt efficiency 
for backward mountainous areas. 
  In addition, when formulating concrete measures, we must 
resolve the problem of poor implementation. 
<H5>  The biggest national concern is to increase farmers' income. </H5>
  Wang Shousen [3769 1108 2773], Director of the 
Agriculture Bureau of Shaanxi: In the last year, the per capita 
income of farmers in Shanxi was 559 yuan, which was 225 yuan 
less than the national per capita farmers' income. This year, 
the gap is even greater, increasing to 250 yuan. There are many 
reasons for this situation, but the major problem is backward 
thoughts and concepts, not having jumped out of the narrow 
circle of self-sufficiency to have sufficient food and clothing. 
This then leads to slow adjustment of industrial structure, 
undeveloped township enterprises, a low level of 
industrialization for agricultural products, and a loss of 
value-adding. 
  The important problem now is to study why farmers' income is 
not high, and why their enthusiasm and investment in agriculture 
has declined. Based on current phenomena, it is due chiefly to 
the rising prices of productive materials. The policy of rising 
grains and cotton was just issued last year. When wheat has just 
been planted, there are eight months to the harvest, and there 
is a tendency for the prices of productive materials to rise. 
Therefore, there must be a protective system for organizing 
production, for if there is any trouble, who can farmers depend 
on? Who will take care of farmers who suffer disaster? If we 
free the prices of productive materials, to what degree can it 
go? What is unreasonable now is that whatever farmers investing 
is linked with markets, but whatever farmers sell is linked with 
the planned economy. If let go, the income of grain planting 
farmers will go lower and lower. So we have to consider 
carefully the transfer of profits, and consider the farmers' 
ability to assume burdens. Overall, the state hasn't figured 
out a way to develop agricultural products according to the laws 
of a market economy. 
  I believe that the state cannot rely on raising the prices 
of 
agricultural products through financial subsidy as the way of 
increasing farmers' income, and not consider other ways. If 
farmers were subsidized through a per capita annual fiscal 
increase, they would only get 30 yuan each. To increase farmers' 
income we must depend on going out beyond agriculture, extending 
to nonagricultural industry, doing fine and deep processing to 
resolve the problem of employing the surplus labor force. In 
other words, develop township enterprises. Also, the government 
has to provide leadership and support in the detailed work of 
increasing farmers' incomes. In 1992, the gross output of apples 
in Shaanxi was 840,000 tons, which created sales difficulties. 
In 1993, the gross output was 1.12 million tons, but the 
government took energetic measures, taking advantage of Xian's 
fame, holding apple trade talks, negotiating transportation 
problems on behalf of the provincial party committee.... 
Through the efforts of leaders and masses, there have been no 
apple sales difficulties this year. Farmers say that the 
provincial party committee has done a good thing for them. This 
issue taught us that we can't just simply push farmers to the 
markets, we have to help them create markets. The government has 
an undeniable responsibility in this. At the same time, it also 
instructed us what agricultural departments should do under the 
market economy. 
  We must also strengthen and accelerate establishment and 
perfection of the market operation system. Overall, the biggest 
national concerning of China is to increase farmers' income, and 
this is our principal mission at present. 


Comparison Chart of Yearly Average Income, Consumption, Farmers and 
Nonfarmers (Unit/yuan) 

Year         Farmer Net     Consumption         Year         Nonfarmer Net 
             Income                                          Income 

1978         113.57         343.44              1978         132 

1979         160.17                             1979         152 

1980         191.33                             1980         173 

1981         223.44         500.40              1981         192 

1982         270.11         535.32              1982         210 

1983         309.77         572.88              1983         232 

1984         355.33         660.12              1984         265 

1985         397.60         748.92              1985         324 

1986         423.76         909.96              1986         351 

1987         462.55         1012.20             1987         389 

1988         544.94         1192.12             1988         473 

1989         601.51         1387.81             1989         513 

1990         686.31         1522.79             1990         524 

1991         708.55         1713.10             1991         570 

1992         783.99         2031.63             1992         648 

1993         809.67         2234.53 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20539 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar018___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-018 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Causes, Solutions to Rural Migrant Upsurge </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0304A Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] in Chinese No 12, 20 Dec 93 pp 33-36 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0304A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhu Ze (2612 3419): "Job-Seeking Peasants Pour </F>
Into Cities"] 
  [Text] In recent years more and more rural workers have 
been pouring into cities and economically developed areas in 
search of jobs, creating a large-scale interregional migration. 
In the days following the Spring Festival each year, in 
particular, wave upon wave of peasants come flooding in, 
overburdening the rail system across the nation and filling bus 
and train stations in large and mid-sized cities to capacity, 
forming a "rural migrant upsurge" that cannot be held back. The 
"upsurge" in rural migrants started in the late 1980's and grew 
explosively after 1990. There is no sign at all it will 
diminish. At present about 50 to 60 millon rural migrants are on 
the move each year, with 24 million of them from the six 
provinces of Sichuan, Jiangxi, Hunan, Hubei, Henan, and Anhui 
alone. 
<H6>  I </H6>
  One of the direct causes of the "rural migrant upsurge" is 
China's huge rural population, which creates a massive 
oversupply of rural labor in absolute terms. Since the switch 
from agriculture to other sectors of the economy without leaving 
one's village cannot absorb all the many redundant workers, the 
outward migration of some peasants in search of jobs is 
inevitable. Secondly, the small scale of farming, the widening 
price scissors between industrial and agricultural products, the 
overburden on peasants, and other factors have depressed the 
profitability of agriculture, particularly farming. Unable to 
get rich by working the land, some peasants have hit the road in 
search of money-making opportunities. 
  The "rural migrant upsurge" is also caused by a more 
deep-seated reason, namely that in China urbanization lags 
behind industrialization severely. Typically, as a nation 
becomes more and more industrialized (as demonstrated by the 
growth of the secondary and tertiary sectors as a share of the 
national economy), the level of urbanization too rises steadily 
(the main indicator being the percentage of the nation's total 
population that is urban). This is the outcome of changes in the 
employment structure, which, in turn, are caused by changes in 
the industrial structure. It is also a result of the operations 
of the market mechanism in the process of resource allocation. 
All developed nations in the world without exception achieved 
industrialization at the same time as they underwent 
urbanization. Today those countries are about 80 percent 
urbanized, above 90 percent in Britain and the United States. In 
developing nations, the figure is 40 percent or so. In China the 
extent of urbanization is only 28 percent. (Footnote 1) The 
ratio between industrial output value and agricultural output 
value is now 7.5:2.5, in contrast to the 3:7 recorded in the 
early days of the PRC. At the same time, however, the balance 
between the urban population and rural population remains stuck 
at 2:8, a unique phenomenon in the world. Apart from a soaring 
birth rate, this state of affairs was mainly caused by the fact 
that for many years in the past, industrialization in China took 
place independently of urbanization in an environment of mutual 
urban/rural isolation. Through the exchange of unequal values 
between industry and agriculture, between the city and the 
countryside, agriculture provided urban industrial development 
with a steady flow of accumulated funds. Meanwhile, the 
permanent residence registration system, food supply system, 
employment system, education, health care, and insurance system 
worked to keep large numbers of workers in the countryside, 
further skewing the existing dual social structure. China has 
now put together a full line-up of industries, but the failure 
of urbanization to catch up with industrialization has saddled 
the nation with a heavy social burden. Modernization in China is 
comparable to a hobbling pony with a big cart hitched up to it. 
Already the "rural migrant upsurge" reflects the social crisis 
brought on by the lag in urbanization. 
<H6>  II. </H6>
  The "rural migrant upsurge" has disrupted and impacted 
China's economy in ways profound and varied. On the positive 
side: 
  1) It has spurred the economic development of cities and 
developed areas. By leaving their villages and taking jobs or 
engaging in business elsewhere, redundant rural workers have 
made good the labor shortages in migrant-importing areas, 
thereby aiding their economic construction with low-cost labor. 
Nowadays a host of peasant workers are heavily involved in a 
range of fields, including urban construction, the textile 
industry, transportation, commerce, the catering industry, and 
domestic services, making themselves indispensable to the 
effective operations of the cities. Most peasant workers are 
employed in jobs that involve hard tiring work in filthy 
conditions. They satisfy the labor demand in those lines of work 
and fill the gaps in the lineup of industries of the host 
locations, at the same time making the lives of local residents 
easier. A leading comrade on the agricultural commission of 
Guangdong Province once commented that the contributions made by 
male and female workers from other provinces to the economy of 
Guangdong should be written into history. 
  2) Rural migrants bring back to their villages funds, 
technology, information, and managerial experience, injecting 
new doses of energy into the rural economy. Studies show that 
peasant migrants from the six provinces of Sichuan, Jiangxi, 
Hunan, Hubei, Henan, and Anhui alone generated 25 billion yuan 
in incomes for their villages in 1992. Even more significant, 
peasant migrants become more conscious of the market economy and 
have a chance to broaden their outlook, overhaul their thinking, 
and improve their quality. 
  3) Migrant workers have relieved the competition for jobs in 
migrant-exporting areas and created the conditions for the 
introduction of scale management in agriculture. In China, a 
populous nation with little land, land has been operated on a 
small scale with limited efficiency, which has become the 
principal impediment to the modernization of agriculture. The 
only way to modernize Chinese agriculture is to channel the 
surplus labor into the secondary and tertiary industries and 
introduce scale management. After taking up jobs or going into 
business elsewhere for many years, some peasants are eager to 
contract out their land, creating a rare opportunity for the 
circulation and concentration of land and the application of 
scale management to land. If only we take effective measures and 
provide proper guidance, the scale management of land will be 
accelerated. 
  Undeniably, the current interregional migration of rural 
workers has also inevitably caused a string of social problems. 
For starters, it has intensified the pressure on the 
transportation system and heightened the demand for urban 
infrastructural facilities and services essential to daily life. 
According to statistics compiled by the Ministry of Railways, 
railroads across the nation carried an average of 3.2 million 
passengers daily between late January and early February this 
year, an increase of 300,000 over the daily average for the 
15-day period before the Spring Festival. Of the total number of 
passengers, 74 percent were rural migrants. The excessive 
increase in passenger traffic meant reduced freight transport 
capacity. Secondly, rural migrants have put social law and order 
under enormous strains. Many criminals have found their way into 
the army of rural workers on the move and disrupt law and order. 
Thirdly, the lack of effective ways to manage the floating 
population also means a loss of control over this segment of the 
population as far as family planning is concerned. 
<H6>  III. </H6>
  The effective operation of the socialist market economy 
requires the free circulation of elements of production, 
including labor, between different industries and different 
localities. In this sense, the inter-regional movement of rural 
workers and the resultant rural migrant upsurge have their 
raison d'etre and inevitability. For this reason, we cannot hope 
to solve the inter-regional movement of rural workers, 
particularly the rural migrant upsurge, simply by blocking it; 
it is not to be blocked. A few years ago many cities had these 
migrants surrounded, tried chasing them away, or kept them out; 
however, the migration of rural workers has never been totally 
banned. As a special form of the movement of rural manpower, the 
rural migrant upsurge will remain part of the overall 
industrialization and urbanization of the Chinese countryside. 
We should be fully prepared ideologically for this and respond 
with the right policy. Making the most of the situation, we 
should lower the costs to the individual and society of the 
interregional movement of labor and the risks associated with 
it, thus minimizing the negative impacts of the rural migrant 
upsurge. 
  In dealing with the "rural migrant upsurge," we must adhere 
to the principle of "tackling both the underlying cause of a 
disease as well as its symptoms" and choose the appropriate 
strategy based on what the main problem is at a given time in a 
given place. 
  In the near term, our principal strategy should be to 
eliminate the haphazardness and spontaneity of interregional 
labor movement and make such movement more orderly and better 
organized by nurturing a labor market and creating a new 
mechanism for the circulation of labor. Specifically: 
  1) The government should step up the macroguidance and 
coordination of the interregional movement of rural labor. The 
central government should set up an authoritative body devoted 
exclusively to the macromanagement of the interregional movement 
of labor or put an existing agency in charge of such management. 
The duties and functions of the new body should include: 
Gathering, analyzing, and disseminating data on the labor 
markets in the migrant-importing and migrant-exporting areas; 
balancing labor supply with labor demand on a regional basis; 
and drawing up policies, laws, and regulations to promote and 
protect labor movement. Level 1 provinces, particularly the 
principal labor-importing and labor-exporting areas, should set 
up inter-regional labor coordination centers and begin active 
cooperation in labor matters. By entering into inter-provincial 
labor cooperation with eight provinces and regions including 
Sichuan, for instance, Guangdong has moderated the flood of 
rural workers pouring into it from the eight provinces and 
regions. This it accomplished by providing information on the 
job market in Guangdong and intensifying market guidance. 
  2) A mighty effort should be made to develop a variety of 
intermediate labor service organizations, gradually forming a 
socialized service system that includes information 
dissemination, consulting, job referral, and training. Such a 
system is critical to broadening the scope of market regulation 
and lowering the costs and risks of the de-agriculturalization 
of rural manpower. Intermediate organizations, particularly 
job-referral centers, should allow and even encourage private 
groups and individuals to go into business on their own. China 
has a vast pool of surplus labor; the government alone cannot be 
relied upon to solve the whole problem by itself. But government 
departments can play a leading role in providing information and 
consulting services. Nobody makes money providing these 
services, yet they do a lot of social good. Most private 
organizations have neither the capability nor the will to 
provide those services. By making full use of existing organized 
resources and information tools, government agencies, in 
contrast, are in a position to collect and transmit 
authoritative information on the supply and demand of labor. 
  3) Regional labor supply-demand exchanges should be set up 
at 
major transportation hubs and in the leading cities of areas in 
demand of labor. A labor supply-demand exchange, on the one 
hand, will bring together the two parties at either end of the 
labor supply-demand equation as well as intermediate 
organizations. Its operations may also help identify wage levels 
and obtain and transmit information. 
  4) Law- and regulation-making should be accelerated as 
appropriate and the management of the labor market must be 
improved, including the protection of the legitimate rights and 
interests of the workers, hiring enterprises, and intermediate 
organizations, as well as the regulation of their conduct; the 
preservation of fair market competition; and the effective 
management of the floating population through the introduction 
of a registration system for workers entering or leaving a 
jurisdiction, for instance. 
  In the long haul, solving the problem of rural worker 
migration at its root entails, for one thing, the inclusion of 
the issue of rural employment into the scope of national 
economic and social development planning and the elevation of 
the realization of full employment in the countryside to a major 
policy goal for governments at all levels. Secondly, it involves 
searching for a path to rural industrialization and a rural 
labor de-agriculturalization model suited to China's national 
conditions. To do so is to stem the rural migrant upsurge at its 
source. 
  Rural industrialization is an inescapable stage in China's 
modernization. Taking a lesson from successful industrialization 
in countries around the world, particularly industrialized 
nations, and bearing in mind what we have learned from the 
course of industrialization in China itself since the founding 
of the PRC, rural industrialization in this nation should 
include the following basic elements and requirements: 
  1) Township and town enterprises were and remain the 
principal vehicle for rural industrialization in China as well 
as the main conduit through which the rural work force leaves 
agriculture for other sectors of the economy. Already by late 
1992 township and town enterprises had absorbed 108 million 
workers. In more recent years, though, with technological 
advances accelerating in township and town enterprises, the 
trend of capital replacing labor has become increasingly more 
notable and labor absorption has slowed. How can township and 
town enterprises continue to absorb large numbers of redundant 
workers while maintaining fast growth? The key is to find the 
right technological mix and create the right industrial 
structure based on the resource situation and economic 
conditions. As far as technological mix is concerned, because 
China has an ample labor supply but little funds, township and 
town enterprises should remain predominantly labor-intensive for 
many years to come. This is the fund-accumulating business 
start-up stage when enterprises should substitute capital with 
labor to the greatest extent possible and increase employment 
opportunities. Such a development no doubt will have positive 
practical implications for most areas in China, particularly 
those in south and central China. We are not ruling out the 
possibility of developed areas and some enterprises taking the 
lead in upgrading the industrial structure or technological mix 
ahead of others. As for the industrial structure, special 
emphasis should be put on the development of the agricultural 
byproducts processing industry and the tertiary industry so as 
to reverse the trend of growing structural convergence between 
township and town enterprises and urban industry, and optimize 
industrial distribution. At present the agricultural byproducts 
processing industry accounts for less than 20 percent of the 
gross agricultural output value, while the corresponding figures 
in developed nations usually double or triple that. Rising 
living standards among urban and rural households in the future 
will translate into bright and growing prospects for the 
agricultural byproducts processing industry. The size of the 
tertiary sector as a share of the national economy reflects the 
degree of modernization of a nation. In a developed country, the 
tertiary sector makes up 60 to 70 percent of domestic output; in 
a developing nation, between 35 and 40 percent on the average; 
and in China, 27 percent, including a mere 14 percent in the 
countryside. Any substantial expansion of the tertiary sector 
will greatly increase job opportunities. 
  2) Industrialization in China should take the road of 
appropriate concentration so that rural industrialization and 
rural urbanization will proceed in tandem with each other. 
Concentrated distribution economizes on land resources and 
investments in the infrastructure. With concentrated 
distribution, we can also make the most of regions, create a 
"critical mass" effect, and build up urban centers from which 
funds and technology can flow to the surrounding areas. Even 
more important, concentrated distribution helps spur the 
formation and development of cities, stimulate the growth of the 
tertiary sector, and close the gap between the city and the 
countryside characteristic of a dual social structure. The 
majority of China's township and town enterprises are widely 
scattered among the countless villages and hamlets and are 
closely interwoven into the fabric of their rural communities. 
The result is a pattern of distribution in which "every little 
village has its own enterprise." This fragmented pattern of 
distribution is the product of a specific set of social and 
economic conditions, primarily the support in the form of cheap 
land and low-cost labor an enterprise could derive from its 
community and other people connected to it by blood or local 
ties. This kind of support is often of critical importance to a 
fledgling enterprise. Needless to say, the drawbacks of 
fragmented distribution are obvious. For one thing, it is 
immensely wasteful of land resources. Secondly, these 
enterprises have little access to information and are not 
located on major transportation routes. The web of relationships 
and ties within rural society and communal administrative 
interference combine to push up business costs to an excessive 
level. Thirdly, the fragmented distribution of township and town 
enterprises does nothing to bring about a modernized 
industrialized society or create an industrial civilization 
while retarding urbanization. A communal rural society lacks the 
environment and conditions conductive to the formation of a 
modern enterprise system. For this reason, once they have grown 
and matured, enterprises do their best to congregate in 
townships, freeing themselves from the restraints of communal 
interests and achieving external economies. Given the conditions 
in China, concentrated distribution and fragmented distribution 
will continue to coexist in the future. In the vast interior, 
especially south and central China, the development of township 
and town enterprises is still inseparable from communal support. 
In the long run, however, concentrated distribution will replace 
fragmented distribution to become the dominant model for rural 
industrialization and the de-agriculturalization of rural labor 
in China. Governments at all levels should create conditions for 
the relative concentration of township and town enterprises to 
make sure that rural industrialization and urbanization proceed 
at the same pace. Henceforth township and town enterprises may 
develop revolving around cities. In view of the fact that large 
cities in China are already severely overcrowded, most township 
and town enterprises should be concentrated in small and 
medium-sized cities, county towns, and their surrounding core 
market towns. Urbanization being a gradual process, we must be 
careful not to over-build with no regard to the circumstances. A 
workable method is to take the county as the unit and single out 
for special assistance a number of selected townships or market 
towns that have a geographical, economic, or human-resource 
edge. Scientific planning should also be practiced. 
  3) Gradually reform the dual permanent residence 
registration 
system that separates the city from the countryside, thereby 
creating the conditions for the free movement of labor between 
industries, between the city and the countryside, and between 
regions, and for the formation of a unified nation-wide labor 
market. A permanent residence registration system that divides 
the city from the countryside does not satisfy the requirements 
of the development of a modern market economy. Under that 
system, being a peasant or a city resident becomes hereditary, 
something passed from one generation to the next. The 
possibility of a peasant becoming a city resident is almost 
non-existent, fundamentally blocking the road leading to the 
urbanization of the rural population and impeding the free 
movement of labor between the city and the countryside and from 
one region to another. For this reason, the existing irrational 
permanent residence registration system must be reformed and 
ultimately abolished. Considering China's national conditions 
and the countless contradictions accumulated through the years, 
we must reform the permanent residence registration system in 
stages in order of priority. In the short haul, we must first 
deregulate residence registration in the seats of county towns 
and rural townships. Peasants should be allowed to raise funds 
among themselves to build a township where they should be free 
to settle down. Moreover, permanent residence registration 
management should be significantly relaxed in small and 
medium-sized cities. Since a majority of small and medium-sized 
cities in China have not reached an appropriate scale, the 
absorption of some peasants will help them boost their economies 
of scale tremendously. Thirdly, deregulate in a small way some 
industries in large cities so as to make good the labor 
shortages in those trades that involve hard and tough work amid 
filthy conditions and accelerate the rationalization of the 
urban economic structure. Fourthly, apply a flexible residence 
registration system to the floating population in order to solve 
some of its problems, such as having more children than allowed 
and order-and-order problems. Regarding rural workers who have 
signed contracts lasting over a year with hiring units 
elsewhere, we must allow their residence registration to move 
with them and go where they go. They should register as 
temporary residents of the jurisdiction where their jobs are 
located and submit to the management of the local authorities 
and receive social welfare in accordance with the law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20540 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Calls For Abandoning Old ConceptS </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0161A Beijing ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN in Chinese No 1, 1 Jan 
94 pp 12-13 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0161A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Qiu Xiaohua (6726 2556 5478): "Further Eliminate </F>
Remnants of Old Concepts"] 
  [Text] Anyone who has been paying close attention to 
China's experience in opening and reform can see that every time 
there is some major accomplishment in this area, it is always 
accompanied by a major breakthrough in people's conceptual 
views. The history of China's 15 years of reform is really a 
history of the Chinese people's continually studying, debating, 
liberating their thinking and changing their ideas, all under 
the leading banner of Deng Xiaoping's "building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics". 
  After Deng Xiaoping's visit to the south of China in 1992, 
many people breathed a sigh of relief. They believed that the 
theoretical puzzle which had been murky for years had now been 
clarified now by comrade Xiaoping's thunderous voice, and the 
theoretical barriers to further reform and opening theory had 
been eradicated, and the only question remaining in establishing 
the socialist market economic system was how to operate it. But 
I am not so optimistic. 
  To be sure, the 14th Party Congress determined that China's 
reform objective is to establish the new socialist market 
economic system, thus ending disputes over the goals of reform. 
It reached agreements concerning the general direction of reform 
for the party and the nation, such as, "the ice jam has been 
broken, the shipping channels are open." However, to really 
break the invisible conceptual shackles on reform and opening 
and social development, there is much hard work still remaining 
to be done. This is because it will for some time be hard to 
heal the remnants of old concepts produced by traditional 
socialist theory and practice, and these are still preventing us 
from going forward. These "remnants" concentrate on three 
aspects: 1) "Is it the socialism or capitalism"; 2) "Is it State 
ownership or private ownership"; 3) "What is the real 
relationship between plan and market"? Although comrade 
Xiaoping's speech on his visit to the south of China brought 
people a great way forward in understanding these questions, it 
is still far from resolving many people's uncertainties. In the 
practice of reform and opening, it is usually the case that 
these ingrained "remnants" quietly pop up, affecting people's 
vision and restricting their activities. 
  So, it is still necessary for us to hold multiple 
"consultations" on these "remnants." 
  --Concerning "capitalism or socialism." In reality, there 
has 
never been fixed, inflexible capitalism, nor fixed, inflexible 
socialism. Real capitalism and socialism have in many regards 
surpassed what they were designed to be in Marx's time. Marx 
never put socialism absolutely in opposition to capitalism; 
rather, he stressed that socialism spun off from capitalism, 
developing capitalism's good factors and abandoning its bad 
aspects. Socialism with Chinese characteristics is no longer the 
socialism in the past meaning of a planned economy rejecting 
markets, but a combination of China's situation and socialism. 
This socialism combines the general socialist system with market 
economics, a socialism which embodies the future course of 
societal development. The nature of socialism is to create much 
higher efficiency than capitalism can, liberating and developing 
productive forces but not other things. Therefore, we shouldn't 
adopt some pattern as the principle, but should adhere totally 
to the principle of development. But regardless of whether we 
call it "socialism" or "capitalism", if it is favorable to 
developing the productive forces, strengthens the Chinese 
people's capacities, and improves their standard of living, we 
will take advantage of it and use it. Otherwise, no matter what 
it is, we should abandon it. 
  --Concerning "state ownership" or "private ownership." It is 
most difficult to change ideas on this question. In spite of 
repeated emphasis by the party and the state that while we "must 
adhere to state ownership being the main part, multiple economic 
elements can still coexist and develop together", many people 
can agree with this verbally, but in their practical work they 
turn pale at the mention of "private ownership". In their view, 
without "the state" title, we cannot have an orthodox public 
ownership system, an example of how the existence of private 
ownership is further restricted. 
  This sort of "private ownership panic" does considerable 
harm 
to developing our national economy. We cannot assume that this 
phenomenon is normal--on the one hand, stressing that the people 
are the masters of society, while on the other hand fearing the 
masters owning a portion of that society's wealth; on the one 
hand believing that three farmers back in the fifties organizing 
a cooperative was "public", while on the hand believing it is 
not public ownership if thousands of people establish 
enterprises by investing in stock. We should be more bold in 
admitting that "private ownership" is to a certain degree an 
intrinsic requirement of socialism, and that socialism 
absolutely does not reject "private ownership"; on the contrary, 
it is more extensive and deep than it is in capitalism. Only in 
this way can it embody social and historical progress. Of 
course, this sort of private ownership within socialism is not a 
totally chaotic mutual massacre, mutually predatory, but an 
orderly, fair, competitive "private ownership" which takes 
socialist public ownership as the dominant factor, under State 
intervention and supervision. This means that this kind of 
"private ownership" is clearly characterized by fairness. 
  "Public" and "private" are interchangeable, they are only 
one 
important aspect in production relationships, just bringing 
about the developmental "pattern" of the productive forces. They 
must both comply with the demands of productive forces, but must 
not replace the productive forces as our standard for judging 
success or failure. If something is favorable to liberating and 
developing productive forces, we should not be obsessed with the 
"public" versus "private" argument. In other words, the only 
standard for accepting or rejecting "public" or "private" should 
be whether it liberates and develops the productive forces. No 
matter whether "private" or "public", if they can promote 
development of the productive forces, then they deserve our 
protection; if not, then we should abandon them. 
  --Concerning "plan" and "market." In the contemporary world, 
there is no economy which is dominated absolutely by a planned 
economy, no matter what type of social system, nor is there an 
absolutely market-dominated economy either, both types are 
always mutually compatible and supportive. Plans always have 
certain subjective features, representative of governmental 
will; markets always have certain objective features, 
representative of mutually supportive rules inside matters. 
"Plan" and "market" are both only means of resource allocation, 
and this is so no matter what their nature, no matter whether 
good or bad, "capitalism" or "socialism." Overall, planned 
measures can be adopted, and so can market means if they are 
favorable to liberating and developing the productive forces. We 
need not be obsessed with debating whether the "plan" or the 
"market" is right or bad, which is the more important or the 
less important. 
  We must completely abandon those "leftist", unsuitable, and 
impractical old concepts of socialism in our minds, we must be 
cured of the remnants of old concepts brought on by traditional 
socialist theory and practice. The only good treatment is 
insistence on the party's ideological line of seeking truth from 
facts. 
  Seeking truth from facts is the quintessence of Mao Zedong 
thought, and is also the moral nature of Deng Xiaoping's basic 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. For a 
long time, especially prior to the 3rd Plenary Session of the 
11th Party Central Committee, we made a big mistake in that 
while building up socialist theory we deviated from the 
ideological line of seeking truth from facts, emphasizing 
thought drawn from abstract principles and ignoring the 
practical base of theories. The result was that while things 
always looked perfect in theory, with nothing to criticize, they 
obviously departed from reality, and the degree of 
accomplishment of these theories was very low. A great person 
has said that the value of a theory lies in the degree of its 
accomplishment. We cannot imagine that a theory can be 
dissociated from reality but still be regarded as correct and 
valuable. The reason why traditional socialist theory has 
suffered setbacks is that it has never really been rooted in the 
fertile land of the various socialist countries. Theory is one 
thing, practice is another, and separating the two must make for 
a lack of vitality. This is also precisely the reason why people 
are calling strongly for reform and theoretical renewal. 
  Therefore, in the process of establishing a socialist market 
economic system, we cannot commit the same mistakes of 
traditional socialist theory, but must adhere to starting out 
from practice. One part of this practice is the basic national 
situation of China. Its major characteristics are: a huge 
population, especially the rural population; backward productive 
forces, especially the backward rural economy, and the gap 
between the urban and the rural; unbalanced regional development 
and a substantial imbalance in industrial development; high 
gross economic value, but a low average level. On the other 
hand, to be a member of the world, we must take into account 
doing business in compliance with international regulations. 
This is our reality, this is where we stand in constructing the 
socialist Chinese market economy, and neither in formulating 
theory nor in renewing theory can we ignore this reality. 
  The three fundamental principles of "if it favorable to 
developing socialist productive forces, if it is favorable to 
strengthening the overall capacity of a socialist country, if it 
is favorable to improving the people's living standard" set 
forth by comrade Xiaoping's speech during his visit to the south 
of China, shine brightly in ideological brilliance. These are 
the basic standards which determine and judge each step in our 
reform, and are also our effective proof in seeking to 
accomplish the goals of reform. In our practice, we must 
abandon those ideologies and concepts that do not match up with 
the "three favorable" principle, and we should persist in the 
correct and correct the wrong, to be worthy of this great 
historical mission. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20541 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Center Forecasts Economic `Early Rebound' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0301A Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 19 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0301A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cast Economic Evaluation Center: "Economic Cycle </F>
Rebounds; Relaxed Environment Remains To Be Created" -- Two 
graphics not reproduced] 
  [Text] Sign of Exceptionally Early Rebound Appears in 
Current Economic Performance 
  At the end of June 1993, the central authorities had 
resolutely adopted a series of measures to stabilize the 
economy. By November, the "overheated" economy was notably 
controlled. The target to exercise macro-economic control were 
basically achieved as expected. The Cast [kasite 0595 2448 3676] 
index shows that the uniform composite index fell from its peak 
of 115.3 to 106 with an average monthly drop of 1.8 percent. The 
comprehensive evaluation mark dropped from the middle section of 
the red light zone (54 points) to the lower limit of the yellow 
light zone (43 points). All this indicates that the economy is 
approaching normal operation. The measures taken this time have 
drawn support from the relatively tight monetary policy. 
  Since the last quarter of 1993, the tight monetary policy 
had begun to slacken off. The indexes of the narrowest measure 
of money supply M1 and the broader measure of money supply M2 
had rapidly risen in December with their rate of growth reaching 
20.87 percent and 23.7 percent. The rate of growth of the total 
industrial production value stopped to fall since November. It 
rose to 29.7 percent in December, 10.8 percent higher than that 
in November. Incentive for more investment was once again 
aroused. The uniform composite index in December rose by 1.9 
percent over November. The comprehensive economic index 
increased to 48 points showing itself within the upper limit of 
the yellow light zone. As seen from the present moment, the 
exceptionally early rebound in the entire economy merits 
attention, although indicators of one month cannot represent the 
whole situation. 
<H5>  Two Possibilities Affecting 1994 Economic Trends </H5>
  Due to the fact that policies for macro-economic control may 
vary in the days to come, there may be two different trends in 
the development of our overall economy. 
  1. The monetary policy which has already become relaxed will 
continue to slacken off. This will make the economy to grow 
rapidly. As a result, the need for macro-economic control will 
once again become pressing, and original problems such as 
serious unbalanced economic developments, various "bottlenecks" 
and inflation will once again crop up. This will prevent the 
various on-going reform measures from being smoothly carried 
out. Also, it may force the government to readjust its economy 
and use "emergency brakes." 
  2. Timely and adequate measures will be adopted to exercise 
micro-economic adjustments, to strengthen guidance over the 
economic sector, to control the growth of investments and money 
supply and to optimize the economic structure by selecting the 
proper investments. Under this kind of situation, the general 
economic trend may possibly be as follows: 
  The rate of economic growth will drop to 9-10 percent from 
the 13 percent in 1993, and the commodity price index will drop 
below 10 percent from the 13 percent in 1993. As a result, the 
uniform composite index will only fluctuate on a small scale, 
and our overall economy will remain in the area between the 
green light zone and the yellow light zone. This kind of 
comparatively relaxed environment will not only help the smooth 
transition of the economic cycle to the economic expansionary 
period. It will also help quicken the tempo in carrying out 
reform and in making preparations for the rapid economic growth 
in the near future. 
<H5>  How To Create a Relaxed Economic Environment </H5>
  This year is the first year of great significance in 
carrying 
out reform. Studies and practice at home and abroad indicate 
that the announcement and implementation of policies in carrying 
out reform must keep pace with the economic cycle. Generally 
speaking, reforms in financial affairs, taxation, commodity 
prices and investments are usually carried out in the period of 
economic decline so that such reforms would have less negative 
impact. Therefore, this year's macro-economic control is 
basically aimed at continuously creating a stable economic 
environment which is conducive to the reform program and at 
reducing the shock the program may possibly create to the 
minimum. 
  A relaxed environment in 1994 is mainly determined by the 
following three factors: 
  1) A stable price index. Commodity prices constitute a 
direct 
factor in affecting social stability. Right now, we still need 
to prevent the inflation from going beyond the endurance of the 
society. We must strive to keep the price rises below the 10 
percent level. 
  2) Adequate rate of growth. The history of China's economic 
cycle indicates that China's economy is mainly one of 
"speed-effectiveness" type. An excessively high rate of growth 
often drives the economy into the red light zone and makes us 
feel notably restrained by the environment. Therefore, we should 
keep the rate of growth of our GNP below 10 percent in 1994. 
  3) Flexible monetary policy. Since the implementation of the 
reform and opening up program, we discover that the several 
economic fluctuations in the past were invariably connected with 
the monetary policy. In most of the cases, the tightening of the 
monetary policy was often the first choice in preventing our 
economy from entering the red light zone. The monetary policy 
will still play an important role in 1994. We should control our 
economy by adopting the form of "tightening the overall economy, 
while relaxing the control over specific projects." That means 
to place the overall economy under control, while ensuring the 
fulfillment of important economic plans. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20542 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  17 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tax Director Summarizes Tax Reform </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0310A Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO in Chinese 17 Jan 94 pp 1, 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0310A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report on and full text of speech at China Tax Reform </F>
Publicity Conference by Director of the State Administration of 
Taxation Jin Xin (6855 9515): "I Solemnly Declare That the New 
Tax System Will Not Increase the Tax Burden on Any Foreign 
Investor"] 
  [Text] "As director of the State Administration of 
Taxation, I declare that the new tax system will not increase 
the tax burden on any foreign investor!" This was the sonorous 
and forceful tone on which Jin Xin, director of the State 
Administration of Taxation, ended his speech at the China Tax 
Reform Publicity Conference on the morning of 14 January 1994. 
  This Publicity Conference was sponsored by the State 
Administration of Taxation, being aimed at better publicizing to 
the outside world the meaning and function of the current 
tax-system reform, so that foreign investors can better 
understand China's taxes. It was attended by over 500 
participants, such as delegates from some countries' embassies 
and consulates in China, and representatives of some 
longstanding foreign-invested enterprises [FIEs] and foreign 
enterprises in China. 
  Tax Director Jin Xin gave an important speech at the 
conference entitled "The New Tax-Revenue System in Our Socialist 
Market Economy," the full text of which is published below: 
  China's tax reform is a key component part of our system 
reform to achieve a socialist market economy. Before New 
Year's Day, the NPC and State Council promulgated new tax laws 
and regulations. This was another crucial step in opening up 
wider to the outside world and steadily improving our investment 
climate. China's tax reform not only is of universal concern 
to our vast numbers of taxpayers, but also has attracted the 
attention of the governments of all countries and our friends 
throughout the world. The China Tax Reform Publicity Conference 
being held here today by the State Administration of Taxation is 
aimed mainly at fully explaining and interpreting the aims, 
principles, contents, and pertinent policies of China's tax 
reform. We hope that all will understand and support them, as 
well as strictly enforcing them in future economic activities. 
<H3>  I. Tax Reform Was Imperative To Achieve a Socialist Market 
Economy </H3>
  As all know, the 14th CPC Congress set in October 1992 the 
goal model of China's economic reforms as the achievement of a 
socialist market economy. Then in the spring of 1993, the 
First Session of the Eighth NPC passed a constitutional 
amendment, stipulating in the Constitution that "China will 
practice a socialist market economy," which provided fundamental 
legal safeguards for China's economic reforms. In November 
1993, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee approved the "Resolution on Certain Matters Involved 
in Establishing a Socialist Market Economy," particularizing 
and systematizing the reform objectives and basic principles 
involved in the establishment of a socialist market economy, 
which formed the essential framework of our socialist market 
economy system, as well as drawing the general blueprint for 
continued intensification of reform. That was China's program 
of action for seizing the opportunity to accelerate our reform 
and development. Our socialist market economy is a legal 
economy, not a laissez-faire economy; our socialst market 
economy's spirit is one of orderly and equal competition, not 
disorderly and unsystematic competition; fair tax burdens are 
one of the key conditions for fair and orderly competition 
premised on the legal system. So tax reform is a key component 
part of economic reform. 
  China's tax reform is aimed at establishing a tax-revenue 
system to meet the needs of our socialist market economy and 
modernization, or one that conforms to both international 
practice and China's national conditions. The guiding ideology 
of China's tax reform is to consolidate our tax laws, set fair 
tax burdens, streamline our tax system, rationalize our 
separation of powers, bring order to our distribution relations, 
and ensure state revenue, by establishing a tax-revenue system 
that is in line with the needs of our socialist market economy. 
  Ever since 1979, China has adhered to a policy of reform and 
opening focused on economic development, taking the path of 
socialism with distinct Chinese characteristics. In our 
economic development, we have used two resources --domestic and 
overseas resources; opened up two markets -- domestic and 
overseas markets; and learned two skills -- how to organize our 
domestic economic development and develop foreign economic 
relations. In our reform and opening, we have supplemented our 
disadvantages with the whole world's advantages, revitalizing 
ourselves with the might of all five continents. Our aim is to 
have begun to establish our socialist market economy by the end 
of the century, in order to realize our second strategic 
objective for our national economy and social development. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, China has 
successfully 
set up SEZs, EDZs, high-tech industrial development zones, and 
open zones along the Chang Jiang [Yangtse] and our borders. We 
have now evolved a multi-level, all-dimensional open order of an 
open region on our eastern seacoast, one along the banks of the 
Chang Jiang headed by the Pudong Development Zone in Shanghai, 
and an inland one centered in provincial capitals. By the end of 
1993, our number of foreign-invested projects had accumulated to 
nearly 180,000, including over 80,000 new ones in that year 
alone; our attracted foreign investments had accumulated to an 
agreed amount of $220 billion, with the agreed amount for 1993 
alone at nearly $110 billion, and the actual foreign investment 
in China had accumulated to over $60 billion, including almost 
$22 billion for 1993, or just about double that of 1992. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, we have steadily 
expanded our foreign-investment fields, from the priority in the 
early days of reform and opening on attracting production-type 
foreign investment, to the approval in 1993 of experimentation 
in some areas with commercial retail enterprises; from 
permission to invest in primary and secondary industries, which 
was expanded to permission to set up with approval tertiary 
industries, such as the establishment in SEZs, the New Pudong 
zone, and other places approved by the State Council of 
Sino-foreign joint-venture or wholly foreign-owned banks and 
insurance companies. This shows that we have steadily expanded 
our investment fields, gradually adding industrial categories. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, we have gradually 
improved our investment climate. Taking FIE income taxes for 
instance, in the early 1980s, China promulgated the 
Sino-Foreign Joint-Venture Enterprise Income Tax Law and the 
Foreign Enterprise Income Tax Law. But after summing up a 
decade of experience and drawing on valuable overseas methods, 
we consolidated the above two laws on 1 July 1991 into the FIE 
and Foreign Enterprise Income Tax Law, consolidating their 
tax-revenue jurisdiction, tax rates, and preferential policies. 
In order to develop our socialist market economy and promote 
equal competition among enterprises, we have conducted in 1994 a 
complete, overall, and structural reform of the tax system, with 
one of our key aims being to better improve China's investment 
climate. 
  All know that since 1979, China's tax system involving 
foreigners has been gradually established, developed, and 
perfected along with our steady intensification and expansion of 
reform and opening. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 
11th CPC Central Committee, in order to meet reform and opening 
needs and promote domestic economic reform, our tax-collection 
categories involving foreigners, such as our enterprise and 
individual income taxes with the amount of income as the 
collection target; our consolidated industrial and commercial 
tax with the flow volume as the collection target; and local 
taxes, such as real estate and motor vehicle and ship 
use-license taxes with assets as the collection target, have all 
been differentiated for taxpayers in a unique system. In 
short, since reform and opening in 1979, we have always used two 
tax systems for domestic and foreign, with separate collections. 
For instance, regarding flow taxes alone, our FIE flow tax is 
the collection of a consolidated industrial and commercial tax 
based on the 1958 Consolidated Industrial and Commercial Tax 
Ordinance (draft) and pertinent regulations passed in principle 
by the 101st Session of the NPC Standing Committee and 
promulgated for testing by the State Council. But our 
domestic-enterprise flow tax was changed on 1 October 1984 from 
the collection of the industrial and commercial tax to 
collection of product, value-added, and business taxes based on 
the Product Tax, Value-Added Tax, and Business Tax Ordinance 
(draft) published by the State Council on 1 September 1984. In 
order to help promote domestic-enterprise tax reform and 
prevent unnecessary concern by foreign firms, at the time of our 
1984 tax reform, the "NPC Standing Committee Resolution on 
Authorizing the State Council To Reform the Trial Ordinance 
Published on the Industrial and Commercial Tax" clearly provided 
that "the preceding ordinance draft published for testing by the 
State Council is not applicable to Sino-foreign joint-venture 
enterprises and FIEs." So our collection of flow taxes from FIEs 
always acted in accordance with the Consolidated Industrial and 
Commercial Tax Ordinance (draft). And while it should be said 
that the flow-tax model set up in the early 1980s basically met 
the needs of China's economic reform and development at the 
time, playing the role of regulating the enterprise profit-gap, 
easing irrational price conflicts, and promoting the in-depth 
development of economic reform, the guiding ideology of using 
different tax rates to fully regulate production, circulation, 
and consumption essentially carried a clear stamp of the state 
using administrative means to manage the economy. But as our 
socialist market economy goal model has been established, this 
flow-tax system hardly any longer meets our economic reform and 
development needs. This can be seen mainly in that: 
  1. The tax-category structure is irrational. A) In the 
industrial production link, we collect product taxes on some 
products, and value-added taxes on others. Such a structure of 
two concurrent taxes contributes neither to the inherent role of 
the value-added tax, or to the special regulatory function of 
the product tax. B) From the perspective of the whole 
commodity-circulation process, collecting product or value-added 
taxes at the production link, business taxes on the 
purchase-sale price difference at the wholesale link, and 
business taxes again on total sales volume at the retail link, 
means separate tax collection on differing taxable grounds for a 
single commodity in the circulation process, leaving the tax 
system without continuity, causing more lost revenue, and making 
it hard for flow taxes to fully play their role in organizing 
revenues. C) In separate collection in different categories for 
domestic and foreign enterprises, nonuniform tax policy creates 
many conflicts. 
  2. There are too many tax-rate grades, making tax burdens 
unequal. As our market economy grows, the prices of all 
categories of merchandise are gradually being deregulated, 
causing an increasingly glaring conflict of larger tax-rate 
differences among industries, enterprises, and products, which 
contributes to neither fair competition among enterprises, or to 
bringing into full play the basic impact of market forces in the 
disposition of resources. 
  3. Nominal tax rates are too high. Too many tax concessions 
of all types, such as reductions and exemptions, are steadily 
eroding the tax base, with real tax burdens declining yearly. 
Such a state of high tax rates, many reductions and exemptions, 
and low tax burdens, severely affects the solemnity of the tax 
laws. 
  4. The Consolidated Industrial and Commercial Tax Ordinance 
was promulgated over three decades ago, clearly no longer 
meeting current economic development needs. While it has been 
revised repeatedly in line with economic development, the 
consolidated industrial and commercial tax remains too narrow in 
coverage and scope, with quite a few taxable products and 
business items not having corresponding taxable-item tax rates; 
the conflicts of too many links and duplicate collections are 
growing increasingly glaring; and the product-tax burdens for 
domestic and foreign-invested enterprises are generally uneven. 
  In summary, China's pre-reform industrial and commercial tax 
system, due to its coexistence of two systems for domestic and 
foreign, was the basic cause of unfair tax burdens, as well as 
being the objective expression of many conflicts in the 
system-conversion process. Our establishment of a socialist 
market economy has presented a pressing demand for tax reform, 
as well as opening up fine tax-reform prospects. Through tax 
reform, we are gradually consolidating our tax laws and rates, 
putting enterprises of various natures all on a level playing 
field for fair competition, in order to speed up our socialist 
market economy development. 
<H3>  II. China's Current Tax Reform Is Characterized as Complete, 
Overall, and Structural </H3>
  The "Resolution on Certain Matters Involved in the 
Establishment of a Socialist Market Economy" of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee clearly 
provided for and expressed our tax-reform direction, goal model, 
and even particular policies. It was our tax-reform grounds. 
This tax reform involves most of our former tax categories, with 
its particular substance including mainly the following areas: 
<H5>  Flow Tax System Reform </H5>
  As the flow tax is the major part of China's tax structure, 
involving much revenue on a wide scale, flow-tax reform is the 
crux of this tax reform. Before reform, China's flow taxes 
were mainly in four categories: product, value-added, and 
business taxes on domestic enterprises, and the consolidated 
industrial and commercial tax on FIEs and foreign enterprises. 
Moreover, the tax rates for these categories were designed to 
regulate the economy on the terms of mostly planned prices, 
having too many tax-rate grades, and too great a difference 
between high and low. But our prices have now been largely 
deregulated. So in order to ensure that China's flow-tax system 
meets our market-economy needs and is in line with the basic 
international trend of flow-tax reform, we have changed from our 
traditional method of setting separate taxable items based on 
products, and of setting different tax rates for separate 
taxable items, to generally collecting value-added taxes at the 
production and circulation links, on which basis we have 
selected a few consumer goods for further collection of a 
consumption [excise] tax. For provision of labor, transfer of 
invisible assets, and sale of real property, we are continuing 
the flow-tax model of collecting business taxes. 
  Our new flow-tax system is uniformly applicable to domestic 
enterprises, FIEs, and foreign enterprises, which is aimed at 
fair tax burdens to encourage competition, as well as at 
evolving the mechanisms to perfect tax deductions among 
enterprises needed for standardizing the value-added tax. On 29 
December 1993, the Fifth Session of the Eighth NPC Standing 
Committee passed the "Resolution on Interim Regulations on Taxes 
Applicable to FIEs and Foreign Enterprises, Such as Value-Added, 
Consumption, and Business Taxes," at the same time abolishing 
the consolidated industrial and commercial tax. 
  A. Our flow-tax reform priority is to promote a 
standardized value-added tax. Since China introduced the 
value-added tax in the early 1980s, objective factors have 
always limited it to only some manufactured goods, and it has 
had 12 grades of tax rates. So in practice, it has been subject 
to problems such as taxable complexity and tax-deduction 
inaccuracy, keeping it from fully playing its proper role. But 
our establishment of a socialist market economy system-model 
made an urgent demand to standardize our value-added tax, as 
well as creating the necessary conditions. So making value-added 
tax reform the crux of this tax reform was aimed at, in line 
with current international practice and under China's existing 
conditions, establishing a more complete value-added tax 
collection mechanism, to meet market-economy tax needs. Our 
reformed value-added tax includes mainly the following items: 
  1) Our value-added tax-collection range includes production, 
wholesale, retail, and imported products, as well as 
manufacture, repairs and replacements. 
  2) Our value-added tax uses the price-exclusive taxable 
method, by making prices not including value-added taxes the 
taxable grounds. In all pre-retail links of the marketing of 
commodities, invoices must separately indicate value-added taxes 
and prices not including value-added taxes. 
  3) Our value-added tax uses the model of a one-grade basic 
tax rate and a one-grade low tax rate, with the basic tax rate 
being 17 percent, and the low rate at 13 percent. Except for 
commodities for which tax regulations stipulate the use of the 
low tax rate, all other taxable products and labor are subject 
to the basic tax rate. Export commodities are subject to a 
zero tax rate, with all taxes being returned once products are 
declared to customs as exports. 
  4) We practice a system of tax deduction [withholding] based 
on the taxes indicated on invoices. China practices a 
production-type value-added tax, with the taxes on 
foreign-bought capital-type fixed assets not being deductible 
when calculating taxable amount. Foreign-bought farm-product 
raw materials are provided tax deductions calculated at a 
10-percent deduction rate. 
  5) For small-scale taxpayers whose annual sales income is 
less than the stipulated amount and whose accounting is not 
perfect, we practice the the simplified method of calculating 
taxable amount based on sales income and a 6 percent 
tax-collection rate. 
  6) Taxpayers calculating value-added tax payments according 
to the standardized method after reform must conduct a special 
tax registration, as well as using the special value-added tax 
invoice, in the interests of strict control. 
  2. The consumption tax is a newly designed tax category in 
the flow-tax system after the industrial and commercial tax 
system reform. Based on the general collection of value-added 
taxes on commodities, our choice of a few consumer goods on 
which to collect a further consumption tax is mainly to adjust 
the structure [mix], by guiding consumption, to ensure state 
revenue. Our current consumption-tax product items are the 11 
of tobacco, alcohol, cosmetics, skin and hair care products, 
expensive jewelry, firecrackers and fireworks, gasoline, diesel 
oil, motor vehicle tires, motorcycles, and sedans. The 
consumption tax uses the tax-inclusive price, being paid at the 
production link. As to tax-system design, consumption-tax 
revenue is made up of a part of the revenue separated out from 
the former tax system's product and value-added taxes, being a 
conversion of revenue from the old to the new tax system, with 
the collection of consumption taxes on consumer goods basically 
maintaining the pre-reform tax burden. 
  3. The business tax. The post-reform business tax has nine 
collection items and three grades of tax rates: the 
communication and transportation, building construction, post 
and telecommunications, and culture and sports industries are 
taxed at a rate of 3 percent; the financial insurance industry, 
service trades, transfers of invisible assets, and sales of real 
property are taxed at a rate of 5 percent; the amusement 
industry is taxed at a rate of 5-20 percent, with details under 
the control of provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal 
governments within the limits provided by tax laws and 
regulations. 
<H5>  Enterprise Income Tax Reform </H5>
  Our enterprise income tax reform is generally designed to 
occur in two steps: A) the consolidation of domestic enterprise 
income taxes; B) at the appropriate time, the further 
consolidation of domestic enterprise and FIE income taxes. So 
this enterprise income tax reform involves mainly domestic 
enterprises, making no change in FIE and foreign enterprise 
income taxes. 
  As to domestic enterprises, since the profit-distribution 
forms of enterprises of various types of ownership used to 
differ, the enterprise income tax system that China gradually 
established had separate tax categories based on the type of 
enterprise ownership. This situation of nonuniform tax rates, 
varying preferences, and interregional policy differences 
created a jigsaw pattern in the distribution relations between 
the state and enterprises, which was very nonstandard. 
State-owned and collective enterprises had a maximum tax rate of 
55 percent, which was hard for enterprises to bear, resulting in 
the formulation of a host of preferential policies, which was 
hard in turn for the treasury to bear, causing it to take a 
piece back from enterprises in forms, such as after-tax 
collection of funds. So our development of a market economy 
meant that our enterprise income tax reform had to be aimed at 
adjusting and standardizing the distribution relations between 
the state and enterprises, to speed up the conversion of 
enterprise operating forces and achieve fair competition. 
  The main items of our enterprise income tax reform are: 
  1. Starting on 1 January 1994, we abolished our separate 
state, collective, and private enterprise income taxes, to 
practice a consolidated domestic-enterprise income tax. 
  2. Domestic enterprise income taxes are at a flat tax rate 
of 33 percent. 
  3. We have used the tax law to standardize enterprise income 
pretax expense-listing items and criteria, changing our 
customary practice of setting taxable income based on the 
enterprise financial system, to stabilize and expand the tax 
base. 
  4. We have abolished the state-enterprise regulatory tax, 
and the state energy and communications priority construction 
funds and budgetary regulation funds paid to the state by state 
enterprises. 
  5. We have rescinded our preferential policy allowing state 
enterprises to repay investment loans before income taxes, 
establishing a new standardized enterprise loan-repayment system. 
  6. Since we have consolidated our domestic enterprise income 
taxes, state enterprises will no longer contract income taxes to 
the state. 
<H5>  Individual Income Tax Reform </H5>
  As China long practiced a low-wage system, we were not 
equipped with the objective conditions to collect taxes from 
individual citizens. But since reform and opening, to meet the 
needs of changing circumstances, China first drew up an 
individual income tax law, then began to collect regulatory 
taxes on personal income, setting up an independent income tax 
for urban and rural individual industrial and commercial 
household operations. So until this reform, China's tax system 
for personal income was made up of three separate laws and 
regulations. This not only was nonstandard legally, but also 
gradually caused glaring problems, such as too low expense 
deductions and too high nominal rates. So it was necessary to 
reform our individual income tax system. Our amended individual 
income tax law has been in effect since the beginning of 1994. 
This was a key step in China's tax reform, aimed at making 
China's individual income taxes more legal, standard, and 
rational. This amended tax law regulates mainly high incomes, 
either not collecting at all or collecting less individual 
income taxes on middle and low incomes. Observing the principle 
of not making taxpayer burdens too heavy and lowering the 
overall burden somewhat, the new individual income tax law 
applies to Chinese citizens who are obligated by law to pay 
taxes and foreigners who earn income within China's borders. 
  Our individual income tax itemizes deductions, rates, and 
collections. Wage and salary income is taxed at 5-45 percent in 
a nine-grade progressive tax rate for excess income; individual 
industrial and commercial household production and operation 
income and enterprise and institution contract and leasing 
operation income are taxed at 5-35 percent in a five-grade 
progressive tax rate for excess income, for roughly the same tax 
burden as the enterprise income tax; labor and service 
remuneration is taxed at a 20-percent flat tax rate, with other 
taxable items also subject to a 20-percent flat tax rate. 
  According to the international practice of not collecting 
income taxes on basic cost-of-living expenses, we have set our 
expense deduction at a uniform standard of 800 RMB, while our 
new tax law involving foreigners adds a provision on an 
additional expense deduction, to show suitable concern for 
foreigners. 
  As our amended individual income tax has higher 
expense-deduction standards, with a wider tax range and lower 
tax rates, the wage and salary income-tax burden is generally 
lighter. 
<H5>  Other Tax-Category Reforms </H5>
  1. We have improved China's tax system for resource 
products. Our reformed resource-tax collection-range includes 
all mineral resources, with the tax categories of crude oil, 
natural gas, coal, other nonmetallic raw ores, ferrous metal raw 
ores, nonferrous metal raw ores, and salt. Meanwhile, in 
coordination with our value-added tax reform, we have 
appropriately adjusted tax burdens. 
  Our resource tax uses the tax-calculation method of specific 
quota by product category, setting taxes in a range with upper 
and lower limits. For similar resource products with different 
resource-recovery conditions, taxes also vary. 
  2. We have begun to collect value-added taxes on land, to 
appropriately regulate excessive profits from real-estate 
transactions. The land value-added tax is collected at the 
real-estate-transaction link on the appreciated part of 
transaction income. The value added to real estate is the 
balance of the income earned by taxpayers through selling real 
estate minus deductions. Deductions include mainly costs paid 
at the time of obtaining land-use rights, land-development costs 
and expenses, new housing construction and related-facility 
costs and expenses, and sales taxes. 
  Our land value-added tax uses a four-grade progressive tax 
rate, with the value added to real estate not exceeding 50 
percent of deductions at a tax rate of 30 percent; the part 
exceeding 50 percent up to 100 percent at a tax rate of 40 
percent; that from 100-200 percent at a rate of 50 percent; and 
over 200 percent at a rate of 60 percent. 
  3. We also need to adjust, by merging or rescinding, our 
urban construction-safeguard tax, land-use tax, and certain 
other odd tax categories, while appropriately adjusting tax 
rates and amounts, and devolving management jurisdiction to 
lower administrative levels. These tax-category reform plans 
are in the process of being drawn up, with each going into 
effect as it matures. 
  As to these tax-category reforms, the State Council will, 
based on the resolution of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee, 
specifically clarify whether they apply to FIEs and foreign 
enterprises. But I hold that these reformed tax categories 
ought to apply to FIEs and foreign enterprises. This is in 
consideration of fair tax burdens, as well as being needed to 
improve our investment climate. 
  In the application of our new reformed tax system, as to the 
range of tax categories applicable to FIEs and foreign 
enterprises, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee's "Resolution on 
Interim Regulations for Value-Added, Consumption, and Business 
Taxes Applicable to FIEs and Foreign Enterprises" provides 
clearly that: 1) where provided by law, implementation will be 
according to legal provisions, referring to the enterprise 
income tax, which will continue to be implemented according to 
the "PRC Income Tax Law for FIEs and Foreign Enterprises" that 
took effect on 1 July 1991; 2) were there are no legal 
provisions, implementation will be according to State Council 
provisions. The ones that are now clearly applicable are the 
value-added, consumption, and business taxes. As to the stamp, 
real estate, motor vehicle and boat use-license, 
animal-slaughtering, land value-added, and resource taxes, as 
well as other tax categories that will go into effect, the State 
Council will soon provide for their applicability. 
<H5>  III. Flow-Tax Burdens and Preferences </H5>
  China's flow-tax system-reform was quite a large adjustment 
of our macroeconomic distribution system and order. We observed 
the principles of fairness, neutrality, transparency, and 
universality; our tax-burden-design guiding ideology was to 
ensure that reform neither increased enterprise burdens or 
decreased state revenues, by keeping the overall burden of our 
former value-added, product, and business taxes. But as our 
reform had to adjust our former irrational tax structure and 
distribution order, it was impossible to completely retain our 
former interests order. Due to factors, such as tax-structure 
changes, tax-rate simplification and merger, and taxpayment-link 
reform, it was impossible to avoid changes in the tax burdens on 
certain industries, enterprises, and products. As to flow 
taxes for instance, while the tax-burden changes were mostly 
structural, leaving the overall enterprise-flow-link tax burden 
basically the same as before reform, the tax-burden changes for 
particular products and enterprises were upwards in some cases 
and downwards in others. This was a step that we had to take to 
make taxpayer burdens fairer, in order to gradually rationalize 
our distribution relations. 
  Since the uniform application of value-added, consumption, 
and business taxes to FIEs, their tax burdens will undergo some 
changes. A survey of thousands of typical FIEs in large and 
midsize cities, such as Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and 
Guangzhou, shows that most enterprise tax burdens will be the 
same as before reform, with some slightly lower, and a few 
others somewhat higher. In order to ensure the continuity and 
stability of tax policy involving foreigners, safeguard the 
legitimate interests of foreign firms, and help to open further 
to the outside world, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee has 
decided to use appropriate methods to resolve the matter of 
higher tax burdens on some FIEs. The particular methods are: 
for all FIEs approved to be set up prior to 31 December 1993, 
where tax burdens are increased due to our change to collection 
of value-added, consumption, and business taxes, upon enterprise 
application and tax-organ approval, and within approved 
operating terms or where there are no operating terms, with the 
maximum not to exceed five years, the extra taxes paid due to 
the increased burden will be returned. But all FIEs approved to 
be set up after 1 January 1994 will be subject to the provisions 
of the interim regulations on value-added, consumption, and 
business taxes. 
  As to Sino-foreign contractual joint ventures engaged in 
maritime oil recovery, while they will be subject to the new 
consolidated tax system, we have decided to tax them according 
to the former method in consideration of the particular 
characteristics of this industry. That is, crude and natural 
gas recovered from oilfields by Sino-foreign contractual joint 
ventures will be subject to collection of value-added taxes in 
kind, as well as mining area use fees according to current 
provisions, but temporarily not resource taxes. The value-added 
tax rate will be 5 percent, with no deduction of 
project-beginning taxes when calculating value-added taxes, and 
no tax rebates granted when oil and natural gas are exported. 
The independent oilfield operations of the China Maritime Oil 
Corporation will contrast with these provisions. The State 
Council will make particular provisions for this, with documents 
needed for permission at the time of implementation. 
  The basic principles of this tax reform were that the tax 
system had to be consolidated, with preferences retained in 
principle. The FIE and foreign enterprise income tax law put 
into effect on 1 July 1991 remains unchanged, with its various 
provided tax preferences also unchanged. Its key provisions 
involving FIEs are the former flow-tax preferential policies 
involving foreigners, in five particular areas: 1) 
Investment-imported capital goods are duty-free, including items 
in overall investment needed for enterprise production, such as 
machinery, equipment, and parts, as well as imported raw 
materials for production of export products. 2) Designated 
imported goods are provided tax reductions or exemptions, mainly 
SEZ FIE imports, and products made by SEZ enterprises for sale 
within SEZs with, except for mineral oil, tobacco, and alcohol 
being granted one-half tax reductions, other products being 
exempt from flow taxes. 3) Bonded areas are granted a 
preferential flow-tax policy. 4) Export products made by FIEs, 
except for crude, refined oil, and where there are other state 
provisions, are exempt from flow taxes. 5) Sino-foreign 
joint-venture or foreign banks set up with approval in SEZs and 
the new Pudong Zone are exempt from flow taxes for five years 
from the day they go into operation. These preferential 
policies are all retained in principle, with particular 
consolidation provisions being made by the State Council. 
  In short, as this tax reform neither increases FIE tax 
burdens or decreases FIE preferential policies, China's policy 
of opening to the outside world will be implemented better as 
reform intensifies. 
<H3>  IV. Along with Tax Reform, We Must Push Ahead Vigorously 
With Tax Collection-Management Reform </H3>
  Equal competition in a market economy means that the state 
must establish fair and strict market rules. Tax laws are a 
key part of market rules. A look at all countries throughout 
the world shows that those with the more developed market 
economies have stronger tax-law rigidity and sounder tax legal 
institutions. As this is a universal law, tax reform has to be 
accompanied by active progress in tax collection-management 
reform, to build a stronger tax legal system, the key substance 
of which is: 1) The universal establishment of a 
taxpayment-declaration system; 2) The active promotion of a 
tax-agent system; 3) Fast progress in the computerization of tax 
collection-management; 4) the establishment of a rigorous 
tax-auditing system; 5) the appropriate application of a 
tax-sharing system, with the organization of two-tiered central 
and local tax organs; 6) the vigorous building of stronger tax 
legal institutions, with the gradual establishment of mechanisms 
for tax legislation, judication, and enforcement with mutual 
independence and restraint. 
  Once these steps are taken, China's tax administration will 
have evolved an order of equal emphasis on the four lines of tax 
policy, taxation, auditing, and reviewed litigation, with 
mutual coordination and restraint. This will help to thoroughly 
change our current state of a lax collection-management system 
and backward collection-management methods, by basically raising 
our tax-management level, establishing a scientific and strict 
tax-management system, and ensuring the implementation of our 
tax laws, in order to speed up our socialist market economy 
development. 
  As taxes involving foreigners are a window on reform and 
opening, strengthening our tax collection-management involving 
foreigners is of prime importance. In the interests of uniform 
management, the State Council has decided that all taxes on FIEs 
and foreign enterprises, as well as individual income taxes paid 
by foreigners (overseas Chinese and Hong Kong and Macao 
compatriots), will be the responsibility of the State 
Administration of Taxation for collection and management, or the 
responsibility of the tax departments involving foreigners set 
up by tax organs at all levels under the jurisdiction of the 
State Administration of Taxation for classified collection and 
management. This makes it easy for taxpayers to pay all taxes, 
while contributing to tax collection-management. 
  Ladies, gentlemen, and friends, China's current tax reform 
is 
an important milestone in China's tax history, an objective 
requirement for the establishment and development of our new 
socialist market economy system, and in line with the needs of 
most FIEs, foreign enterprises, and our friends from all 
countries. So I believe that China's tax reform will certainly 
succeed, and that our many friends will certainly understand it 
fully and support it vigorously. I believe even more strongly 
that as China's investment climate improves steadily, all people 
of insight will certainly come to invest in China more eagerly, 
giving China cooperative partners throughout the world, and even 
brighter growth prospects. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20543 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  11 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article on Implementation of New Financial Reform </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0306A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 11 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0306A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cheng Boming (4453 0590 2494) and He Dexu (0149 </F>
1795 2485) of the Beijing Securities Registration Corporation 
and the Finance and Trade Institute of the Chinese Academy of 
Social Sciences: "Difficulties and Countermeasures in the New 
Round of Financial Reform"] 
  [Text] Difficulties in the New Round of Financial 
Reform 
  In China's reform of the financial system, 1993 was a year 
of 
strategic change in promoting reform and a year in which 
theoretical innovation and planning and design were made for a 
new round of overall reforms. But implementing the new round of 
financial reforms was by no means easy, still less could it be 
accomplished in one step. It could be said that after trying and 
probing for fifteen years, China's financial system reform is 
now entering a crucial period of storming the fort and meeting 
strong resistance. All of the situations that reform is facing 
are deep-rooted, broad-based, and very hard to manage. So, each 
reform is a hard-fought battle and each step forward can 
encounter new obstacles and new difficulties. 
  The first difficulty: It is difficult in one step to 
accomplish central bank macroeconomic control mainly adopting 
economic methods and establish an improved macroeconomic control 
system with mainly indirect means. The reason is not only 
that the constraints and affects of external conditions (such as 
government interference, enterprise "resistance" [daobi 0227 
6656], and defects in the investment system) cause the central 
bank to make "ineffective adjustments" and be "powerless to 
control," but also in the difficulty that the central bank has 
in transforming its macroeconomic goals and means from the 
control model under the planned economic system to true market 
controls in one strike; and even less can the creation of market 
conditions for implementing indirect controls be accomplished in 
a day. What is especially worthy of note, is that the pursuit of 
a sustained high rate of economic growth has a strong impact on 
the central bank's first goal, "a stable currency." 
  The second difficulty: There are numerous difficulties 
in establishing a policy bank. This is manifested in that: 
1) It is hard to clearly distinguish policy work from business 
work and we lack a unified standard to measure them. Moreover, 
this type of standard often is constantly changing with changes 
in the industrial structure and development of the national 
economy. 2) It is difficult to appropriately decide on the 
capital and the day-to-day operating funds needed to set up a 
policy bank. In the operation it is extremely difficult to 
accurately give expression to or maintain the specifics of a 
policy bank. With the slightest inattention, it can be 
transformed into a second financial or commercial bank. Despite 
the fact that policy bank loans are clearly supportive in 
nature, they also are different from financial allocations. They 
are not free and one-time and they are paid in advance, 
circulating, and repayable. Also to a certain extent they 
stress results. As banks policy banks also are different from 
commercial banks. Despite their emphasis on accounting, profits 
are not their principal goal and they do not compete with 
commercial financial organizations. 
  The third difficulty: In developing commercial banks, 
the burden is heavy and the road is long. Converting 
Chinese specialized banks to commercial banks is a very long 
process. We cannot successfully commercialize them by simply 
issuing a decree. The main reasons are: First, to convert 
Chinese specialized banks to commercial banks, there must first 
be clear-cut property rights relations, that is implementation 
of a stock system. But the restructuring of specialized banks 
to implement a stock system would be far more complicated and 
more difficult than the current stock system restructuring of 
state enterprises. Second, the ratio of bad accounts, messy 
accounts, serious credit asset losses, and bad assets much 
higher than international banking standards that Chinese 
specialized banks have formed over a long period of time also 
are a major obstacle to their conversion to commercial banks. 
Third, whether future state commercial banks can thoroughly 
divorce themselves from the interference of various factors in 
credit issues and truly act as autonomous businesses still 
awaits various common efforts. Fourth, what scale is considered 
appropriate for a future commercial bank to maintain still 
remains to be resolved. Large-scale commercial banks have 
numerous network points, wide coverage, and results of scale. 
But they also can easily become monopolies, stifle competition, 
and obstruct improvement in financial services and quality, and 
they cause commercial banks to lack force as tools of financial 
innovation. But if commercial banks are too small and too 
dispersed it also is not helpful to developing the finance 
industry and playing a financial role. 
  The fourth difficulty: Standardization and 
internationalization of the capital market still requires 
time. Totally marketizing the issuance of bonds, perfecting 
the grading system for bond-issuing organizations and bond 
credit, the scale of stock-issuing markets, and a unified stock 
exchange market (especially, resolving the distinction between 
the legal person and the individual stock market, distinguishing 
A-stock and B-stock markets, and the entrance of state stocks 
into the market) all will require arduous efforts. 
  Countermeasures in the New Round of Financial Reform 
  Faced with numerous problems in the new round of financial 
system reform, we should by no means do nothing, and we 
certainly should not retreat from the difficulties, but we 
should adopt effective countermeasures. Surmounting difficulties 
and grasping opportunities will spur on deeper reform of the 
financial system. 
  --We should be fully prepared ideologically for the 
difficulties of the new round of financial system reform. 
  If financial system reform is to be completely intensified, 
we must storm the fortifications and run up against tough 
situations, we must reform and restructure what constitutes 
support for the old system and what can become important 
components for the new system, and beginning with deep-rooted 
aspects and adjustment of authority and benefits, advance 
overall and break through on key points. 
  --Clarify the extreme importance of the government in 
reform of the financial system. 
  There are two levels of content to financial reform: The 
first is administrative innovation, also known as government 
directed financial reform. It is manifested in the government's 
involvement in the circulation of funds and the implementation 
of currency policy by clear changes in financial laws and 
administrative regulations to attain administrative and control 
goals. Reform of these legal and nonlegal activities launched by 
governments and governmental organizations aimed at changing the 
structure of the financial system and expanding currency 
authority is administrative financial reform. The second is 
market innovation, that is market-directed financial reform. It 
is manifested in the emergence of new financial assets, 
financial tools, and financial techniques on financial markets. 
From the perspective of the history and the reality of China's 
financial system reform, we can say with complete reason that 
delays in financial reform are mainly from lack of financial 
innovation on the part of government--administrators. So, it is 
an urgent matter for the government to take the initiative in 
participating in financial reform, actively promoting it and 
energetically advancing it. 
  --Stress overall coordination in promoting financial 
system reform. The affects of the new round of financial 
system reform are wide-ranging and far-reaching. As far as the 
financial system itself is concerned, reform could intensify the 
competition of various types of financial organizations and 
promote overall development of finances and improvement in the 
level of business administration. At the same time, it will 
increase the business risks for financial organizations. 
Increased instability in the financial system makes the task of 
macromanaging currency even more arduous and complex. As far as 
external affects of reform of the financial system are 
concerned, 1) Since the central bank has made currency stability 
its primary goal and financial deficits can no longer be taken 
as overdrafts on the central bank, times have not gone well for 
the Ministry of Finance. If policy banks are established, it 
will add greatly to the burdens of the Ministry of Finance. 2) 
After specialized banks are commercialized, the days of 
enterprises relying on eating from the bank's big pot will be 
gone forever and losing (or potentially losing) enterprises will 
have difficulty getting support funds from specialized banks. 
From another perspective, the affects of financial system reform 
on these sectors conversely are constraints of these sectors on 
financial reform. If they are not handled well, they could 
restrain financial system reform in different respects. So, we 
should stress overall reforms related to financial system 
reform. This consists of two aspects: One aspect is that reform 
within the financial system should be linked up and coordinated. 
The other aspect is that financial system reform should be 
coordinated with reform of other aspects (government, planning, 
finance, investment, enterprises, etc.). If we do not "act as 
the occasion demands" in these aspects, it will be difficult or 
even impossible for financial system reform to develop in depth. 
  --Guard against the financial system reform plan losing 
its form, changing shape, or becoming distorted. In 
fifteen years of financial reform, this type of phenomenon has 
frequently occurred. What was originally a very good reform 
measure or plan can ultimately lose shape and not attain the 
mark in the implementation. Not only does it not give rise to 
the proper effect, on the contrary, it greatly exhibits the 
opposite effect. So, in the new round of financial system 
reform, we must put forth an effort to avoid a recurrence of 
this type of situation and from top to bottom we must heighten 
our awareness of the implementation of reform measures to ensure 
that reform plans are all implemented in accordance with 
predetermined goals. 
  --Accelerate financial system reform. The 
arrangement of the overall framework and year of financial 
system reform has now been essentially clarified, but the 
specific steps of implementation still are not clear. Various 
sectors, especially numerous grass-roots units, are waiting to 
see. Normal tasks already are affected. If it persists, not only 
could it affect the development of the finance industry and the 
national economy, but it also could trigger new contradictions 
and problems. Moreover, the coexistence of dual systems leading 
to friction, gaps, and vacuums has caused the cost of reform to 
reach the limits of tolerance. Increased reform efforts and 
acceleration of reform have become choices that cannot be 
delayed in financial system reform. 
  --Increase understanding of financial system reform and 
stress the dissemination of financial knowledge. The new 
round of financial system reform is more than many people 
(including some high-ranking leading cadres) can accept. For 
example, people still are not knowledgeable, are not accustomed, 
or cannot even accept such things as policy banks, commercial 
banks, and open markets. If there is not widespread 
understanding of these basic concepts, it would naturally be 
rather difficult to think about promoting the design of a new 
system that is based on these concepts. So, increased publicity 
and dissemination of financial knowledge and increased 
understanding of financial system reform has become an important 
part of promoting the new round of financial system reform. 
  --Handle the relationship between reform and stability 
carefully and create a relatively relaxed economic environment 
for financial system reform. Only in this way can financial 
system reform be conducted smoothly. If the relationship among 
the various aspects of the economy are bound up very tightly or 
if serious inflation even occurs, it would not help to promote 
financial system reform and it could obstruct reform of the 
overall economic system and development of the national economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20544 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  20 December 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   GATT Impact on Industry, Prices </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0300A Beijing JIAGE LILUN YU SHIJIAN [PRICE: THEORY AND 
PRACTICE] in Chinese No 12, 20 Dec 94 pp 12-20 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0300A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIAGE LILUN YU SHIJIAN [PRICE: THEORY AND 
PRACTICE] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Effect of GATT on China's Industry and Prices" </F>
  [Text] Effect on Country's Overall Price Level 
  Following China's re-entry into GATT, large amounts of some 
high quality, low priced foreign goods will surge into China's 
markets. On the surface, it appears that the price level in 
China will fall, but because of changes in the import-export 
mechanism and various other reasons, China's overall price level 
will not only not fall but possibly rise. Generally speaking, 
the following several factors will have an effect: 
  1. The effect of exchange rate changes. Several times since 
1985, China has lowered the exchange rate between the renminbi 
and the United States dollar, but the official exchange rate 
today still overestimates the value of the renminbi. In 
addition, with the institution of strict foreign exchange 
control whereby the renminbi cannot be freely exchanged, the 
renminbi will be devalued. The reasons are as follows: First, as 
price reform intensifies and the pace quickens, domestic prices 
will enter a period of fairly high rise during which the 
national price index will increase several percentage points 
each year. Second, with the development of China's commodity 
economy, the determination of the prices of goods by the laws of 
value is bound to rupture the existing price system. Tremendous 
changes will occur that will cause a rise in prices resulting in 
an absolute decline in the existing monetary value of the 
renminbi. This will produce a devaluation of the renminbi 
relative to foreign currencies. Third, as trade protection 
weakens, imports will increase fairly rapidly in the short term 
causing an increase in domestic demand for foreign exchange, 
which will cause a rise in the exchange rate. Thus, the renminbi 
value of imports will rise. Clearly, a lowering of the renminbi 
exchange rate will cause a rise in the price index on the one 
hand, and a rise in the price index will spur a further lowering 
of the renminbi exchange rate on the other. Therefore, following 
China's re-entry into GATT, changes in the exchange rate will 
cause a rise in the domestic price level. 
  2. The effect of the transfer of international inflation. 
The 
meshing of China's economy with the international economy is an 
objective requirement for China's re-entry to GATT. As a result 
of foreign trade, foreign debt, and exchange rate devaluation, 
international inflation can be shifted to China. Conversely, 
because the renminbi cannot leave China, domestic inflation 
cannot be shifted to the international economy. Therefore, in 
the process of opening to the outside world, we will sustain 
pressure from both domestic inflation and the transfer of 
international inflation. Because of this double inflation, 
China's price level is bound to rise. 
  3. The effect of total supply and demand. Following re-entry 
into GATT, international factors will have to be added into 
China's total supply and demand balance. The former balance will 
be destroyed. On the supply side, numerous foreign products that 
enjoy marked superiority in quality and price will enter China 
directly. At the same time, large amounts of some Chinese 
resources and preliminarily processed raw materials will flow to 
foreign countries because of their cheap price. On the demand 
side, as Chinese incomes increase fairly rapidly and 
restrictions on income soften, the demand for high quality 
consumer goods (such as motor vehicles) will be virtually 
unlimited. Because imports of foreign goods are restricted in 
various ways at the present time, citizen consumption demand is 
held down by the structural dislocations between supply and 
demand; thus, supply and demand are in relative balance for the 
time being. But just as soon as the regulation of imports 
demolishes the structural restraints on the supply and demand 
structure, people's consumption will begin to be stimulated. As 
a result, current latent demand will become real demand. 
Moreover, since consumption accounts for two-thirds of total 
demand, the fairly rapid growth of consumption demand is bound 
to stimulate growth of total demand, thereby affecting the 
overall price level. 
  4. The effect of tariffs. In the course of multilateral 
negotiations with GATT signatory nations, China promised to 
reduce tariffs. China believes that a lowering of tariffs will 
lower prices of imports, thereby lowering the overall price 
level. A World Bank report believes that China's actual tariff 
rate is between 5 and 6 percent, which is close to the developed 
country level and lower than the developing country level. 
Therefore, following re-entry to GATT, China's actual overall 
tariff level will not change very much. 
<H5>  Effect on Agricultural Product Prices </H5>
  1) Advantages 
  The GATT provides favorable conditions for accelerating the 
opening to the outside world of China's agriculture, and for 
linking China's agricultural production with the world 
agricultural products market. It helps introduce new varieties, 
and new techniques and management experiences to transform 
traditional agriculture, to promote advances in China's 
agricultural techniques, and to increase the modernization of 
China's agriculture. It enables China to enjoy fairly consistent 
most favored nation treatment, and it expands exports of China's 
agricultural products, particularly processed agricultural 
products. China can make full use of the GATT negotiating 
mechanism to link up with developing countries concerned in 
opposing the agricultural trade barriers and the export subsidy 
policies of developed countries in order to safeguard the 
interests of developing countries. China can make use of foreign 
experiences and GATT mechanisms to give impetus to thorough 
reform of agriculture that promotes the smooth transformation of 
China's agriculture from a planned economy to a socialist market 
economy. 
  2) Disadvantages 
  The lowering of agricultural product tariffs and the 
reduction of non-tariff production measures means that China's 
principal agricultural products will face strong quality and 
price competition from foreign products. 
  1. Farming 
  During the past decade, agricultural production costs in 
China have increased by an average 10 percent per year. Prices 
of some products are higher than the international market price. 
Many agricultural products have lost their competitive price 
advantage. Once China returns to GATT, its farm production 
--particularly grain production -- will face extremely daunting 
challenges. 
  2. Animal Husbandry 
  It is well known that under today's import control system 
and at today's tariff rates, China's wool production frequently 
receives a pounding from the international market. In 1984 and 
in 1988, for example, China-produced wool accumulated in 
inventory for 2 to 3 years because too much wool was imported. 
This had an extremely adverse effect on the economic development 
of border areas and the normal life of peasants and herdsmen. 
Between 1989 and 1991, the annual per capita income of Inner 
Mongolian herdsmen was 201 yuan less than in normal years. 
Following China's re-entry to GATT, if tariff rates are further 
greatly lowered and license control is abolished, imports will 
further increase making maintenance of domestic wool production 
difficult. Milk and dairy products production also face 
challenges from foreign products. Today, prices of Chinese 
produced dairy products are higher than the international market 
price, largely because yields per milk cow are low and costs are 
high. In China today, 68 percent of all cows are low yield cows 
that product 5 tons or less per year. Second, processing scale 
returns are poor. Most of the country's dairy products 
processing plants have a fresh milk processing capacity of under 
20 tons per day. No scale production capacity has been built, 
products are undiversified, and the labor productivity rate is 
low. Among imported dairy products, whole fat milk power poses a 
substantial threat. 
  3. Aquatic Products 
  Following GATT re-entry, China's aquatic products industry 
will also face some problems and challenges. One relates to 
prawns. China is the largest producer and the foremost exporter 
of prawns. Because of the rise in production costs in recent 
years, costs now approximate, or are slightly higher than in the 
prawn producing countries of southeast Asia. If import tariffs 
are too low, southeast Asian prawns may take over China's 
markets because their quality is good and sale prices are 
flexible. Second, once tariffs are lowered, imports of marine 
fish will increase and prices will fall. This may damage 
freshwater fish production. 
<H5>  Effect on Electronics Industry Products </H5>
  Positive Advantages 
  1. GATT re-entry will create a domestic and international 
climate helpful to the development of China's electronics 
industry and hasten its internationalization. 
  a. It will help improve the domestic economic environment. 
In 
the operation of China's economy today, as formerly, the 
government controls the economy through the use of command plans 
and guidance plans. Government control of enterprises behavior 
is stifling. The role of the market mechanism in regulating 
enterprises behavior is insufficient. In addition, parochialism 
in industries and local protectionism split markets that were 
not intact to begin with the result that market behavior and the 
market mechanism in China today does not conform to GATT 
regulations. However, these regulations have been universally 
accepted by other countries. In order for China to revive its 
GATT signatory nation status, it must accept generally 
acknowledged international norms. This requires that China 
further intensify economic system reforms, demolish the old 
control system, and build a new administrative system and new 
market mechanism that meets the requirements of a socialist 
market economy. It requires elimination of excessive 
administrative meddling with enterprise behavior, elimination of 
local and industrial sector protectionism, full use of the 
market mechanism, establishment of the proper position of 
enterprises in the market, and accelerated formation of a 
nationwide unified market. Only in this way can our enterprises 
have a fair and competitive environment on which they can rely 
for their survival and development. 
  b. China's environment for electronics exports will improve 
substantially. Following GATT restitution, we can enjoy steady, 
multilateral most favored nation treatment. We can further free 
ourselves from the economic control of developed nations. 
Applicable GATT tariff protection principles may be used to 
counter the non-tariff barriers that some countries have set up 
against China's export of electronics products. As the volume of 
China's electronics exports has increased in recent years, some 
rampantly protectionist developed countries have invoked 
anti-dumping controls against China's electronics product 
exports. Once China re-enters GATT, it will be able to rely on 
applicable GATT tariff protection principles to counter improper 
foreign anti-dumping, and anti-subsidy sanctions for a gradual 
elimination of such discriminatory trade behavior, and avoidance 
of the unfairness and arbitrariness of unilateral sanctions 
based on importing countries anti-dumping and anti-subsidy laws. 
GATT principles of free trade provide that protection of the 
indigenous industry of all signatory nations is limited to 
tariffs. Signatory nations have an obligation to abolish import 
quantity restrictions, import subsidies, and such non-tariff 
barriers. Thus, the non-tariff barriers of certain countries 
against China's electronics products will decrease to a certain 
extent once China re-enters GATT. 
  2. Full enjoyment of the favored treatment that GATT accords 
developing countries. 
  China is still a developing country; thus, it may make full 
use of GATT exception clauses that pertain to developing 
countries. It can enjoy the favored treatment that GATT accords 
developing countries such as greater elasticity in the tariff 
system of developing countries, permitting subsidies within 
certain limits, enjoyment of general preferential treatment, 
etc. These clauses are favorable for China's making the most of 
its own advantages, for turning its strengths to advantage and 
avoiding weaknesses, and for expanding exports once it has 
returned to GATT. Specifically, China's electronics industry can 
use the tariff system provisions (such as developing countries 
not making any countervailing tariff reduction or preferential 
provisions for developed countries) for fairly flexible handling 
of tariffs on the products of China's electronics industry, 
thereby gaining a certain degree of protection for China's 
fledgling and incompletely competitive industries. 
  3. Acceleration of the internationalization of China's 
electronics industry. 
  GATT re-entry means a meshing of the domestic market with 
international markets, the domestic market becoming an integral 
part of the international market. China's electronics industry 
must orient toward both the domestic and the international 
market. Macroeconomically speaking, China must put in place an 
operating mechanism for the transformation of enterprises, 
effectively control the economy as a whole, improve analysis of 
the domestic and foreign economic situations, analyze market 
price prognostications, readjust tax policy, credit policy, 
income policy, and exchange rate policy in a timely fashion, and 
maintain general balance between total social supply and demand 
so that price formation and operation are consistent with 
economic development. China must use effectively and rationally 
domestic and foreign sources of materials, become a part of the 
modern economic development tide of an international division of 
labor, and join the ranks of international competition. Like it 
or not, our enterprises have no other choice. They can either 
seek survival and development through competition, or they can 
lose and collapse through competition. This international 
competition provides both motivation and pressure. This is the 
only way to spur enterprises to transform their operating 
mechanisms, to improve internal administration, to raise labor 
productivity rates, to strive to lower product costs, to engage 
in constant technological transformation, to update technology 
and develop new products, to actively adjust their product mix, 
to improve product quality steadily, and to realize the 
economies of scale. We must master the international market, and 
actively take part in international competition as the only way 
to develop our electronics industry. 
  4. GATT re-entry will permit China to take part in the 
drawing up of regulations pertaining to international trade; it 
will help China draw up economic regulations suited to its 
reform and opening to the outside world, new circumstances, and 
international practice. 
  Since we are not yet a GATT member, our specific national 
circumstances cannot be reflected in GATT international trade 
regulations. We can only passively accept GATT regulations on 
international trade. Consequently, China's electronics exports 
are frequently treated unfairly. They are unfairly restricted, 
proscribed, and even excluded by numerous non-tariff barriers. 
Once China's GATT signatory nation status has been restored, we 
can participate directly in drafting and discussing the GATT 
regulations that play a major role in international trade. This 
will enable China to express its intentions and have them made a 
part of GATT regulations. This will mean that. like other 
members, China can enjoy and observe GATT regulations as an 
equal, avoiding the discrimination that comes with not being a 
member. 
  China's participation in GATT will have a definite effect on 
the drafting and perfection of its laws and regulations 
pertaining to the economy, trade, and finance and banking. Some 
new laws and regulations that are in keeping with international 
practice and norms will have to be drawn up, and existing laws 
and regulations will have to be further improved to make Chinese 
economic life a part of the legal system while maintaining 
China's distinctive socialist market economy. 
  5. GATT entry will help resolve trade disputes. 
  GATT is an international body having a mechanism for 
resolving multilateral trade disputes. It is an authoritative 
arena for the resolution of international trade arguments. Since 
China followed a policy of isolation and self-containment for so 
long, since economic reform and opening to the outside world has 
taken place only during the past 10-odd years, and since China 
is not a GATT member, it is still not thoroughly conversant with 
the trade regulations of some GATT signatory nations. The 
arguments and disputes of recent years over China's electronics 
product export trade have usually been attributable to this. 
This puts China in an unfavorable position for resolving and 
handling disputes, and thus it has paid an unnecessary price in 
some cases. However, each year GATT has to deal with many trade 
disputes. While upholding the just rights and interests of 
signatory nations, it effectively handles trade disputes verging 
on conflict from all quarters. Following GATT re-entry, China 
can place itself under the multilateral trade protection 
principles that all signatory nations acknowledge. It can avail 
itself of GATT's dispute resolution mechanism, thereby improving 
its bargaining position in the resolution of trade disputes 
among signatory nations. It will be able more effectively to 
discuss and negotiate solution to disputes with its trading 
partners using the maintenance of GATT principles as a basis. 
When necessary, it can fairly resolve issues through GATT's 
mediation, thereby improving treatment for China's electronics 
products export trade to safeguard the national interest. 
  6. GATT re-entry will mean fairly easy access to full 
information about the world economy and trade. 
  GATT has information about the world economy and trade. As a 
signatory nation, China can use this GATT window to obtain 
documents from which it can gain an understanding of the trade 
regulations, trade policies, trade statistics, and trends of 
development in trade of other signatory nations. This will help 
China decide trade development strategies and draw up rational 
trade laws and regulations. It will also enhance information 
exchanges with other countries. For electronics products, in 
particular, which are updated extremely rapidly and in which 
competition is extremely intense, timely understanding of 
international market product trends and market movements holds 
extremely important significance for China's long-term trade 
strategy and the setting of near-term goals. 
  7. GATT participation will further help attract foreign 
capital, and bring in sophisticated technology and management 
experience. 
  Following GATT re-entry, as China's markets mesh with 
international markets to become an integral part of the 
international market, our products will be able to leave and 
enter the international market, and we will be able to acquire 
some sophisticated technology and sales techniques from foreign 
countries. In addition, the more roomy domestic market climate 
will also further attract foreign trader investment and the 
operation of enterprises in China. Investment in the electronics 
industry, in particular, will increase, and with it will come 
fairly sophisticated technology and management experience. 
<H5>  Negative Disadvantages </H5>
  Recovery of GATT signatory nation status will have a very 
severe near-term impact on China's electronics markets. Intense 
competition may put some enterprises in dire straits. Some 
enterprises that produce low quality, not readily saleable 
products will lose out in competition, will lose their markets 
entirely, and will face the prospect of halting production, 
going out of business, merging, or shifting to other lines of 
production. 
  Following GATT re-entry, while enjoying rights as a member, 
China will also have to perform corresponding duties. As China's 
electronics products enter international markets, whether we 
greatly reduce tariffs or provide "market promises" as the 
"admittance fee" for GATT re-entry, the domestic electronics 
products market will become an integral part of the 
international market. Thus, China will lose its "protective 
umbrella" to stand completely naked in international markets. 
This will pose a grim test for China's electronics industry. 
  1. High and new technology industries that are just getting 
started will face grim challenges, and industries in their 
infancy will find their development threatened. High and new 
technology businesses in China's electronics industry are in a 
nascent stage. They do not have the ability to compete with 
similar foreign products in terms of product quality, technical 
performance, or price. We must clearly realize that in their 
overall level, China's electronics products cannot compete with 
sophisticated products from the United States, Japan, and 
Europe. They will even find sales competition with similar 
products from Asia's "four small dragons" difficult. Unless 
China's electronics industry is properly protected, foreign 
goods will overwhelm its electronics products markets facing 
China's industrial enterprises will a further predicament. 
  2. Many years of narrow sectarianism and local 
protectionism, 
failure to keep in mind the nation's overall interests, and much 
mindless redundant imports and construction have produced two 
consequences: One is the waste of a large amount of money, 
materials, and manpower; and the other is that excess production 
capacity for the same items resulted in none of the enterprises 
producing the same product being able to keep fully employed. 
Thus, they could not realize the economies of scale, found it 
difficult to hold down costs, and were unable to fashion a 
certain amount of international competitiveness. If premium 
quality, low priced foreign goods come flooding in on top of 
this, without government protection, some enterprises producing 
low quality products will face the danger of being eliminated 
when faced with the onslaught of foreign products because their 
technology is antiquated, the management is inept, their product 
quality is poor, and their economic returns are low. 
  3. Electronics products, which cannot compete on price and 
quality, will lose the protection they now enjoy when the 
domestic market is opened up. They face the danger of being 
wiped out. For a long time, China has accorded both tariff and 
non-tariff protection to electronics products. This kept out 
imports to protect markets. At the same time, however, it 
protected backward industries and obstructed competition. 
Ultimately this caused a loss of both money and human resources. 
Some low technology, poor quality enterprises had to rely on a 
distorted market price system. They depended on the government's 
protective umbrella for their survival. Even so, some 
enterprises still showed a loss. However, some technologically 
strong and well-run enterprises, and some enterprises whose 
product quality and prices were superior could not update their 
equipment because of unfair market competition, and government 
policies that penalized frontrunners. They lacked sufficient 
reserve strength, and thus could not become strongly competitive. 
<H5>  The Effect on the Textile Industry </H5>
  GATT re-entry will open opportunities for the textile 
industry. 
  1. The international climate for textile product exports 
will 
improve. 
  International competition in textiles is currently very 
intense. Trade protectionism by all countries is very severe. 
Currently, China's foreign trade is conducted through bilateral 
negotiations. Since textile exports are frequently limited by 
various tariff and non-tariff barriers in developed countries, 
China's exports are at a competitive disadvantage 
internationally. For example, the United States pressures China 
with most favored nation treatment, and it employs the "301" 
provisions to retaliate against China's textile exports. 
Following GATT restoration, in principle, China will 
unconditionally enjoy most favored nation treatment. All trade 
barriers will be greatly reduced; trade among signatory nations 
will become freer; and the international climate for China's 
textile exports will improve. 
  2. GATT re-entry will set the stage for textiles to open new 
markets. 
  Most of China's textile exports today go to Hong Kong, 
Japan, 
the EC and the United States. Exports to these countries and 
territories account for the lion's share of all of China's 
textile exports. Relatively speaking, future potential is not 
very great for the expansion of textile product exports in these 
main sales markets. United States Department of Commerce 
Statistics show that China has become the largest supplier of 
textiles to the United States, accounting for 13.9 percent of 
the total. It ranks second in money terms at 12.6 percent. In 
1990, China ranked third as a supplier of textiles to the EC. 
Therefore, expansion of China's textile exports will require 
great efforts to open markets in other countries and 
territories. GATT re-entry provides the possibility of opening a 
new, more diversified, multilateral trade pattern for China's 
textiles. 
  3. Portion of China's textile exports may increase. 
  During the period of transition from the Multi-Fiber 
Arrangement [MFA] to GATT integration, the accompanying quotas 
on kinds and percentages will be gradually abolished, and 
surplus textile allocations will gradually increase. The 
year-by-year percentage increase in allocations according to 
provisions of the new agreement will be 16 percent between 1993 
and 1995, 25 percent between 1996 and 1999, and 27 percent 
between 2000 and 2002. At this rate, the actual allocation will 
increase 1.3-fold within 10 years. Thus, following GATT 
re-entry, China should enjoy the benefit of a gradual increase 
in its textile and clothing quota. It must be noted that this is 
a theoretically calculated rate of increase. Numerous factors 
affect export growth, and they must be completely analyzed to 
make a scientific prediction. Actual quota increase can also 
only be obtained through intense market competition. 
  In addition, the new agreement also provides for integration 
of 12 percent of textile imports between 1993 and 1995, 
integration of 17 percent between 1996 and 1999, and integration 
of 18 percent between 2000 and 2002. China may compete equally 
with other signatory nations in the integrated textiles and 
clothing trade. This will also provide China an opportunity to 
expand textile exports. 
  4. The 10-year MFA transition period provides conditions for 
readjustment of China's textile industry and wins time for 
technological transformation. 
  During the textiles and clothing export trade integration 
process, fierce competition will occur in the world textile 
market. The key to successful competition lies in the 
technological transformation of the textile industry. Ability to 
apply high technology to the production of high quality, high 
grade, high added value products is decisive in competing 
successfully. At the present time, the technological level of 
China's textile industry lags far behind that of developed 
countries and territories. Top priority matters include 
transformation of enterprises' operating mechanisms, orienting 
toward domestic and international markets, readjusting the 
industrial structure and the product mix, spurring technical 
progress, and accelerating technological transformation. 
However, these things require a process of development. The MFA 
to GATT 10 year transition period provides conditions for 
China's textile industry to adjust and gain time for 
transformation. 
  The above opportunities are premised on solution to GATT 
re-entry problems. Since the developed countries of Europe and 
America insist that the Uruguay round (including textiles and 
clothing) is a total agreement, only GATT signatory nations 
having the right to take part in textile and clothing 
transitional plans, this means that this plan applies only to 
signatory nations within GATT. Currently, 116 countries and 
territories are full participants in the Uruguay round of 
multilateral trade negotiations. China is one of them. Once 
China rejoins GATT, it will automatically enjoy the rights 
stipulated in the Uruguay round of negotiations, and it will 
also be responsible for discharging attendant obligations. 
Unless China is able to achieve restoration of its signatory 
status before conclusion of the Uruguay round of negotiations, 
China's textile and clothing exports will continue to be limited 
to what can be accomplished through bilateral negotiations. They 
will be limited by quotas. China has already expressed 
willingness to sign the complete Uruguay round accord. It is 
hoped that the negotiations will conclude shortly in order to 
promote growth of the world economy and trade. This also 
explains the necessity and urgency for China's GATT re-entry. 
  Of course, immediately following GATT re-entry, especially 
within a short period, China will have to gradually eliminate 
import licensing and substantially reduce tariffs; however, 
poorly competitive businesses and firms in the textile industry 
will face substantial pressures and threats. The main such 
trades are as follows: 
  1. China began to build its chemical fiber industries during 
the 1960s. Thanks to more than 30 years development, a complete 
range of such industries has been fashioned. Some fairly large 
size industries exist. In 1991, China ranked third in the world 
in chemical fiber production capacity. Conspicuous problems 
today are the small scale of China's chemical fiber industry, 
scattered plant sites, numerous production links, many tax 
rates, fairly antiquated equipment, low labor productivity 
rates, fairly high costs, not very high product grades, numerous 
ordinary products, few products meeting special specifications, 
prices that are higher than in international markets, and lack 
of competitiveness. Following China's GATT re-entry, the first 
textile industry to be hurt will be the chemical fiber industry. 
With the elimination of licenses and the lowering of tariffs, 
polyester producing enterprises will face losses, the returns of 
dacron short fiber enterprises will decline further, and new 
polyester and acrylic fiber plants will be hard hit. 
  2. Long chemical fiber textiles. During the past several 
years, China has developed the production of silk-like chemical 
fiber textiles on a large scale, but in 1991, large amounts of 
silk-like chemical fiber textiles were still being imported 
because China could not compete with foreign products on variety 
or quality, and particularly on price. Once China re-enters 
GATT, this kind of silk-like chemical fiber will be even harder 
hit. 
  3. China's dyeing industry today is not of a proper scale or 
composition, varieties are few, lots are large, quality and 
grade are not high, and returns are poor. It does not meet 
international needs for "small lots, many varieties, and quick 
delivery." Currently, China's self-sufficiency rate in export 
clothing lining is fairly low, and the quantity and quality of 
high grade sanforized products cannot meet domestic clothing 
industry demand. Much must still be imported. When tariffs are 
lowered and markets are opened following GATT re-entry, foreign 
textiles and clothing will enter the domestic consumer market at 
once. China's dyeing industry will face intense competition and 
a serious pounding. 
<H5>  Effect on Iron and Steel Product Prices </H5>
  1. The price formation mechanism. After 15 years of reform, 
China's iron and steel products price control system has 
changed. Enterprises rather than the state now set prices. This 
is basically consistent with the market pricing mechanism that 
GATT requires. However, China's iron and steel products price 
formation system differs in certain ways from the market system 
that western countries practice. 2. The iron and steel product 
price level. Overall, because they are currently pulled by 
demand, prices of iron and steel products in China are the same 
or greater than the international market price. For example, the 
domestic market price for popular goods such as wire rods and 
steel plate is greater than the international market FOB price. 
For a time, it was greater than the delivered cost of imported 
steel. Consequently, since 1993 large quantities of processed 
steel and scrap steel have been imported. 
  The effect of GATT re-entry on China's steel products price 
levels will be as follows: 1. It will restrict domestic finished 
steel market price levels, thereby causing a slide in the price 
of finished steel products that exceed the delivered cost. 
Second, most Chinese-produced iron and steel products are less 
diversified and of poorer quality that the same kinds of 
products on the international market. This means that, generally 
speaking, prices of Chinese-produced iron and steel products 
will be lower than prices of imports. 
  In addition, following GATT re-entry, prices of production 
elements such as railroad transportation, electric power and 
coal will rise substantially, thereby increasing iron and steel 
product production costs. This will affect the overall price 
level of iron and steel products, and the price structure 
between different products. 
<H5>  Effect on Cement Prices </H5>
  Analysis of the effect of GATT re-entry on cement prices in 
China, and study of remedies that may be taken requires, first 
of all, a clarification of the advantages and shortcoming of 
China's cement industry in a free market. Advantages and 
disadvantages are comparative. Thus, one cannot generalize. One 
must make accurate comparisons. Many trades study the effect on 
domestic industry of GATT re-entry by comparing China's 
advantages and disadvantages in comparison with their main 
competitors, the developed nations of Europe and America. Such 
comparisons are correct, no doubt, but we feel that Chinese 
cement cannot be compared with cement in Europe and America. 
This is because many years practice show that we import very 
little cement from Europe and America, and we will not import 
much in the future. China exports very little cement to either 
Europe or the United States today, but the amount may increase 
in the future. However, a long development process will be 
required. The Chinese cement industry's main foreign trade 
competitors are Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Indonesia, 
Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore. Our main comparative 
advantages over these countries and territories are as follows: 
  1) Manpower advantage. China's wage level is only one-tenth 
or less of theirs. The cement industry is a labor and capital 
intensive industry. To a very large extent, the cost of labor 
decides product competitiveness. Rise in the price of a nation's 
labor cannot arbitrarily exceed the overall level of its 
economic development. Therefore, the manpower advantage that 
China's cement industry enjoy is not just for the present, but 
will continue for a very long time. 
  2) Energy and raw materials advantage. The cement industry 
is 
a high energy consumption industry, and it requires large 
amounts of non-metallic raw materials such as limestone. By 
comparison with competitors, China has plentiful reserves of 
energy, particularly coal, and raw materials such as limestone, 
which are found over a wide area. China is richly endowed by 
nature, and prices are relatively cheap. 
  3) Environmental protection pressures are relatively slight. 
Since the cement industry is a traditional industry that 
pollutes the environment to a certain extent and whose 
technology content is fairly low, during the 1980s, some 
developed countries and territories began to limit its 
development or relocation. For example, Japan and Singapore 
adopted such measures. Relatively speaking, pressures in these 
regards are not great in China. 
  4) Transportation and sales advantage. The cement trade is 
strongly dependent on transportation. Cement must be marketed 
within a certain radius. Currently, some competitors are able to 
compete with us in sea transportation; thus, they have entered 
some coastal areas. However, they will find it difficult to 
compete with domestic firms in shipping cement long distances 
into vast inland markets. 
  Relatively speaking, China's cement industry is at a 
disadvantage in the following respects: 
  1) The general level of production technology is not high. 
Most Chinese cement concerns are medium and small enterprises 
most of whose equipment is antiquated and whose technical 
strength is weak. Consequently, they lag behind foreign 
countries in product quality, variety, and resources 
utilization. In particular, the variety and character of the 
cement they produce lacks diversity. It does not meet the 
construction industry's development needs. 
  2) Plant size is relatively small. Only one in 100 plants 
are 
of large or medium size. This percentage is far lower than for 
Japan and South Korea, and even lower than for Indonesia and 
Thailand. Failure to increase the benefits of scale is bound to 
increase difficulties in lowering costs. 
  3) A not entirely rational dispersal of the industry, and 
poorly developed transportation means that cement is in short 
supply in some coastal areas where much cement is used, while 
supply is greater than demand in inland areas. This affords 
opportunities for imported cement. 
  4) Psychological effect. Chinese prefer foreign goods not 
just for technological or quality reasons, but for psychological 
reasons as well. In Guangdong and Fujian provinces, the demand 
of capital construction projects for cement has increased in 
recent years, but some projects would rather use high priced 
imported cement than low priced inland China cement. One 
important reason for this is greater confidence about the 
quality of imported cement and that contracts will be honored. 
  Ultimately, all of the foregoing factors are reflected in 
price. In accordance with the principles of free trade that GATT 
follows, following GATT re-entry domestic and foreign firms will 
compete on equal conditions. Survival of the fittest will depend 
on quality, price, and sales service. China's advantage in 
future development lies in price, which it will continue to 
maintain. Its disadvantage lies in development problems, which 
efforts are being made to solve. Therefore, prospects are fairly 
optimistic. 
<H5>  Effect on Export Prices </H5>
  Following GATT re-entry, China's commodity export trade 
climate will improve greatly. Applicable GATT provisions will 
provide forable conditions and effective protection for China's 
exports. They will provide China vast export opportunities 
manifested in the following specific ways: 
  1. Following GATT re-entry, in accordance with the most 
favored nation treatment provisions and the general preference 
system principles, China will enjoy tremendous tariff 
concessions from GATT member states. During the past more than 
40 years, all member nations have conducted tariff concession 
discussions under GATT auspices, the tariff level of developed 
nations falling from 50 to 4.7 percent. The tariff level of 
developing countries has also fallen commensurately to 13.5 
percent. Once China is a GATT member, more of its export 
commodities will enjoy preferential tariffs to a greater degree, 
and no longer will there be general tariffs. There is a wide gap 
between preferential tariff rates and general tariff rates; 
thus, this will greatly increase the price competitiveness of 
China's exports. This will mean that China's low cost and low 
price advantages can be more fully exploited. It will also lower 
export costs, improve export returns, and stimulate export 
growth, providing opportunities for exports that could not 
otherwise be exported because of overly high tariffs. This will 
enable more of China's goods to enter international markets. 
  2. Following GATT re-entry, China will receive most favored 
nation treatment from more countries and territories. Thus, its 
export channels will increase, and its export area will expand. 
At present, China's export area is relatively concentrated. Only 
21 countries and territories provide general preference system 
treatment to China. Once China has re-entered GATT, we can use 
the GATT negotiating arena to conduct wideranging talks and 
negotiations with nearly 100 GATT member nations. We can use 
GATT's most favored nation treatment provisions and general 
preference system principles to obtain most favored nation 
treatment from more countries and territories. Thus, our goods 
can be exported to more countries and regions. Widening of the 
market will permit greater latitude in setting prices of China's 
exports. We will be able to chose markets over a wider area that 
will accept higher priced exports. 
  3. Consultation, mediation, and resolution of disputes are 
the basic tasks of GATT. After restitution of China's signatory 
nation status, with the help of GATT's mediation mechanism, 
China will be able to use international law as a basis for 
impartial resolution of trade disputes, the elimination of 
prejudice against China's exports, and improvement of China's 
position in trade negotiations. In recent years, some western 
nations have used the low prices of China's exports as a pretext 
for leveling dumping charges. They have instituted "anti-dumping 
investigations" and levied anti-dumping sales taxes that have 
caused great losses for China's export trade. Once China's GATT 
status has been restored, it will be able to refer such 
unreasonable charges to GATT for equitable resolution in 
accordance with prescribed procedures. This will ensure the 
development of China's foreign trade exports and safeguard 
China's economic trade interests. 
  4. Following GATT re-entry, China can use GATT's information 
system to obtain more international trade information and 
intelligence. In addition, it can engage in bilateral exchanges 
with other GATT signatories for an expansion of economic 
information sources and channels. Thus, China will be able to 
more frequently, more quickly, and more completely understand 
international market development trends, particularly 
international market price information. It will be able to 
scientifically determine kinds of exports and export price 
levels, and to rationally formulate export policy and make price 
competition decisions. 
  Recovery of its GATT seat will provide China's foreign trade 
exports excellent opportunities, but it will also pose stricter 
requirements. We will have to abide strictly by international 
regulations in export practice, and strictly enforce the 
provisions of GATT articles. Of all the GATT provisions, the 
ones that have the greatest effect on exports are the "dumping 
and anti-dumping" and the "subsidy and anti-subsidy" provisions. 
  Dumping is a form of unfair competition. GATT has provisions 
forbidding dumping, and it holds that an anti-dumping sales tax 
of a certain amount may be levied on dumped goods. Anti-dumping 
has a direct effect on the prices of China's exports. On the one 
hand, because of the strict provisions, once China has 
re-entered GATT, it will protest our legal rights and regular 
exports. It will prevent unreasonable accusations against 
China's dumping of goods. On the other hand, it will require 
that China's exports be handled strictly according to 
international standards. When setting export prices, we will 
have to be scientific and reasonable. When a low price is used 
to compete, a limit must be set. The price cannot be lower than 
normal value (i.e. a price comparable to the one for the same 
product consumed in the home country under normal circumstances, 
or the highest comparable price for the same product exported to 
a third country under normal trading circumstances, or the 
production cost plus a reasonable sales expense and profit in 
the home country). Since reform and opening to the outside 
world, China has frequently been accused of dumping by western 
countries. This has occasioned very great losses for China's 
export trade. This sounds a warning for China's exports 
following GATT re-entry. If an anti-dumping sales tax is levied, 
this will not be just a matter of loss or gain from buying and 
selling but may well result in the community being blocked from 
future exports of that product, which would seriously damage the 
development of China's exports. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20545 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  8 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Machine, Electronics Industries Advance </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0286B Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO in Chinese 8 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0286B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIDIAN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Correspondents Yang Wenyuan (2799 2429 0337) and </F>
Xiang Xu (0686 2485): "Exports of Machinery and Electronics 
Products Saw Sustained Growth During 1993. Key To Further 
Advance Lies in New Actions Says Ge Hui (2047 6540), the Officer 
in Charge of the National Machinery and Electronics Products 
Export Office, in Response to Correspondents' Questions"] 
  [Text] National Machinery and Electronics Product Export 
Office officer Ge Hui recently said in response to 
correspondents questions about the country's exports of 
machinery and electronics products during 1993 that exports of 
these products totaled $22.5 billion, up 13 percent from the 
previous year. He added, however, that the key to further 
advance lay in new approaches and new actions. 
  In reviewing the golden age of machinery and electronics 
product exports from 1986 to 1992, Ge Hui told the 
correspondents that thanks to the enormous growth during this 
seven-year period, the country's foreign exchange earnings from 
machinery and electronics products exports shot up from $1.62 
billion yuan in 1985 to $19.55 billion in 1992, an average 
annual 42 percent rise. China's exports of machinery and 
electronics products also increased from 0.3 to 1.3 percent of 
world trade in machinery and electronics products. Exports of 
machinery and electronics products also rose from 6.1 to 23 
percent of the country's foreign trade exports, machinery and 
electronics products now ranking second after textiles 
(including clothing) among the country's exports. 
  While evaluating the overall trend of development of China's 
exports of machinery and electronics products in 1993, Ge Hui 
stressed the need to look at them in the following two ways: 
First, machinery and electronics product exports continue to 
rise between 5 and 6 percentage points relative to foreign trade 
exports. Second, the 13 percent increase in machinery and 
electronics product exports during 1993 is far lower than the 40 
percent of the previous year. After seven years of high speed 
growth of machinery and electronics product exports, hidden 
worries about insufficient export strength have begun to set in 
again. 
  What are the reasons? Ge Hui believes there are five 
reasons: 
  First is the impact of the overall climate. During 
1993 the domestic market made a good showing. Demand was very 
brisk for commodities of an investment nature, such as machinery 
and electronics products for direct use in capital construction. 
This intensified the strain between the international market and 
the domestic market. 
  Second, too brisk domestic demand caused excessive rise 
in the prices of raw and processed materials such as steel. This 
led, in turn, to a rise in foreign trade enterprises' export 
costs, which impaired exporting firms returns from exports and 
increased export business difficulties. In addition was the 
good domestic market prices of machinery and electronics goods. 
The problem of returns from export sales not being as good as 
those from domestic sales became more glaring. Many production 
firms put greater emphasis on domestic market sales. 
  Third was further intensification of foreign trading 
firms' funds shortage. During 1992 and the first half of 
1993, the country's financial order was somewhat chaotic. Bank 
discounting of loans in violation of regulations was rampant. 
This also meant that the banks could not fully ensure a supply 
of funds for foreign trade enterprises. Some foreign trade 
corporations and industrial and trading corporations also tied 
up fairly large amounts of money in real estate and stock 
speculation. 
  Fourth, failure of state agencies concerned to enforce 
foreign trade export business policies also directly impaired 
the zeal of large numbers of export business. Examples 
include inability to offset renminbi payments when paying 
foreign exchange to the government, burdensome export tax rebate 
procedures, and inability to get tax rebates promptly. Of 
course, the situation improved following rectification of 
financial procedures and greater macroeconomic regulation and 
control during the last half of 1993. 
  Fifth, the export mechanism shows no formation as yet 
of a mechanism whereby enterprises can make their own business 
decisions, be responsible for their own profits and losses, 
restrain themselves, develop themselves, and expand exports as 
they like. New problems also occurred in the course of 
reform. Some foreign trade corporations unilaterally construed 
the "primarily one business but running multiple businesses" 
that state policy permitted to mean making money mostly inside 
the country. They did not put much effort into the fundamental 
task of earning foreign exchange for the country. During 1993, a 
substantial number of foreign trading corporations and 
industrial and trading corporations showed zero or negative 
increase in exports. 
  Ge Hui said that after an analysis and validation by units 
and locations concerned based on actual circumstances in China 
and the trend of world economic development at the All-China 
Machinery and Electronics Products Export Work Conference held 
in early 1993, a three stage development goal was set for 
China's machinery and electronics products exports: This was to 
export approximately $30 billion worth of machinery and 
electronics products by 1995 by meeting two years ahead of 
schedule the State Council proposed $20 billion export goal by 
the end of the Eighth Five-Year Plan; exporting approximately 
$60 billion worth by 2000, machinery and electronics products 
thereby becoming China's first major category of exports; and 
exporting approximately $150 million worth in approximately 15 
years beginning now. 
  Ge Hui emphasized that attainment of this magnificent goal 
will require new approaches and new actions. He discussed this 
issue from several angles. 
  First is the export products question. Vigorous 
efforts must be made to adjust the export product mix, truly 
creating a number of primary export products such as complete 
factories, ships, motor vehicles, and electronic products. If 
these products are to become the country's dominant exports, 
China will have to formulate corresponding industrial policies, 
draw up concrete methods, increase investment, speed up 
technological transformation, improve its product development 
capabilities, raise the level of its technology, and improve 
testing. 
  Second is the export market question. Today, 
international markets are the weakest link in the expansion of 
machinery and electronics products exports. The urgent task of 
the moment is further improvement of ability to open up 
international markets. This means both focusing on the opening 
of important markets that have a large capacity, and 
simultaneously paying attention to places that have market 
potential (such as Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa), 
doing all possible to create conditions to enter these areas. 
This is the only way of forming an all-points, diversified 
market pattern to reduce export risks. Henceforth, we will have 
to fashion a composite force made up of designated foreign trade 
corporations, production firms that do their own exporting, and 
foreign owned concerns for joint opening of international 
markets. We must gradually build a number of primarily 
industrial or primarily trade export enterprise blocs to pursue 
a course of greater internationalization, greater 
industrialization, and greater commercialization. 
  Next is the trading methods question. Trading 
methods must be more flexible. We must further develop the 
importation of materials for processing and re-export and 
develop OEM methods, i.e., use the manufacturing techniques, 
blueprints and materials of foreign firms to manufacture 
products bearing the trademarks of foreign forms, and using 
foreign firm commercial channels to sell them in international 
markets. We must operate joint ventures or produce and design in 
cooperation with foreign firms, investing in the operation of 
plants abroad to develop CKD and SKD assembled exports to expand 
exports of machinery and electronics products. 
  With the steady intensification of our foreign trade system 
reforms, the domestic market will gradually dovetail with the 
international market. Some methods used in China that are not in 
keeping with international practice will gradually weaken. Ge 
Hui emphasized that the role of finance and banking in 
supporting exports will becoming increasingly important. He 
believes that the state should intensify financial support for 
machinery and electronics products exports. While ensuring the 
short term operating funds needed to expand exports, the state 
should more greatly increase intermediate and long term export 
credit, grant preferential credit interest rates for sellers, 
and support exports of large and complete plants and equipment, 
as well as aircraft, and ships. Formation of a Chinese 
import-export bank should be accelerated. We should learn from 
the experiences of Japan and South Korea in export and import 
banks support for the export of complete plants. Once China has 
founded an export-import bank, it should assume the credit risks 
that ordinary commercial banks do not want to assume or are 
unable to assume, preferential credit being used to increase the 
competitiveness of China's machinery and electronics products in 
international markets. 
  Ge Hui said that the gradual intensification of reform 
should 
bring about the quickest possible formation of a mechanism 
whereby enterprises are responsible for their own operation, for 
their own profits and losses, for limiting themselves, for 
developing themselves, and for expanding exports. Truly 
effective policy measures should be formulated to arouse the 
interest of exporting enterprises in expanding exports. Ge Hui 
also especially emphasized the need to make the most of the role 
of the coordinated guidance and consulting services that the 
Machinery and Electronics Product Export Chamber of Commerce 
provides in building a regular export order. As government's 
function changes, not only will the Chamber of Commerce 
coordinate export prices, customers, and markets, but export 
quota assignments and preliminary examination of export licenses 
will gradually come to be handled by the Chamber of Commerce. 
The Chamber of Commerce must substantially improve its 
organizational structure to meet the needs of deepening reform. 
He said that a "Foreign Trade Law," and "Regulations for 
Punishing Sales of Exports at Low Prices" must be drawn up as 
quickly as possible, legal methods use to prevent a chaotic 
situation. Punishments must be particularly emphasized, 
violations of the law dealt with according to law, severe 
punishments meted out depending on the seriousness of the 
offense, and for causing severe economic losses for the country. 
  Reportedly, acting in the spirit of State Council structural 
reforms, a National Machinery and Electronics Products 
Import-Export Office organized from the merger of the former 
State Council Machinery and Electronics Products Export Office 
and the State Council Machinery and Electronics Equipment Import 
Coordination Office is to become the functional unit of the 
National Economics and Trade Commission. Ge Hui said that the 
new organization will formulate support policies as reform 
steadily intensifies. Just as in the past, it will be in charge 
of needed macroeconomic regulation and control measures to move 
ahead and spur healthy development of the machinery and 
electronics products import-export trade. 
  The CPC Central Committee's listing of the machinery and 
electronics industry as a principal industry in the national 
economy has greatly encouraged the millions of staff members and 
workers on the machinery front. "Close involvement in reform, 
hastening development, vigorous development, and making the most 
of the national economy's dominant role," have become action 
slogans for stimulating an all-out effort throughout the 
industry. The development program for invigorating the machinery 
industry that the Ministry of Machinery has drawn up has been 
revised many times and will soon appear. 
  Human talent is the keystone in dominant industries. One 
important aspect of the invigoration of the machinery industry 
is good management and good use of all kinds of specialists and 
technical talent to improve the caliber of the rank and file 
throughout the industry. 
  Survey data show that as education, the economy, and science 
and technology develop, and as society and enterprises 
increasingly respect science and technology as well as 
scientific and technical talent, the speed of growth of 
technicians in the machinery system has been markedly higher 
than the total number of staff members and workers. Statistics 
from 10 dominant enterprises show an 8.6 percent increase in the 
total number of staff members and workers between 1988 and 1991, 
but a 20.8 percent increase in the number of technicians. At the 
same time, the caliber of technicians as a whole has also risen 
markedly, and the percentage of graduate students, and college 
undergraduates has increased by varying degrees. An environment 
of respect for human talent, respect for knowledge, and respect 
for contributions is gradually taking shape. 
  However, by comparison with needs in invigorating the 
machinery industry, numerous problems in need of immediate 
solution continue in the training and use of human talent. 
<H5>  Human Talent Utilization Efficiency Not High </H5>
  A questionnaire survey of 201 scientific and technical 
personnel shows that only 5.5 percent of scientific and 
technical personnel in the machinery and electronics industry 
personnel feel that their skills are being used to the full; 
39.8 percent feel they largely apply their talents; and 17.4 
percent believe their talents are not being used at all. In 
another survey of engineers in large and medium size 
enterprises, 72 percent felt they were being held back, 80 
percent felt work unsatisfying, and only 5 percent put in 
overtime. Such a slack and easy going state of affairs naturally 
creates not very high work efficiency. Some comparative data for 
1988 is shocking. In Japan, per capita gross output value of 
engineers in the machinery industry was $350,000, while it was 
only $84,000 in China. This is to say that in machinery 
industries having the same output value, China used 4.1 times 
the number of engineers as Japan. 
  There are both structural reasons and conceptual reasons for 
this state of affairs. Examples include out of date products, 
antiquated organizational methods, softening of demand for 
technology and for technical personnel, and being accustomed to 
the expansion of extensive inputs primarily, using large amounts 
of money and manpower; and a serious shortage of development 
funds that leads to having a large number of technical personnel 
in name but not in reality, which makes the development of new 
products very difficult, and makes it even harder to translate 
scientific research achievements into production. (The money 
provided for technical progress in some developed nations 
generally runs between 3 and 5 percent of total sales. In strong 
Japanese enterprises, it runs as high as 10 percent. In China, 
by contrast, many enterprises invest less than 1 percent.) A 
Shanghai survey shows 70 percent of new research achievements 
have not been translated into the development of products. The 
value of knowledge is not fully appreciated. Many enterprises 
continue to treat scientific and technical personnel like 
organizational cadres, their average bonus being between 10 and 
30 percent less than workers on the front line of production. 
Egalitarianism in distributions is a serious problem. "It makes 
no difference whether one works or does not work," or whether 
one "does not work and also takes few risks." This situation 
results in scientific and technical personnel not doing their 
best; production efficiency in the enterprise itself is not 
high; and overstaffing is the general rule, etc. 
<H5>  Serious Flight of Human Talent </H5>
  Surveys show that despite the increase in technicians in the 
machinery and electronics industry in recent years, in 
state-owned enterprises -- particularly in large- and 
medium-sized enterprises -- the dropping out of skilled 
personnel, the aging of human talent, and the flight of human 
talent is extremely serious. It is mostly middle age and young 
permanent scientific and technical cadres that leave. A sample 
survey showed a decline from 24.6 to 19.28 percent in the number 
of scientific and technical personnel between the ages of 30 and 
40 between 1986 and 1991. Another survey showed the flight of 
more than one-third of the young scientific and technical 
personnel during the past five years from large- and medium-size 
machinery and electronics enterprises. More than 60 of the best 
graduates of institutions of higher education assigned to the 
Dalian Municipal Machinery Bureau were snapped up by the three 
kinds of partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises. Between 
1984 and 1990, 4000 university graduates were assigned to a 
Beijing machine tool plant. More than half have already left. 
The problem in frontier regions is particularly serious. Survey 
statistics from 287 enterprises show only 7.92 percent of 
technicians in enterprises today are between 31 and 35 years of 
age, and 14.5 percent are between 26 and 30 years old. The 
flight of human talent not only weakens enterprises technical 
strength, but also damages continuity. It tends to create a 
vicious cycle. 
  The main reasons for the flight and dropping out of human 
talent are that large- and medium-sized state-owned enterprises 
are in the least favorable position in the intense competition 
for human talent. They cannot compete with the three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises, or with township 
and town enterprises, in earnings. In the probability of making 
a name for oneself and opportunities to travel abroad, 
state-owned enterprises cannot compete with educational and 
scientific research units. In housing, working conditions, and a 
feeling of being respected, state-owned enterprises cannot 
compete with administrative institutions. In work freedom, work 
environment, and income, state-owned enterprises cannot compete 
with companies of all kinds. Yet another important reason for 
the flight of human talent is that technicians can more easily 
put their talents to use in the three kinds of partially or 
wholly foreign-owned enterprises, and in township and town 
enterprises, unlike in some large- and medium-sized state-owned 
enterprises where seniority and age play a role, and where 
people are not used to the full. This corrodes people's spirit 
and enthusiasm. 
<H5>  Accelerate Building of a Human Talent Corps </H5>
  Informed people believe that the priority task in 
invigorating the machinery industry is accelerating the creation 
of a high caliber specialist corps that combines ability and 
political integrity, and that is sensibly composed. The human 
talent strategy that the Ministry of Machinery espouses is 
"maintenance of continuity in the corps, optimization of the 
make-up, improvement of caliber, and speedy selection for 
promotion and training of middle agent and young permanent 
technical cadres and academic leaders so that new technical 
personnel will be available to replace old technical personnel 
over the next 10 years. It wants to build a technician corps of 
good political quality, that has fine professional skills, whose 
make-up is rational, that is highly trained, and that is imbued 
with vitality to meet the needs of reform and opening to the 
outside world, scientific and technical competition, and social 
development." 
  The specific measures that the Ministry of Machinery has 
proposed to attain this strategic goal are the founding of a 
human talent bank, including the establishment first of a high 
level specialized talent bank, accelerated training of 
three-in-one talent (technology, management, and sales), and 
four-in-one talent (technology, management, sales, and foreign 
language); founding of a human talent exchange center, 
improvement of enterprises competitiveness, using fair 
competition as a basis for accurately guiding rational exchanges 
of human talent; formulation of preferential policies for the 
importation of scientific and technical management talent; 
founding a rewards system, increasing investment in education, 
etc. In short, "human talent engineering" is imminent. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20546 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Firm Mergers, Acquisitions Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0292A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 15 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0292A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Zuoyi (3769 5679 5030): "Enterprise </F>
Mergers and Acquisitions as Tool of Foreign Trade Reform"] 
  [Text] Mergers and acquisitions involving foreign trade 
enterprises and industrial enterprises have been attracting 
enormous interest in all quarters of society since last year. 
Enterprise mergers and acquisitions are a means of foreign trade 
reform and a key instrument of accelerating the development of a 
socialist market economy by combining the transfer of ownership 
rights with the optimization of resource allocation. Last June, 
for instance, China Metals Import and Export Corporation merged 
with the Siping City Tungsten Molybdenum Materials Company and 
in November China Chemical Industrial Import and Export 
Corporation merged with the Siping City United Chemical 
Industrial Works and Siping City Pharmaceutical Company. Earlier 
in January last year, Ningxia Metals Import and Export 
Corporation acquired Yinchuan Calcium Carbide Factory. 
Reportedly a number of foreign trade enterprises are actively 
considering and making plans to merge with or acquire industrial 
enterprises. 
<H6>  I </H6>
  Enterprise mergers and acquisitions are governed by the 
"Regulations on Changing the Operating Mechanism of Industrial 
Enterprises Owned by the Whole People." Under Article 16, for 
example, "Enterprises may acquire other enterprises in 
accordance with the principle of voluntary participation and 
compensation. The transaction shall be reported to the 
government department in charge for record purposes." Article 34 
says, "The government may decide that one enterprise shall merge 
with another or approve such a merger. In either case, provided 
the enterprises in question are owned by the whole people, the 
properties may be transferred without compensation. A merger 
plan shall be put forward by the government department in charge 
or by the enterprises. A merger agreement shall be drawn up 
under the auspices of the government department in charge and 
after full deliberations by all parties involved. The creditor's 
rights and liabilities of the original enterprises shall be 
assumed by the enterprise created by the merger." "An enterprise 
may acquire other enterprises on its own initiative. Acquisition 
is a form of merger with compensation. Enterprise acquisitions 
must be approved by the government department in charge. The 
creditor's rights and liabilities of the acquired enterprise 
shall be assumed by the enterprise that has acquired it." When a 
foreign trade enterprise seeks to merge with or acquire an 
industrial enterprise, it should proceed in accordance with the 
above-mentioned regulations. 
  1. About Enterprise Mergers 
  A foreign trade enterprise may merge with an industrial 
enterprise with permission. As far as enterprises owned by the 
whole people are concerned, a merger may take the form of a 
transfer of properties without compensation. A merger plan 
should be put forward by the enterprise. A merger agreement 
should be drawn up by the two parties after full consultations. 
The creditor's rights and liabilities of the merged enterprise 
will be assumed by the post-merger foreign trade enterprise in 
accordance with the terms in the merger agreement. The merger 
between China Metals Corporation and Siping City Tungsten 
Molybdenum Materials Company and that between China Industrial 
Chemical Corporation and Siping City United Industrial Chemical 
Works and Siping City Pharmaceutical Company were processed in 
this manner. 
  2. About Enterprise Acquisitions 
  Enterprise acquisition is a form of merger with 
compensation. 
A foreign trade enterprise which decides on its own to acquire 
an industrial enterprise should come up with an acquisition 
plan. An acquisition agreement should be drawn up by the 
acquiring enterprise and the enterprise being acquired after 
full discussions. The creditor's rights and liabilities of the 
acquired enterprise should be assumed by the foreign trade 
enterprise in accordance with the terms of the acquisition 
agreement. Ningxia Metals Import and Export Corporation acquired 
Yinchuan Calcium Carbide Company in this manner. 
  3. About the Legal-Person Status of the Enterprise Being 
Merged or Acquired 
  Regardless of whether the case involves the transfer without 
compensation of the properties of an enterprise owned by the 
whole people or the transfer with compensation of the properties 
of a collectively owned enterprise, the original ownership 
system shall remain unchanged despite the change in its 
affiliation. Also unchanged will be its original independent 
legal person status under which it enjoys decision-making 
authority in its operations and assumes responsibility for its 
own profits and losses. That way we can first avoid putting old 
wine in new bottles, which would give rise to a new form of 
"eating off the big rice pot." Secondly, we want to fully 
mobilize the enthusiasm of both industry and trade. Thirdly, we 
can keep the more flexible operating mechanism. 
<H6>  II </H6>
  True to the spirit of the relevant national regulations, a 
foreign trade enterprise should abide by the following basic 
principles when it proposes to merge with or acquire an 
industrial enterprise: 
  1. Comply with the principles of mutual voluntary 
participation, supplementing one another's strengths, and common 
development. Departments in charge should not practice 
match-making when the parties involved are reluctant. Practice 
proves that forced mergers and acquisitions that ignore 
objective conditions and are based solely on subjective wishful 
thinking are often counter-productive. A foreign trade 
enterprise has its own characteristics. For example, it has good 
access to international market information, varied and multiple 
commodity marketing channels, and a specialized corps skilled in 
handling foreign economic relations and trade. Industrial 
enterprises too have features unique to themselves. Most, for 
instance, have fixed physical structures, including plants or 
land, a substantial quantity of machinery and equipment, and a 
corps of workers boasting a fairly high technical standard and 
practical experience. The two--a foreign trade enterprise and an 
industrial enterprise--are able to come together, breaking down 
administrative regional barriers and bridging the gap between 
different industries, mainly because this form of combination 
serves the common economic interests of both trade and industry 
and is consistent with the direction of their long-term 
development. 
  2. The foremost responsibility of a foreign trade 
enterprise, 
which lies at the heart of its work, is to work hard to expand 
exports and earn foreign exchange. In seeking to merge with or 
acquire an industrial enterprise, a foreign trade enterprise 
should abide by the principle that the new enterprise must be 
able to increase exports and earn more foreign exchange or do so 
after transformation. The foreign trade enterprise must strike a 
proper balance between concentrating on its core industry and 
diversifying its range of operations, between exporting and 
earning foreign exchange, on the one hand, and making a profit, 
on the other. It must strive to diversify into a variety of 
areas by revolving around its main industry. 
  3. Take stock of and appraise the assets of merged or 
acquired industrial enterprises carefully. Enterprise mergers 
and acquisitions in essence mean two parties trading property 
rights. Only a comprehensive, fair, and accurate inventory and 
appraisal of assets ensures the protection of the legitimate 
rights and interests of both parties and prevents the loss of 
state or collective properties. In line with the principle of 
comprehensiveness, fairness, and accuracy, the state has ruled 
that neither departments in charge of state property 
administration nor the departments overseeing the industries 
concerned should directly engage in the business of inventorying 
and appraising state properties. Instead, it should be conducted 
by a third party: a property appraisal company, an accounting 
firm, or an auditing firm certified by the state to appraise 
properties. 
  4. After taking stock of and appraisal its assets, an 
enterprise that is found to have more liabilities than assets in 
principle should not be accepted as candidates for merger or 
acquisition. In the real world, however, the situation is much 
more complicated. We should study each case in earnest and 
handle it with caution before making a decision. Some industrial 
enterprises may have more liabilities than assets, but they have 
development potential. In these cases one should consider their 
combination on the basis of voluntary participation. 
  5. Industrial enterprises that have been merged or acquired 
normally should not be given the authority to import and export. 
Importing, exporting, and related business activities should be 
handled centrally by the foreign trade enterprise. Where such 
authority is indeed justified, an application should be made in 
accordance with regulations. In the case of industrial 
enterprises already authorized to import and export before the 
merger or acquisition, such authority should remain intact. 
  6. The personnel management, appointment and dismissal of 
cadres, wages, bonuses and benefits, and social insurance, among 
other things, of the industrial enterprise merged or acquired 
should be processed in accordance with the appropriate 
regulations of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and 
Trade or the local government concerned. 
  The merger and acquisition of industrial enterprises by 
foreign trade enterprises is a product of the deepening of 
foreign trade reform as well as the road foreign trade 
enterprises must travel to achieve industrialization. China's 
property rights market has yet to be standardized and the 
necessary laws and regulations are less than comprehensive, but 
provided we liberate our thinking, seek truth from facts, 
research diligently, and experiment boldly, our property rights 
market and the body of laws are bound to get better and better 
over time, thus making fresh contributions to the deepening of 
foreign trade reform. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20547 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rural Reform, Land System Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0290A Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] in Chinese No 12, 20 Dec pp 3-7 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0290A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO NONGCUN JINGJI [CHINA'S RURAL 
ECONOMY] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lin Yifu (2651 3015 1133) and Yang Jianping </F>
(2799 1696 1627) from the State Council's Development Research 
Center and the Office for Investigation and Research under the 
CPC Central Committee's General Office: "Perfecting the Land 
System, Developing the Land Market"] 
  [Text] A major problem in China's countryside today is the 
zero or even negative growth of the rural people's income. Now, 
the rural people's complaints about excessively heavy burdens 
have become a serious matter seldom heard of in the past. It is 
a direct reaction to the lack of growth in income. Lack of 
growth in income has dampened the rural people's initiative, 
shaken agriculture's position as the foundation of our national 
economy, and aroused the concern of all quarters. This state of 
affairs has prompted our country to dig into the root cause of 
the problem. 
  Whether the rural people's income can grow steadily 
depends on whether the mix of rural products and the proportions 
of rural people engaged in different fields of work are kept 
reasonable and are adjusted from time to time with the 
development of the economy. Agricultural products, especially 
grain, have a low Engel's coefficient. In the entire national 
economy, the proportion of needs for agricultural products, 
grain in particular, falls with the progress of economic 
development. This means that, as the economy grows, the only way 
to steadily increase the rural people's income is to adjust 
their product mix and occupational makeup so as to turn out more 
high-value-added products and have more people engaged in 
non-agricultural production. The problem that in recent years 
our grain production has increased but the rural people's income 
has declined is exactly an inevitable result of our failure to 
make the above adjustments in time. 
  In a market economy, the adjustments of the mix of 
products and the proportions of people in different occupations 
are automatic and quick. In China's rural areas, however, such 
adjustments do not occur as a quick reaction to signs of changes 
in the market condition. There are many reasons for this. One of 
the chief reasons is that, following the implementation of the 
land contract system, property rights are not clearly defined 
and, accordingly, cannot be transferred smoothly from one person 
to another. In other words, the imperfect land system and the 
slow development of the land market are main obstacles to 
improving our agricultural returns and raising the income of the 
rural people. 
<H3>  I. Accelerating Land Market Development Is an Urgent Task in 
Rural Reform </H3>
  A radical measure taken by our country for its rural 
reform is the implementation of the output-related contract 
responsibility system based on households. The prime 
significance of this responsibility system lies in that it 
changes the old land system and distribution system. The 
tremendous achievements of our rural reform are universally 
acknowledged, but no reform can give benefits forever. In recent 
years, with the development of the rural economy, more and more 
hidden shortcomings in our present land system have been brought 
to light. While we have set the goal of building a socialist 
market economy, these shortcomings are placing hurdles in our 
way toward fostering a market economy in rural areas. 
  Since 1984, a variety of new problems have cropped up in 
China's rural areas. The crux of the problems is the conflict 
between the market mechanism pursued by the commodity economy 
and the administrative interference relied upon by the planned 
economy. From an objective viewpoint, the fast growth of 
agricultural production and the rural people's income before 
1984 was abnormal. It was due to an immense surge of the 
farmers' productive enthusiasm, and hence a sudden eruption of 
the rural productive force, triggered by the change in the 
system. Such a fast growth had its limitations, and there is no 
reason to expect it to persist. After 1985, agricultural 
production and the rural people's income entered a stage of 
regular growth -- a normal economic phenomenon. At a time in 
this stage, the grain output did not go up. On the one hand, 
this was inevitable when intra-agriculture adjustments were 
under way. On the other hand, it reflected the spontaneous need 
of farm households to act in accordance with the law of value 
after they had become the main elements in rural economic 
operations. With the decontrol of the markets for certain farm 
products and the rapid development of non-agricultural 
undertakings in rural areas, farmers, who could work on their 
own, would inevitably choose to produce those farm and sideline 
products that were relatively high-priced and had a high added 
value or would go to work in township enterprises or do their 
own businesses. That is to say, the market mechanism lured the 
rural people to spur the adjustment of the agricultural 
structure. It was due to this adjustment that the rural 
per-capita income increased rather quickly between 1984 and 
1988. Unfortunately, we did not take advantage of that situation 
by using the market mechanism to adjust our supply and demand, 
allocate our resources, and guide our production. Instead, we 
judged the whole situation by the ups and downs in grain output. 
This led to the reinstatement after 1989 of a series of 
traditional measures to artificially adjust our agricultural 
structure, such as strengthening control over the agricultural 
production and input plans, increasing subsidies to farmers for 
purchase of means of agricultural production, and raising the 
government's grain procurement prices. At the same time, we 
restricted the flow of the agricultural labor force to urban 
areas and non-agricultural sectors, and controlled the 
production of farm products not included in the unified 
distribution plan in an effort to ensure a higher grain output. 
In so doing, we have forced our labor, land, and financial 
resources to go from the lucrative undertakings and products 
back to less profitable grain production. The results: On the 
one hand, our grain production no longer remains unchanged, but 
hit one record high after another. On the other hand, however, 
our gross agricultural output has not increased as noticeably as 
we expected, while the farmers' income has declined remarkably 
and the government's burden caused by subsidies has become 
heavier and heavier. What is more, the government's heavy burden 
has only invited the farmers' complaints about their declining 
income. This fully bears out the fact that the traditional 
policies and measures can no longer meet the needs of the new 
rural situation, and we must have a new mindset and seek a new 
way to solve the issue of agricultural development. The new 
mindset and new way is to deepen our rural reform by fostering 
the market so that the market mechanism, under the government's 
macro-guidance, will play a real fundamental role in the 
allocation of agricultural resources. 
  There are two tasks in fostering the rural market: One is 
to foster a product market. Here the main task is to do away 
with the unified and fixed-quota purchase system and to 
facilitate direct contact between producers and consumers so 
that the rural people can manage production in accordance with 
changes in social demands. The other task is to foster a 
production-element market. The principal work is to establish a 
mechanism for the free flow and optimum allocation of such 
production elements as labor, funds, and land. An active 
production-element market is a prerequisite for timely 
adjustments of the production structure in line with market 
demands. Only when production elements are exchanged and 
transferred freely between farm households and are combined in 
an optimum way based on their relative advantages, is it 
possible to adjust the rural production structure and 
occupational makeup in line with economic development. 
  Now, the governments at all levels have done a great deal 
of work toward building the product market. Contracted purchase 
is very popular, the grain price has been by and large 
liberalized, and pace is being quickened to foster the product 
market. In contrast, the development of the product-element 
market is comparatively slow. Now, in our rural areas, a number 
of limitations still exist on the flow of the labor force. The 
financial market is small and chaotic. In particular, due to 
delay in the formation of a rural land market, the household 
contract responsibility system has become an objective factor 
restricting the development, exploitation, and transfer of our 
land resources. Because of this, quickly fostering a land market 
should be a breakthrough point in our next move to deepen the 
rural reform. 
  Now, in our rural areas, the productive force is still at 
a low level, and nothing other than land can provide so many job 
opportunities for the people. Under such circumstances, land not 
only has the function of developing production, but also plays a 
social security role; that is, it has a welfare nature. For this 
reason, when the output-related household contract 
responsibility system was first introduced, land was allocated 
according to the number of household members. This was 
objectively necessary. Nevertheless, since land is one of the 
most fundamental elements of production, without a land market 
to invigorate it, the mobility of other production elements will 
be greatly hampered. So, even though fostering the land market 
is the most thorny task, we must do it in order to pave the way 
for an all-round and in-depth rural reform. 
<H3>  II. The Present State and Problems of the Land Ownership 
System </H3>
  The household contract responsibility system was quickly 
popularized in the tide of rural reform with the main goal of 
correcting the over-centralized control and the separation of 
labor and means of production inherent in the old system. It was 
correctly oriented and did tackle the vital points of the 
problems. However, practical experience over the past few years 
has revealed the following drawbacks of this land system: 
  With regard to the land use rights, there are three major 
problems: First, the instability of land contract periods has 
affected farmers' investment expectations. To avert the negative 
effect of short contract periods on farmers' investment zeal, 
the CPC Central Committee clearly stated in its No. 1 Document 
of 1984 that the term of a land contract is 15 years, and it 
cannot be changed. This did set farmers' minds "at ease." 
However, the statement that the term of the contract is so many 
years and is unchangeable or it can be extended implies, in 
itself, that after this number of years, eventually it may be 
changed. This means that the output-related contract 
responsibility system is still an expedient measure and cannot 
help stabilize farmers' long-term investment expectations. As 
farmers dare not provide too much input into the land, the 
reserve productive capacity of the land tends to diminish, 
resulting in the deterioration of production conditions. It is 
quite likely that with the approach of the termination of their 
15-year contracts, farmers will all the more aim at short-term 
profits rather than long-term benefits in using the land. 
Secondly, the frequent readjustments of the contract 
responsibility land has led to numerous land-border disputes. 
The land distribution system based on household members has, in 
itself, the problem of frequent readjustments to cope with the 
change in the household size. The longer the time, the more such 
changes will occur and the more frequently the land has to be 
readjusted. A survey reveals that all rural areas have made 
remarkably more readjustments of their contracted land since 
1985, and that an almost complete reshuffle has taken place in 
land distribution in a span of four or five years. The principle 
of "overall stability, minor readjustments" established by the 
central authorities has been invoked by grassroots units as a 
basis to readjust their contract policies. The primary goal of 
such readjustment is to solve the land problem for the increased 
population. However, too frequent readjustments have added to 
the fragmentation of the already-divided contracted land and 
created a number of land-border disputes. This is another factor 
affecting farmers' investment in the contracted land. Thirdly, 
the fact that collectives such as township and village 
enterprises can use land without giving compensation has 
resulted in a waste of land resources. With the concept of the 
collective ownership of land, when setting up a new enterprise, 
a village collective may use, without paying anything, the land 
designated for contracting to farmers. Township enterprises may 
use contracted land freely or by paying a nominal fee as 
compensation. In many localities, when a township or village 
enterprise wants to take over a piece of land already contracted 
to a household, all it needs to do is to hire the main laborers 
of that household as its employees, and there is no further 
obligation. According to a survey of 280 villages conducted by a 
department concerned, under the condition that no state tax was 
levied on transactions involving the change of farmland into 
non-farmland, the compensation on 56.8 percent of the 
village-requisitioned land was less than 10 years' land rental, 
and the annual interest on the per-mu compensatory fee was below 
the bank's interest on savings deposits. The losses to the 
farmers were grave. The result of little or no compensation for 
land taken from farmers is that township and village enterprises 
have indiscriminately taken up large tracts of farmland, thus 
seizing resources from the hands of farmers and wasting the 
already-scanty arable land. However, because we have not formed 
a land market, land is apt to be viewed as a no-price resource, 
and even if we want to give it a reasonable price, it is hard to 
do so. 
  Two main problems exist with regard to land revenue: One 
is that various "covert taxes," levies, and income retentions 
have affected farmers' revenue from the contracted land and led 
to unequal financial burdens. After the land contract system was 
put into effect, no improvement has been made on the complicated 
and ambiguous land tax system formed at the time when all 
purchases and sales were monopolized by the state and when the 
people's communes still existed. Now, farmers are the main 
producers. They hope to see a simple and clear-cut land tax 
system. In their words, what they want is that "after paying 
enough to the state and giving enough for collective retention, 
all that remains is ours." Yet the current land tax system 
actually consists of two kinds of taxes--an overt tax (collected 
by the state) and a covert tax. The latter can be further 
divided into a hidden tax, which is actually the fixed-quota 
purchase of farm products by the state, and a concealed tax, 
which is the extra financial burden shifted onto farmers (in the 
form of various levies and income retentions). The covert tax is 
a highly flexible and arbitrary burden and often damages the 
interests of farmers. For this reason, it often induces farmers' 
complaints and resistance, and directly dampens their enthusiasm 
about agricultural production. Now, many localities have adopted 
a "two-land system" which divides land into contract 
responsibility land and food-grain land. They use the contract 
responsibility land to guarantee the land tax revenue, but in 
doing this, they concentrate and aggravate the tax burden on one 
part of the land. The policy of using industry to subsidize 
agriculture is aimed at offsetting part of the hidden costs of 
farming. But, because different localities may give different 
subsidies to agriculture, this policy can add to the inequality 
in the distribution of burden. In fact, the principle of 
fairness, targeted by the equal distribution of land, has often 
been marred by the unequal land tax burden. The other problem is 
the unfair distribution of revenue from the increase in land 
value. This has directly affected farmers' interests. With the 
expanding scale of urban construction and the rapidly increasing 
numbers of large-area development zones, large tracts of 
farmland have been diverted to non-agricultural purposes. Now, a 
lot of farmland is being transformed into industrial and urban 
land. This is actually a shift of the primary industry's capital 
to the secondary and tertiary industries. Inevitably, such a 
shift will raise the value of land to a considerable extent. In 
our rural areas, land belongs to collectives, while farmers are 
members of the collectives and they get a share in the 
distribution of collective revenue on the basis of the land they 
are farming. For this reason, any revenue from the increase in 
land value should be reasonably distributed among the 
collectives, the farmers giving out the land, and the new land 
users. Nonetheless, the fact is that without a land market and 
effective government control and guidance, it is hard to decided 
on a reasonable land price, and it has become a common 
phenomenon that land is transferred at too low a price. What is 
more, a large amount of revenue from the increase in land value 
is enjoyed by new land users or small groups, while very little 
goes to collectives and farmers. In 1984, with the surging of 
township enterprises, there appeared a tide in using farmland 
for non-agriculture projects. At that time, a large part of the 
extra profit created by rural industries through the use of 
farmland was retained in the rural community either for use in 
subsidizing agriculture or for public welfare purposes. Now, a 
new tide of this nature is coming into being. Although industry 
and real estate business have created large amounts of extra 
profits from land, including revenue from the increase in land 
value, basically these profits do not benefit farmers at all. 
According to surveys in Guangdong, Hebei, and other localities, 
fees paid to farmers as compensation for use of their land, for 
making up for their loss of crops, and for subsidizing their 
resettlement expenses total only 2,000-20,000 yuan per mu, 
whereas land that has "roads, running water, and electricity and 
has been leveled" generally sells for 200,000-300,000 yuan per 
mu. Such a high revenue from the added land value is almost 
entirely enjoyed by the government departments or the real 
estate companies concerned. This has brought about a situation 
where government power is used to exploit the rural collective 
property. Such a situation has drawn farmers' complaints and 
often led to their conflicts with the government department or 
the real estate company. 
  On the land-disposal right, the chief problem is the 
various subjective and objective restrictions on the 
subcontracting and transfer of land. These restrictions have 
three negative effects: In the first place, they affect the 
development of non-agricultural undertakings. To those farmers 
who wish to switch to industrial or commercial jobs, their 
contract responsibility land is a big hurdle because after they 
have given up farming, in most cases they still have to pay tax 
on the land and may even be fined for leaving the land idle. 
Further, because of the land's social security function and 
their inability to exchange the land for anything valuable, they 
can hardly come to a determination to leave the land. Secondly, 
these restrictions affect the development of land operations of 
scale. Appropriate-scale land operations is one of the 
significant measures to raise agricultural productivity, while 
the subcontracting and transfer of contracted land is a 
necessary condition for such operations. Now, on the one hand, 
in some rural areas there is no lack of high-caliber farmers, 
but due to the insufficient land contracted to them, their 
productive capability cannot be fully utilized. On the other 
hand, some farm households, for one reason or another, are 
unwilling to do farming with the result that large tracts of 
contract responsibility land are lying idle. Thirdly, the 
above-mentioned restrictions hinder the development of the rural 
financial market. With the continued change in the rural 
production structure and occupational makeup, rural people have 
an ever-increasing need for long-term loans from banks or other 
financial institutions so as to invest in new production 
projects. International experience and lessons show that 
long-term loans for agricultural production are possible only 
when there is an appropriate mortgage. The mortgage should not 
be subject to depreciation and should be immovable and 
invulnerable to damage. From this perspective, the land-using 
right is the most appropriate thing that rural people can use as 
mortgage. Failure to liberalize the land disposal right is bound 
to hinder the development of the rural financial market, thereby 
obstructing the readjustment and optimization of the rural 
production structure. 
<H3>  III. Enact and Perfect Relevant Laws and Regulations To 
Speed Up Land Market Development </H3>
  A sound land system should meet at least two requirements: 
One, a clear-cut property right; two, a self-adjusting and 
self-changing mechanism. The essence of building a land market 
is to set up and make perfect a system for the selling and 
reselling of the land-using right during the land contract 
period and to put this system within the framework of laws and 
regulations after we have clearly distinguished the land 
ownership from the land-using right. 
  In fact, whether our attitude toward fostering the land 
market is active or not, farmers have already acted in this 
direction, driven by their market-oriented initiative. In those 
areas where the economy is relatively developed and more new job 
opportunities exist, there are considerable instances of 
subcontracting the land or asking others to farm the land, 
either openly or secretly. Meanwhile, some local governments 
have implemented more active policies to protect farmers' 
interests in line with the development of the situation. In 
certain localities, the land contract period has been extended 
to 20-50 years--in Hainan Province, the contract period is as 
long as 70 years. In other localities, farmers who no longer 
want to farm their contracted land are allowed to subcontract or 
transfer their land-using rights to others as long as this does 
not affect the agricultural tax, the villages' income retention, 
and the fulfillment of the local farm labor plan. As an 
alternative, they may return their contracted land to the 
collective, which will give it to new contractors. Still other 
localities have adopted a "two-land system," which divides land 
into "food-grain land" and "contract responsibility land." The 
basic goal is to liberalize the transfer of the contract 
responsibility land while maintaining a stable guarantee for the 
people's food requirements. Now, it is rather common that land 
owned by rural collectives finds new applications or enters the 
market. This is especially noticeable in coastal developed areas 
and in the suburbs of inland cities. In most cases, this 
phenomenon finds expression in the utilization of land as a form 
of capital for industrial or real estate ventures, including 
joint and cooperative projects. At the same time, however, the 
practice of using various pretexts to indiscriminately divert 
farmland to other purposes is becoming an increasingly serious 
problem. Now, the farmland used for building development zones 
alone has exceeded 200 million mu. In the absence of a proper 
land market rule, this practice is causing more and more losses 
to the state, collectives, and farmers. This state of affairs, 
coupled with the problem of farmers leaving large tracts of 
farmland idle, indicates from another perspective the necessity 
and urgency of building a land market and making it perfect as 
soon as possible. 
  After introducing the small peasant-owner land system to 
replace the feudal land system and with the development of 
productive forces and the increase in employment opportunities, 
Japan, Korea, and some West European countries have all 
traversed a course from restricting to encouraging the transfer 
of land and finally to the development of appropriate-scale 
family farms. This shows that building the land market is a 
matter common to all countries. 
  In view of the land's dual function of production 
development and social security, we should comply with three 
principles, namely, efficiency, development, and fairness, in 
fostering our rural land market. The efficiency principle means 
that we should do our best to achieve the most rational and 
efficient use of land so that our limited land resources will 
give us more benefits. Through the transfer of the land-using 
right and with the adjustment by the market force, we may 
develop appropriate-scale operations to raise our agricultural 
productivity. By the development principle, we mean that through 
the subcontracting and transfer of the land-using right, we 
should adjust and optimize the product mix and occupational 
makeup and develop non-agricultural production in the 
countryside as a way to spur the development of the entire rural 
economy. The fair principle means that in the course of transfer 
of the land-using right, we should ensure that farmers leaving 
their land will not be deprived of security for livelihood, and 
those transferring their land-using right to others will not 
lose the benefit from the increase in land value to which they 
are entitled. We should acknowledge the fact that the rural 
people are the natural beneficiaries of the collective-owned 
land. We should also give due recognition to the investment they 
put into the land during their contract period. This way, we 
will not only maintain social stability in rural areas, but also 
ensure equitable competition on the land market. 
  Now, we may start with the following five measures to 
foster the land market: 
  First of all, it is necessary to make clear that the 
output-related household contract responsibility system is a 
basic system, which will remain stable and unchanged for a long 
time to come. Practical experience shows that this contract 
responsibility system is a way of production suited to the 
current level of our rural productive forces. It must be taken 
as a foothold to proceed to the next stage of our rural reform. 
If the farmers do not request a change, the state should respect 
their choice and should not use administrative measures to 
impose any other rural cooperative system upon them. Now that 
the 15-year contract period, as stipulated in the CPC Central 
Committee's document, is running out, it is imperative to 
announce as soon as possible that the output-related contract 
system will remain unchanged and the farmers can continue to use 
the land for a long time to come. It would be best if something 
could be done to assure them that the land they are using "would 
not change whether there are births or deaths in their 
families." Only by deepening the reform toward improving the 
contract responsibility system and by clearly defining the 
relationship of land ownership versus the land-using right, can 
we avoid going astray in improving our land system. 
  Secondly, we should, by means of law, clearly define 
and protect the integrity of the rights to the use, revenue, and 
disposal of land. The integrity of these three rights means 
the integrity of the farmers' rights and interests under the 
contract responsibility system. It is also a fundamental 
condition for pushing land to the marketplace. The various acts 
at present infringing upon farmers' rights related to land 
operations can only be checked by a clear-cut land law. Since 
1984, we have encouraged the buying and selling of the contract 
responsibility land but without noticeable success. One of the 
reasons is that we have not clearly specified the land-using 
right. Once we have a clear-cut land administrative law, we 
should issue land-using right certificates so as to give a legal 
protection to the output-related household contract 
responsibility system. 
  Thirdly, we should establish a system allowing 
land-using right certificates to be used as mortgage so as to 
facilitate the transfer of such right in rural areas. When 
the land-using right can be transferred in association with the 
use of certificates for the land-using right as mortgage and 
when the land-using right can be mortgaged through the transfer 
of such certificates, transfer of contracted land will be a very 
simple process. Once certificates for the land-using right can 
be transferred, it is possible to increase the average scale of 
land-related operations and raise the efficiency of land 
utilization. Mortgaging these certificates for loans will 
quicken the development of the financial market and the 
readjustment of the production structure in rural areas. Of 
course, specific requirements on such certificates should be 
established so as to facilitate the transfer of the land-using 
right and prevent farmers from using land as a value-guaranteed 
saving rather than a production element they should earnestly 
work with. 
  Fourthly, we should accelerate the formulation of 
laws and regulations on the land market so as to set a standard 
for its normal development. To meet the obvious needs and 
comply with the principle of land market development, we should 
work out as soon as possible a perfect legal system for the 
management and operation of the land market and check those acts 
that hurt the interests of the state and farmers in the lease or 
sales of the land-using right. The most urgent task at present 
is to levy a value-added tax on land at a progressive rate so 
that benefits from the increase in land value--as reflected in 
differential land rentals--will not go enormously to a few units 
and individuals. By doing so, we can put the inappropriate "real 
estate craze" to an end. 
  Fifthly, it is imperative to reform the land tax 
system so as to combine the overt and covert taxes into one 
tax. Now, our country's actual revenue from agriculture is 
gradually declining with the abolishment of the state monopoly 
system for the purchase and sales of agricultural products. The 
diversified rural economic activities, in particular the 
operations conducted by farm households, require socialized 
services provided by the government and other related 
organizations. This requires that townships and villages have a 
stable revenue. After the reform of the agricultural products 
procurement system, the covert tax should be turned into overt 
tax, and all kinds of expense apportionment and the special 
products tax should be abolished. Instead, a unified land tax 
system should be put into practice. 
  In coordination with the land tax reform, efforts should 
be made to improve the rural social security system so as to 
reduce the impact of market competition on farmers. 
  Though the above-mentioned tasks are interrelated, some of 
them can be started earlier than the others. However, we must 
have a proper overall plan for these tasks in order to ensure 
the integrity, orderliness, and equality of our land market. 
  Moreover, the silent emergence of the land market in our 
rural areas is a fact that we must acknowledge. This is a worthy 
attempt to better use land so as to achieve a higher marginal 
productivity. It is also a significant way to raise the rural 
people's income through the readjustment of their production and 
occupational structure. The government should act in accordance 
with this trend to speed up the development and improvement of 
the land market. This is a vital part of the current work in 
building a socialist rural market economy as well as an 
effective way to break through the predicament of no growth in 
the rural people's income. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20548 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Current State of Physically Challenged Persons </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0162A Shanghai SHEHUI KEXUE [SOCIAL SCIENCES] in Chinese 
No 161, 15 Jan 94 pp 47-51 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0162A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHEHUI KEXUE [SOCIAL SCIENCES] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhao Zhuliang (6392 4554 5328) of the Central </F>
China Teachers' College, edited by Xu Honghai (6079 1347 3189): 
"The State of China's Physically Challenged Persons in the 
Course of Modernization"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] 
  In recent years, along with the development of China's 
physically challenged persons' cause, while the condition of 
this large and special group has improved to a certain extent, 
the current state of physically challenged in areas such as 
economics, education, jobs, and recovery, generally remains far 
behind the average level of the society as a whole. 
  1. The threat-to-survival crisis. Statistics show 
that of the 4.9 percent of China's population that are 
physically challenged, as many as 20 million are struggling to 
survive below the subsistence line, with 70 percent of 
physically challenged existing only with the support of family 
and relatives or on state or collective relief. 
  A study reported in the 1993 No 2 issue of ZHONGGUO CANJI 
REN 
[CHINA'S DISABLED PERSONS] says that: "Many physically 
challenged remain in great hardship, with basically not enough 
food and clothing. For instance, in Shaoyang City, Hunan 
Province, where economic conditions are better, the average 
income in 1991 was 545.19 yuan for the rural population, but 
only 264.64 yuan for physically challenged, or less than 
one-half. In Shaoyang's Xinning County, poverty-stricken 
physically challenged make up 64.4 percent of all physically 
challenged, with 17.2 percent in exceptional poverty." 
  A document put out by the China Coalition for the Disabled 
(the 1992 Document No 126 of the Coalition for the Disabled) 
contains the following item: While poverty relief is carried 
out, in certain developed or more developed areas, 70-80 percent 
of the poverty-striken population below the local subsistence 
line are physically challenged. While Shunyi County has only 
200 poverty-stricken families, 97 percent of them are families 
of the physically challenged. In one village in Chengde, all 
those living in thatched houses are physically challenged. Of 
the poverty-stricken population in 1991, physically challenged 
made up 80 percent in Qingdao, over 70 percent in Jiangsu, and 
50 percent in Yunnan, Guizhou, and Sichuan. 
  2. The inequality-of-education crisis. The 
national rate of illiteracy or semi-literacy was 20.6 percent in 
1987, but down to 15.6 percent by the end of 1991, while 
illiteracy of the physically challenged stood at 68 percent. 
And the national school-entrance rate for school-age children 
was 97.1 percent in 1987, and up to 97.8 percent by the end of 
1991, while this rate in 1987 was 2.7 percent for blind 
children, 5.5 percent for deaf and dumb children, and 0.33 
percent for low-intelligence children. By the end of 1991, the 
school-entrance rate for blind, deaf, and low-intelligence 
children was less than 10 percent. 
  This gap is even larger for education above the high-school 
level. Before 1984, almost none of China's physically challenged 
went to school above the high-school level. Since 1984, while 
physical-examination criteria have been amended, enabling about 
1,700 physically challenged a year to meet 
political-examination, grades, and physical-examination 
standards for college admission, nearly 900 of these a year are 
still not admitted. By 1992, only a little over 5,000 physically 
challenged throughout China had received higher education at the 
university level. 
  Poverty and ignorance always go together. Approximately 70 
percent of China's physically challenged are dependent on the 
support of family and relatives or state and collective relief, 
which figure is alarmingly close to the rate of illiteracy and 
semi-literacy among physically challenged. This warns us that 
a longstanding lack of education makes it hard for physically 
challenged to overcome their dependence on others and on 
society, leaving them in the regretable plight of being a social 
burden. 
  3. The job-obstacle puzzle. While jobs are a 
means of livelihood, the terms on which individuals display 
their talent and grow, and the way that everyone can contribute 
to society, the jobs situation among China's physically 
challenged is far from desirable. In recent years, China's 
urban unemployment rate has been around 3 percent, and was down 
to 2.6 percent by 1991, while 49 percent of physically 
challenged were unemployed. In our rural areas, nearly 30 
percent of employable or partially employable physically 
challenged were without jobs. 
  When physically challenged choose jobs, their range of free 
job-choice is very small. A sample survey shows the job 
situation for physically challenged in china has the following 
features: 1. By job classification, 81.2 percent work in 
farming, forestry, livestock raising, and fishery; 9.8 percent 
in production, transportation, and post and telecommunications; 
5.5 percent in commercial service; 2.1 percent as specialized 
technicians; and 1.4 percent as government collective-enterprise 
officials, office workers, and at other jobs. 2. As to manual or 
mental labor, 96.6 percent of physically challenged work in 
manual jobs, such as agriculture, industry, and commerce, while 
only 3.4 percent work at mental jobs, such as specialized 
technicians and government enterprise officials, which is lower 
than the national ratio of mental laborers to the population of 
8 percent. 
  4. The health-care-security deficiency. While a 
1987 national sample survey showed that the most crucial need of 
about 50 percent of physically challenged was for treatment, 
recovery, and the necessary supplementary appliances, a 1992 
sample survey of 11 provinces found that 97 percent of 
physically challenged needed supplementary appliances and 
special articles, which nearly 90 percent could not obtain. 
  China has 4.9 million people who have gone blind because of 
cataracts, and 17.7 million deaf people (of whom 1.71 million 
are children under the age of 14, and 740,000 are infants under 
the age of 7), with every year bringing about 30,000 new deaf 
children, and 1.24 million suffering from the aftermath of 
polio. By the end of 1992, only a little over 700,000 had had 
cataract surgery, only a little more than 280,000 had had 
corrective surgery for polio [infantile paralysis], and only 
slightly more than 29,000 deaf-mutes had been trained to sign. 
This data shows that the health-care-security deficiency keeps 
many physically challenged in bed for long years, cut off from 
the world, and unable to take an equal part in social activities. 
  5. The marriage-and-family misfortune. A 1987 
sample survey showed that of the 43 million adult physically 
challenged throughout China, 20.21 million, or 47 percent of 
adult physically challenged, did not have spouses, while the 
national unmarried rate for adults was roughly 8 percent; the 
family divorce rate for the physically challenged was a high of 
1.46 percent, almost triple the sound-family divorce rate of 
0.55 percent; and the widowed rate for physically challenged 
was 32.17 percent, more than quadruple the healthy widowed rate 
of 7.61 percent. Their physical defects, psychological barriers, 
and social and economic status limitations turn the marriage and 
family matter for physically challenged into the most 
troublesome problem they face. 
  In short, within the general setting of the Chinese people's 
march toward becoming comfortably well-off, two-thirds of 
physically challenged still cannot support themselves, with 
nearly 20 million not having enough food and clothing; 
physically challenged have a high 68-percent illiteracy rate, 
with almost 90 percent of blind, deaf, and low-intelligence 
children not in school; quite a few employable physically 
challenged have no jobs, for a high 49-percent unemployment 
rate; and most physically challenged have not obtained the care 
needed for recovery... leaving such an enormous and shocking 
social problem harshly confronting society and physically 
challenged. 
  [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20549 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Analyzes Phenomenon of Structural Corruption </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0162B Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] in Chinese No 108, Jan 
94 pp 13-15 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0162B </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cheng Guoyou (4453 0948 2589): A Plain </F>
Discussion of Structural Corruption"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] I hold that corruption can be 
divided into the two general categories of nonstructural and 
structural. So-called nonstructural corruption 
refers to the exploitation by some of their job conveniences and 
authority to engage in corrupt actions that directly encroach on 
and damage the interests of others or of society, such as graft, 
bribe-taking, and fraud. As such corrupt behavior directly 
violates the law, it can be punished by law and, as long as the 
party and government pay it great attention and control it 
strongly, it is very easy to root out. But so-called 
structural corruption refers to the exploitation by 
certain people of their regular job conveniences and authority 
in particular social, political, and economic structures, due to 
management systems and regulations being imperfect and unsound, 
and premised on not affecting their own organizational interests 
and ensuring that their own organizations operate normally 
according to practice, to engage in certain behavior for private 
gain, such as trading power for profit, exchanging power for 
money, trading power for material, using public monies for 
entertaining and gift-giving, traveling abroad at public 
expense, using public vehicles for private purposes, using 
public office for private gain, and indulging in extravagance 
and waste. Such corrupt behavior is necessarily much more 
covert than nonstructural corruption. It may apparently not be a 
direct violation of laws and regulations, or be a violation that 
is very hard to expose, as long as "only a few know about it." 
Due to this feature of structural corruption, it is very hard to 
investigate and punish, as well as being very liable to 
spreading quickly once the climate eases. And it is only when it 
abets the growth of nonstructural corruption, or corrupts 
overall social values, or has a significant impact on overall 
public interests, that it arouses great attention by the general 
public. As China's political and economic management systems are 
still not perfect and sound in many areas, structural corruption 
occupies a key position in corrupt behavior. This is precisely 
why the phenomenon of corruption has always been hard to curb. 
Having investigated the case records of a certain province for 
1991, I have discovered that most of the cases handled were 
nonstructural corruption (direct violations), mostly graft, 
while there were very few cases of structural corruption, 
showing that structural corruption is very covert and hard to 
investigate and punish. 
  China's current structural corruption can be roughly divided 
again into the following four situations. 
  1. Corruption caused by shortages. Shortages in 
the field of economics show up as demand exceeding supply for 
certain goods (funds) with designated prices. When the 
macroeconomy is not controlled or uncontrollable, the choice of 
clients by functional departments of enterprises, commodity 
departments, or officials in charge of certain commodities or 
fund distribution becomes a kind of power which, under existing 
conditions, easily turns into a certain individual's power. As 
the choice of client does not in any case affect the 
department's normal operations, the individual exploitation of 
such power for private gain falls within the normal range of 
responsibililty, with very little likelihood of severe censure, 
so that quite naturally, the choice of whoever makes the most 
gifts is also logical. 
  Shortages in the field of social organization are also 
widespread, showing up mainly as demand exceeding supply for 
officials, cadres, and workers, or limited positions with many 
wishing to become officials, cadres, and workers. This gives 
great power to organizational, personnel, and labor departments, 
or certain other departments and individuals with jurisdiction 
over personnel, which power, without democracy, openness, or 
effective restraint, is very easily exploited for private 
purposes. As whoever is chosen does not directly impact the 
organization per se, being part of the organization's normal 
work responsibility, such conduct for private purposes is hard 
to uncover. And while it might be condemned by outsiders (which 
condemnation is very dangerous), it is very difficult for it to 
be genuinely investigated and punished. 
  So shortages obviously create power. Since the individual 
exploitation of such power does not directly endanger normal 
organizational activities, as long as democracy is imperfect and 
individual power is not effectively restrained by organizations, 
it will be widely exploited for private gain, leaving such 
corruption to spread. 
  It needs to be pointed out that under our traditional system 
before 1979, while shortages were more severe than at present, 
the pheonomenon of corruption was certainly not as serious. 
This was because the state exercised strict control over areas, 
such as personnel, wages, prices, and markets, putting more 
limits on such corruption. 
  2. Corruption caused by irregular competition. 
Competition was the product of our development of a commodity 
economy, being an inevitable social development. Reasonable 
competition can make excellence even better, and transform 
inferiority into excellence, contributing to economic 
development, the display of pent-up talent, and social progress. 
  But when rational competition mechanisms are still 
imperfect, 
certain people will actively draw or depend on certain powers to 
give themselves an advantageous position in competition, while 
also granting certain benefits to powerholders. This power in 
turn helps them to further strengthen their advantageous 
position in competition, forming the logical equation of power 
plus competition equals success. On the other hand, competitors 
who have not found any patronage are left in a disadvantageous 
position, finding it either impossible or difficult to go on. 
The current dual-pricing system's "official" and "private" 
corruption are typical examples of power combined with 
competition. Most of the economic entities now being run by 
certain government organs or functional departments are also 
suspect due to this. 
  3. Corruption caused by imperfect power-oversight 
mechanisms per se. Perfect power-oversight mechanisms 
should include internal oversight mechanisms, external oversight 
mechanisms, and oversight mechanisms for the overseers 
themselves. But China's current power-oversight mechanisms are 
very imperfect. 1) We have neither internal or extenal 
oversight mechanisms, not to speak of any oversight of the 
overseers. While there are certain written prohibitions and 
regulations at times, there are no genuine oversight organs or 
personnel. For instance, bank credit officers have the three 
powers of investigation, examination, and approval concentrated 
in one post, with certainly no oversight or restraint organs. 
2) Even when there are internal and external oversight 
mechanisms, there is certainly no oversight of the overseers. 
In addition, the poor quality of certain overseers saps the 
oversight function, which can be seen in certain public servants 
violating the law in its enforcement, not acting in accordance 
with the law, and not enforcing the law strictly. 3) When 
there is only internal oversight but no external oversight or 
oversight of the overseers, certain organs of power become the 
enforcers as well as the overseers of power. [passage omitted] 
  For instance, while government departments have internal 
supervision bureaus and party committees have 
discipline-inspection commissions, their external oversight is 
generally only through written prohibitions and regulations by 
upper-level governments or party committees without any 
substantive oversight-enforcement organs. 
  With such imperfect oversight mechanisms, it is actually 
very 
hard to stop the exploitation of public power for private gain 
and striving for small-group interests, and neglecting current 
activities, such as the private use of public vehicles, the use 
of public office for private gain, the use of power for private 
purposes, and light punishments for serious crimes, not at all 
surprising. Certain powerholders also dare to state recklessly 
that: "I will not act without advantage, I will act with 
advantage, and I will do anything for more advantage," the crux 
of which is "orders that are not followed, and prohibitions that 
do not work." 
  Not only are oversight mechanisms imperfect, but party and 
government organs are bloated and overstaffed. So certain 
departments overstep their jurisdictions, exploiting their power 
actively, by looking for matters to handle where there are none, 
seeking for power to exploit where there is none, and 
artificially setting up obstacles in political and economic 
activities to create shortages and power to exploit for private 
gain. For instance, actions, such as inspecting, evaluating, 
setting up blocks, and issuing documents to restrict X, or 
exerting invisible pressure on certain sectors, are precisely 
the root of the spread of "arbitrary charges, fines, and 
apportionments" and other unhealthy tendencies. 
  4. Corruption caused by dependency connections among 
powerholders. China's current cadre-appointment 
system-model is mainly one of "connections" and appointments by 
superiors, with the appointments and powers of lower-level 
officials controlled not by the people, but rather by the 
superior pertinent leaders, with certain subordinate interests 
also controlled by certain upper-level departments and leaders. 
So subordinate officials, in order to protect their powers or 
partial interests, often do no hesitate to entertain or make 
gifts to their superiors at public expense, in order to 
harmonize upper and lower connections, consolidate their own 
positions, or gain local benefits. This is probably one of the 
causes of the much-prohibited yet unstoppable entertaining and 
gift-giving at public expense. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20550 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  5 October 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Three Types of `Pseudo-Aristocrats' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0093 Changsha FAZHI YUEKAN [LEGAL SYSTEM MONTHLY] in 
Chinese No 145, 5 Oct 93 pp 38-39 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0093 </F>
<F P=104>  Changsha FAZHI YUEKAN [LEGAL SYSTEM MONTHLY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Shuming (1728 2562 2494): </F>
"`Pseudo-Aristocrats'"] 
  [Excerpts] In recent years, exclusive establishments 
catering solely to the pleasures of aristocrats have sprung up 
in such places as Guangzhou and Shanghai. They operate under the 
slogan "members only." Surprisingly, the use of this slogan has 
damaged the "self-esteem" of many, leading them to ask 
themselves the question: "Why am I left out?" As a consequence, 
"pseudo-aristocrats" of every kind have emerged. As the name 
implies, a "pseudo-aristocrat" is not a true aristocrat. Rather, 
he is one who makes a grand entrance in those places frequented 
by aristocrats. There are, roughly speaking, three kinds of 
"pseudo-aristocrats." 
The first kind is known as the "person with contacts." This 
type is comprised of mainly executive department personnel who 
use their official duties to inspect management operations and 
maintain public order as a springboard to gain entry into the 
establishments frequented by aristocrats. Or course, the 
managers and owners of the establishments catering to 
aristocrats cannot treat these people rudely, and so they give 
them indefinite "entrance passes" which are "tickets" that would 
otherwise cost several thousand yuan or even over ten thousand 
yuan to buy. These persons with "contacts" are thereby allowed 
to fully enjoy the perks of the aristocrat lifestyle. The second 
kind is known as a "wanna-be." These persons cannot resist the 
enormous lure of the "aristocrat lifestyle," and the burning 
desires in their hearts lead them to gather up all of their 
savings so that they may make loans to aristocrat establishments 
and thereby enjoy the perks of the same. This type of 
"pseudo-aristocrat" is the most dangerous. The third kind is 
known as the "momentarily flush." This kind of person acts in a 
fairly reasonable manner. When he is flush with money he goes 
out and "lives it up," and when he is broke he will restrain 
himself so that he does not get in over his head. This group is 
made up of poor people who enthusiastically pursue wealth and a 
quick improvement in lifestyle. Some say that the social 
phenomenon of the "pseudo-aristocrat" will, like that of drug 
use, be difficult to reverse once the people get a taste of what 
they are craving. If drug use is harmful to the physical and 
mental health of individuals, then "pseudo-aristocracy" is a 
chronic spiritual disease that is tough to cure. It is not hard 
to see that the ranks of the "pseudo-aristocrats" continue to 
swell as people hanker after greater luxury and enjoyment. How 
ought we regard this phenomenon of the "pseudo-aristocrat?" 
  One executive branch cadre with years of party experience 
says that the "pseudo-aristocrat" phenomenon certainly does 
exist among executive branch cadres. Once people take the bait, 
party status and principles are pushed to the back of their 
minds. As a result, certain high-class establishments emerge, 
devoted to such things as illegal activities and sex services, 
and this happens because law enforcement is lax. This seriously 
disrupts the socio-economic order and should be a matter of 
concern for our whole society. A propaganda cadre says 
passionately that China's public opinion and propaganda organs 
must take a certain amount of responsibility for the emergence 
and spread of the "pseudo-aristocrat." In earlier days, the 
public opinion organs went overboard against things like "big 
money," "big operators," and "abnormal consumption," while 
exercising very little tact. As a result, certain weak-willed 
individuals reacted just the opposite and began joining the 
ranks of the "pseudo-aristocrats." Conversely, it is clear that 
not enough propaganda has been done about correct consumption, 
and in the future, improvements must be made in our guidance of 
public opinion. Without discussing how "abnormal consumption" 
momentarily expands the ranks of the aristocrats, we can say 
that the "pseudo-aristocrat" phenomenon has led certain law 
enforcement personnel to fail in vigorously enforcing the law, 
to abandon principles, and even to adopt criminal ways. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20551 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rapid Growth of Underground Criminal Societies </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] in Chinese No 105, Oct 93 pp 47-48 </F>
<F P=103> Shanghai </F>
<F P=104>  SHEHUI [SOCIETY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sun Hui (1327 6540) and Wu Mengshuan (0702 1322 </F>
2165): "Underground Criminal Societies Rapidly Expand Their 
Influence"] 
  [Excerpts] First of all, the influence of recently formed 
underground criminal societies within China is expanding at an 
alarming rate! Currently, more and more criminal gangs and 
unhealthy organizations are turning into underground criminal 
societies with even stronger and more one-pointed devotion to 
crime. The rapid numerical growth in underground criminal 
societies stems from the major increase in criminal gangs over 
successive years. In 1990, 100,527 criminal gangs with 368,885 
members were identified throughout the country. Both the number 
of gangs and their membership were three times as large as that 
of 1985. And while the numbers of those involved in underground 
criminal societies has rapidly grown, the influence of these 
societies has spread throughout all regions of the country. 
Fairly large-scale underground criminal societies have been 
identified in Harbin, Shaoyang of Hunan Province, Guiyang of 
Guizhou Province, Yancheng of Jiangsu Province, and Yuncheng of 
Shanxi Province, while the situation in the southeastern coastal 
regions is even more critical than in the north or in the 
hinterland. Looking at an individual province, underground 
criminal societies have been found operating in 18 regions and 
cities of Hunan Province, as an example. The members of 
underground criminal societies are primarily the dregs of 
society's idlers, while the nucleus and backbone of these gangs 
is made up of wayward habitual criminals, recidivists, those 
running from the law, as well as those who have not been 
reformed through the two types of labor. These types of 
individuals have long taken an anti-social stance, conducting 
themselves in a wicked, merciless, and unscrupulous fashion as 
they engage in unbridled criminal activity without regard for 
the consequences. They represent the worst sort of criminal 
influence we are confronted with, and they are the hardcore 
operators behind the exercise of underground criminal society 
influence. A significant segment of the underground criminal 
society operates under a clear reactionary agenda colored deeply 
by political designs. For example, the "China crime party" and 
the "plum blossom gang", both of which were located and busted 
by public security organs, had clearly established reactionary 
agendas based on "seizing territory and political power." The 
huge growth in underground criminal society influence is also 
shown by the massive wealth these individuals have acquired 
through illegal means. They have used every sort of method to 
lay hold of firearms, ammunition, hand grenades, daggers, 
electrical billy clubs, poison guns, tear gas cannisters, and 
other lethal weapons, and they illegally manufacture firearms 
and ammunition for themselves. For example, in early April of 
1991, the "wolf gang" was busted in the Yuncheng region of 
Shanxi Province, and they were found to possess 22 firearms, 10 
of which were home-made. At the end of 1991 and the beginning of 
1992, eight underground criminal gangs were busted in Guiyang 
and they were found to have 17 handguns and rifles, as well as 
military grenades, mortars, bulletproof vests, hunting knives, 
daggers, and other lethal weapons. Underground criminal 
societies generally possess modern means of transportation and 
advanced communications facilities. For example, the underground 
criminal society headed by Wu Jiazhen [0702 0502 3791] in a 
certain suburb of Yancheng, Jiangsu Province, has vehicles for 
all of its thugs. Also, it has set up communications links by 
purchasing a radio station and walkie-talkies, and it has 
installed a tower antenna over 20 meters high in front of the 
entrance to its headquarters building. The "wolf gang" of Shanxi 
Province controlled all of the drivers of our unit and used our 
vehicles to carry out their criminal activities. 
  Underground criminal societies have many members, they are 
tightly organized, they have a considerable stockpile of 
weapons, and most of the members are more hardened in their 
criminal ways than the run of the mill criminals and gangs, and 
for these reasons, the influence of the underground criminal 
societies is deeper and more pernicious. For the most part, 
these people brazenly commit their crimes in the open, not 
hesitating to kill, injure, rob, steal, swindle, blackmail, 
kidnap, smuggle, or traffic in and use narcotics, and they will 
go so far as to illegally imprison individuals. In addition to 
these serious crimes, members will freely beat up and insult 
people, oppress whole towns by bullying the businessmen, eat and 
drink their fill without paying, forcibly take whatever they 
desire, wantonly insult women, extort money and items form 
sources public and private, commit every manner of crime, 
seriously prejudice the good order of society, and disturb 
normal social order. They have become a new form of mass 
oppressor, they try to dominate through evil deeds, and they 
represent a wicked force that challenges the political power of 
the people and the laws of the state. For example, since 1988, 
the city of Shaoyang has had at least 25 cases of persons having 
their hands and/or feet chopped off. In some cases, persons have 
had their fingers chopped off or smashed, while others have had 
the tendons in their feet slit out and discarded. When the same 
persons go to the hospital to have new tendons transplanted, the 
savage criminals track them down to re-slit and discard the 
tendons, and then smash their kneecaps and ankles. Another trend 
is that criminal societies are infiltrating the business world, 
actively seeking legal business fronts, thereby establishing a 
base for operations. Some criminal societies even use ill-gotten 
wealth to make contributions and donations and to render aid, 
seeking political capital in the process and ensconcing 
themselves in protective surroundings. Criminal societies employ 
various means to bribe, entice, and corrupt personnel of party 
and government organs, and in particular public security and 
justice workers, into acting as protective umbrellas. They use 
these people to shelter criminal actions, to facilitate crime, 
and to gain priviliged information. A small minority of cadres 
and policemen become corrupt after failing to resist 
temptations. They shelter the criminal societies and either do 
nothing about the illegal criminal activity or they do next to 
nothing about it. Some even drink toasts with the criminals and 
pass along priviliged information. Several major crime society 
stings have shown this to be the case, and it has forced public 
security organs to set up secret operational cells in secret 
locations to work in a highly concealed manner. As the influence 
of underground criminal societies grows wildly within China, 
outside and foreign criminal elements are taking advantage of 
our country's gradual opening to the outside world. They are 
stepping up their infiltration of Mainland China, trying to 
establish a foothold, open up a "new battlefield", or seek 
refuge on the mainland. Underground criminal societies from Hong 
Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and Japan have been the most pernicious in 
this regard. They have infiltrated the southeast coastal regions 
and have conspired with evil elements in those areas to join 
forces. The harm this represents is significant. Especially in 
the last few years, international drug cartels have tried to 
open up routes for their drug trade through China. The drug 
trade has become the medium for underground criminal societies 
both within China and abroad. For example, in July of 1990, when 
the Taiwan police launched a crime raid under the code name 
"sudden thunder", the "kingpin" of the so-called "firefly bridge 
gang", Zhang Zhenqian [1728 4176 3383], moved to the mainland 
and set up the Zhongshan Trading Company in Xiamen. His business 
expanded to Fuzhou, Shanghai, and Beijing, among other places, 
and Zhang became "brothers" with a certain Chinese painting 
master. He registered in Beijing and continued to engage in 
crime. In February of 1992, our police captured him and 
extradited him to Taiwan. According to the estimates of the 
Taiwan press, there are now over 200 underground Taiwan 
criminals of the big brother rank or higher operating on the 
mainland, approximately 30 of whom carry guns. It is obvious 
that outside criminal influence permeates our country party and 
government organs and departments are the focal points of 
outside criminal infiltration. Customs, border defense, and 
public security organs are particular targets. In Guangdong 
Province, a small percentage of the border defense station 
officials have been bribed by criminal societies from Macao into 
helping sneak things across the border. And a very small number 
of public security cadres and policemen have been recruited by 
the Shuifang and Shenghe gangs of Hong Kong. While infiltrating 
the mainland, underground criminal societies from abroad 
wantonly engage in criminal activity. For example, in the 
Friendship Market robbery case in Shenzhen, aside from one 
student being involved, all of the perpetrators were members of 
the "14K" and "Shuifang" gangs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20552 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<F P=101> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rapid Growth of Underground Criminal Societies </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] in Chinese No 105, Oct 93 pp 47-48 </F>
<F P=103> Shanghai </F>
<F P=104>  SHEHUI [SOCIETY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sun Hui (1327 6540) and Wu Mengshuan (0702 1322 </F>
2165): "Underground Criminal Societies Rapidly Expand Their 
Influence"] 
  [Excerpts] First of all, the influence of recently formed 
underground criminal societies within China is expanding at an 
alarming rate! Currently, more and more criminal gangs and 
unhealthy organizations are turning into underground criminal 
societies with even stronger and more one-pointed devotion to 
crime. The rapid numerical growth in underground criminal 
societies stems from the major increase in criminal gangs over 
successive years. In 1990, 100,527 criminal gangs with 368,885 
members were identified throughout the country. Both the number 
of gangs and their membership were three times as large as that 
of 1985. And while the numbers of those involved in underground 
criminal societies has rapidly grown, the influence of these 
societies has spread throughout all regions of the country. 
Fairly large-scale underground criminal societies have been 
identified in Harbin, Shaoyang of Hunan Province, Guiyang of 
Guizhou Province, Yancheng of Jiangsu Province, and Yuncheng of 
Shanxi Province, while the situation in the southeastern coastal 
regions is even more critical than in the north or in the 
hinterland. Looking at an individual province, underground 
criminal societies have been found operating in 18 regions and 
cities of Hunan Province, as an example. The members of 
underground criminal societies are primarily the dregs of 
society's idlers, while the nucleus and backbone of these gangs 
is made up of wayward habitual criminals, recidivists, those 
running from the law, as well as those who have not been 
reformed through the two types of labor. These types of 
individuals have long taken an anti-social stance, conducting 
themselves in a wicked, merciless, and unscrupulous fashion as 
they engage in unbridled criminal activity without regard for 
the consequences. They represent the worst sort of criminal 
influence we are confronted with, and they are the hardcore 
operators behind the exercise of underground criminal society 
influence. A significant segment of the underground criminal 
society operates under a clear reactionary agenda colored deeply 
by political designs. For example, the "China crime party" and 
the "plum blossom gang", both of which were located and busted 
by public security organs, had clearly established reactionary 
agendas based on "seizing territory and political power." The 
huge growth in underground criminal society influence is also 
shown by the massive wealth these individuals have acquired 
through illegal means. They have used every sort of method to 
lay hold of firearms, ammunition, hand grenades, daggers, 
electrical billy clubs, poison guns, tear gas cannisters, and 
other lethal weapons, and they illegally manufacture firearms 
and ammunition for themselves. For example, in early April of 
1991, the "wolf gang" was busted in the Yuncheng region of 
Shanxi Province, and they were found to possess 22 firearms, 10 
of which were home-made. At the end of 1991 and the beginning of 
1992, eight underground criminal gangs were busted in Guiyang 
and they were found to have 17 handguns and rifles, as well as 
military grenades, mortars, bulletproof vests, hunting knives, 
daggers, and other lethal weapons. Underground criminal 
societies generally possess modern means of transportation and 
advanced communications facilities. For example, the underground 
criminal society headed by Wu Jiazhen [0702 0502 3791] in a 
certain suburb of Yancheng, Jiangsu Province, has vehicles for 
all of its thugs. Also, it has set up communications links by 
purchasing a radio station and walkie-talkies, and it has 
installed a tower antenna over 20 meters high in front of the 
entrance to its headquarters building. The "wolf gang" of Shanxi 
Province controlled all of the drivers of our unit and used our 
vehicles to carry out their criminal activities. 
  Underground criminal societies have many members, they are 
tightly organized, they have a considerable stockpile of 
weapons, and most of the members are more hardened in their 
criminal ways than the run of the mill criminals and gangs, and 
for these reasons, the influence of the underground criminal 
societies is deeper and more pernicious. For the most part, 
these people brazenly commit their crimes in the open, not 
hesitating to kill, injure, rob, steal, swindle, blackmail, 
kidnap, smuggle, or traffic in and use narcotics, and they will 
go so far as to illegally imprison individuals. In addition to 
these serious crimes, members will freely beat up and insult 
people, oppress whole towns by bullying the businessmen, eat and 
drink their fill without paying, forcibly take whatever they 
desire, wantonly insult women, extort money and items form 
sources public and private, commit every manner of crime, 
seriously prejudice the good order of society, and disturb 
normal social order. They have become a new form of mass 
oppressor, they try to dominate through evil deeds, and they 
represent a wicked force that challenges the political power of 
the people and the laws of the state. For example, since 1988, 
the city of Shaoyang has had at least 25 cases of persons having 
their hands and/or feet chopped off. In some cases, persons have 
had their fingers chopped off or smashed, while others have had 
the tendons in their feet slit out and discarded. When the same 
persons go to the hospital to have new tendons transplanted, the 
savage criminals track them down to re-slit and discard the 
tendons, and then smash their kneecaps and ankles. Another trend 
is that criminal societies are infiltrating the business world, 
actively seeking legal business fronts, thereby establishing a 
base for operations. Some criminal societies even use ill-gotten 
wealth to make contributions and donations and to render aid, 
seeking political capital in the process and ensconcing 
themselves in protective surroundings. Criminal societies employ 
various means to bribe, entice, and corrupt personnel of party 
and government organs, and in particular public security and 
justice workers, into acting as protective umbrellas. They use 
these people to shelter criminal actions, to facilitate crime, 
and to gain priviliged information. A small minority of cadres 
and policemen become corrupt after failing to resist 
temptations. They shelter the criminal societies and either do 
nothing about the illegal criminal activity or they do next to 
nothing about it. Some even drink toasts with the criminals and 
pass along priviliged information. Several major crime society 
stings have shown this to be the case, and it has forced public 
security organs to set up secret operational cells in secret 
locations to work in a highly concealed manner. As the influence 
of underground criminal societies grows wildly within China, 
outside and foreign criminal elements are taking advantage of 
our country's gradual opening to the outside world. They are 
stepping up their infiltration of Mainland China, trying to 
establish a foothold, open up a "new battlefield", or seek 
refuge on the mainland. Underground criminal societies from Hong 
Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and Japan have been the most pernicious in 
this regard. They have infiltrated the southeast coastal regions 
and have conspired with evil elements in those areas to join 
forces. The harm this represents is significant. Especially in 
the last few years, international drug cartels have tried to 
open up routes for their drug trade through China. The drug 
trade has become the medium for underground criminal societies 
both within China and abroad. For example, in July of 1990, when 
the Taiwan police launched a crime raid under the code name 
"sudden thunder", the "kingpin" of the so-called "firefly bridge 
gang," Zhang Zhenqian [1728 4176 3383], moved to the mainland 
and set up the Zhongshan Trading Company in Xiamen. His business 
expanded to Fuzhou, Shanghai, and Beijing, among other places, 
and Zhang became "brothers" with a certain Chinese painting 
master. He registered in Beijing and continued to engage in 
crime. In February of 1992, our police captured him and 
extradited him to Taiwan. According to the estimates of the 
Taiwan press, there are now over 200 underground Taiwan 
criminals of the big brother rank or higher operating on the 
mainland, approximately 30 of whom carry guns. It is obvious 
that outside criminal influence permeates our country! Party and 
government organs and departments are the focal points of 
outside criminal infiltration. Customs, border defense, and 
public security organs are particular targets. In Guangdong 
Province, a small percentage of the border defense station 
officials have been bribed by criminal societies from Macao into 
helping sneak things across the border. And a very small number 
of public security cadres and policemen have been recruited by 
the Shuifang and Shenghe gangs of Hong Kong. While infiltrating 
the mainland, underground criminal societies from abroad 
wantonly engage in criminal activity. For example, in the 
Friendship Market robbery case in Shenzhen, aside from one 
student being involved, all of the perpetrators were members of 
the 14K and Shuifang gangs. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20553 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<F P=101> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Qinghai MD Commander on Conscription </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0154A Xining QINGHAI RIBAO in Chinese 4 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0154A </F>
<F P=104>  Xining QINGHAI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yin Shenghua: "In One Hand Grasp New Recruit </F>
Quality, In the Other Grasp Honest Recruitment and Welcoming of 
Recruits"] 
  [Text] Qinghai Provincial Military District Commander Zhang 
Meiyuan [1728 5019 6678] , speaking on 30 November at a meeting 
of the provincial conscription small group emphasized that we 
must both pay strict regard to the quality of soldiers being 
conscripted as well as insure that conscription and acceptance 
is done in an honest manner, guaranteeing that the work is 
completed successfully. He stated that the provincial 
conscription work has completed the first three phases of public 
announcement and registration, education evaluations and 
physical examinations and now we are entering the phase of 
political investigations, induction and transportation. In order 
to guarantee that the conscription assignment levied on our 
province by the State Council and the Central Military 
Commission is completed on time, safely and according to high 
quality standards, in the coming days we must focus on both the 
quality of the new conscripts and on honesty in conscription and 
acceptance work. He stated that focusing on political quality is 
of extreme importance and each level of the party committees, 
the government, the military organs, public security and the 
grass roots organs have the responsibility to carry out a 
responsible political investigation of the newly selected 
conscripts, and must resolve to not induct or to accept even one 
new soldier not meeting the political criteria. In order to 
guarantee the quality of the new inductees and the honesty of 
the conscription and acceptance process, this aspect cannot be 
slighted in the least. When the key moment of decision is 
reached, supervision must be augmented; in conscription and 
acceptance, both sides must accept supervision; the military 
service organs must accept supervision by the masses. All 
persons who participate in conscription and acceptance work must 
be honest and self-disciplined, accept no personal favors, take 
no bribes, make no promises, and create an environment of equal 
competition for those being conscripted. Make a good impression 
on the minds and hearts of the masses; by words and actions, 
give the new recruits their first lesson in honest government. 
Commander Zhang also specifically made the point of requesting 
all levels of the military services and the discipline 
inspection departments to handle the communications and 
visitations of the masses conscientiously, but people or 
situations which seem to take advantage of the conscription 
process to thwart or transgress discipline should be 
investigated thoroughly, and miscreants punished severely. At 
the same time, conscientiously handle the ideological work 
associated with the youths and the parents of the youths who 
answered the call but were disqualified or eliminated because of 
numerical restrictions; cherish and preserve their willingness 
to voluntarily offer themselves for the cause of national 
defense. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20554 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  23 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<F P=101> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   PSB, Customs Counter Smuggling Operations </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0154B Beijing RENMIN GONGAN BAO in Chinese 23 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0154B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENMIN GONGAN BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Over the past three months, under the overall 
leadership of the Public Security Bureau, the public security 
organs in various places have actively pursued large, major 
smuggling cases. As of the end of November, they have cracked 22 
major cases of smuggling in Shandong, Guangxi, Jiangsu, 
Liaoning, Zhejiang, Hainan, Fujian and other provinces, 
confiscating 1,557 smuggled vehicles, 29,000 cases of 
cigarettes, 23,800 tons of scrap metal, as well as air 
conditioners, color television sets, cameras and other items 
worth some 260 million yuan. On the evening of 24 July this 
year, the Huanqiu, a freighter of Honduran registry belonging to 
the Hong Kong Maritime Shipping Company Limited, entered Yantai 
harbor carrying 8,000 cartons of contraband cigarettes bound for 
the Fugang [Fujian-Hong Kong] Fuxing Aquatic Products Company 
Limited of Yantai city in Shandong Province. The Yantai Coastal 
Defense units in close cooperation with the customs departments, 
worked on the case from four different angles. On the following 
day when the Huanqiu off-loaded the contraband at Bajiao Port in 
Fushan and prepared to depart, all of the smugglers were 
apprehended on the scene. The Qinzhou Prefecture Economic 
Development General Corporation in Guangxi and the Dongxing 
South-Central Economic Development Corporation and the Qinzhou 
Prefecture Materials Trade Corporation smuggled in 25 vehicles 
and 100 copy machines. When the Guangxi Qinzhou Prefecture 
Anti-smuggling Office received reports of this from the public, 
they acted immediately and nabbed all of the smugglers. At 
present, the public security organs in Shandong, Guangxi, 
Jiangsu, Liaoning, Zhejiang, Hainan and Fujian, acting under the 
instructions of the party center and State Council to vigorously 
prosecute all crimes of smuggling, are actively investigating 
other cases under the guidance of the Public Security Bureau and 
are striving for even greater achievements. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20555 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 November 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG </F>
<H3> <TI>   Realignment of Political Forces in Prospect </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0125A Hong Kong TANGTAI [CONTEMPORARY] in Chinese No 32, 
15 Nov 93 pp 18-20 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0125A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong TANGTAI [CONTEMPORARY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ho An-ta (0149 1344 6671): "The Democracy </F>
Faction Is Defending Its Authority, While the Democratic 
Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong Breaks Out of Its 
Encirclement--A Concurrent Review of Hong Kong's Political 
Forces in the Last Four Years"] 
  [Text] The 1989 Tiananmen incident forced the democracy 
faction to organize its groupings into the "Hong Kong Democracy 
League" [HKDL], making it the first political party to call 
itself an organization for participation in government and 
political affairs since the Hong Kong Government began to 
practice a respresentative system of government in the early 
1980s. 
  Since then, influenced by the "4 June" effect, the HKDL has 
made a remarkable showing in all direct elections at all levels. 
While the HKDL at the time had only about 530 party members, 
including 80 who took part in the district parliamentary 
reelections, its success rate turned out to reach 70 percent. 
By the time of the first Legislative Council [LEGCO] direct 
elections, except for their defeat in the New Territories East 
election district, all other HKDL candidates won easily. 
  But since the HKDL's victory in 1991, while it has been able 
to retain its position in most public opinion polls as the 
best-received political party, its real score is in a declining 
trend. Independent Congressman Liu Hui-ch'ing [0491 1979 0615] 
has outdone Li Chu-ming [2621 2691 6900] to become Hong Kong's 
best-received directly-elected congressman. 
  Meanwhile, the Cooperative Resource Center [CRC], composed 
of 
17 LEGCO members, has changed into the Liberal Party [LP]. As to 
number of party members alone, the LP has about 2,000 members, 
having replaced the HKDL as the political party with the largest 
membership. 
  During the Sino-British controversy, the LP visited Beijing, 
proposing that the two countries might first resolve their 
dispute over the 1994 district parliamentary elections, only on 
which cooperative basis they could then deal with the more 
thorny "direct-service problem" of the makeup of LEGCO. Once 
they had obtained Chinese consent, they met with Hong Kong 
Governor Chris Patten to promote their "first easy, then hard" 
negotiating plan. Such a mediation role was one that the HKDL 
was unable to play. 
  But the HKDL has never seen the LP as its major election 
foe, 
as the major threat that it feels has come mainly from Hong 
Kong's left-faction forces. 
  In the 1991 LEGCO elections, while the congressmen with 
close 
ties to Beijing all lost on the district front, a few such 
candidates, such as Ch'en Wan-hsien [7115 1238 8300] and Ch'eng 
Chieh-nan [4453 0094 0589], did remarkably well. 
  Having assimilated the 1991 experience, the camp with close 
ties to Beijing officially established the Democratic Alliance 
for the Betterment of Hong Kong [DABHK] on 10 July 1992. While 
the DABHK had only 57 founding members, there was no lack of 
figures with election potential. While they had lost to the 
HKDL in the earlier Executive Council [EXCO] by-election in the 
Southwest District, the very first time they raised the DABHK 
flag in an election, they showed their full organizational might 
in that district. 
  In October 1993, not long after the independent "Commission 
on Elections and Election-District Boundaries" appointed by the 
Hong Kong Government had announced its division of the 
directly-elected seats in the 338-member 1994 district 
parliament, the DABHK's district members criticized it very 
quickly. Their officers indicated to the press that they were 
making active plans for the next year's district parliamentary 
elections. 
  The differences between China and Britain on election plans 
for Hong Kong prior to 1995 remain very deep. The news released 
repeatedly by both sides on "plans to each go their own way" has 
led to much speculation. Some surmize that the DABHK might be 
forced to follow Beijing's line, by renouncing or even 
boycotting elections not approved by Beijing, to avoid being 
blamed for supporting Britain's conspiracy of "three 
violations." But as the DABHK had indicated as far back as at 
the time of its founding that it would take an active part in 
elections, its not taking part in elections arranged 
unilaterally by the British Hong Kong Government prior to 1997 
would be a great blow to its future development. Moreover, the 
indications of recent DABHK words and deeds are that even if 
there is a final fallout between the Chinese and British, it 
will still launch a full-scale offensive in the coming 
three-levels of parliamentry elections. 
  In fact, some directly-elected HKDL LEGCO members have also 
recently expressed privately that they are highly likely to use 
"one-on-one" tactics to counter the DABHK's "four great stars." 
  These so-called "four great stars" are the DABHK's Ts'eng 
Yu-ch'eng [2582 6877 2052], T'an Yao-tsung [6223 5069 1350], 
Ch'eng Chieh-nan, and Ch'en Wan-hsien. 
  Ts'eng Yu-ch'eng is one of the few DABHK's leaders who are 
fluent in English. Since elected party chief, he has become 
the unofficial international spokesman for the whole camp in 
Hong Kong with close ties to Beijing. While he received less 
votes than most current legislators, he has at least passed the 
first test of widespread name recognition. 
  As to T'an Yao-tsung, he is currently DABHK's only voice in 
LEGCO. Since the 1991 direct elections, many analysts have all 
agreed that if the left faction at the time had even a litle 
daring, by having T'an Yao-tsung take part in the 
Kowloon-Central District election, and raising labor circles to 
give Ch'en Wan-hsien its functional-constituency seat, it was 
highly likely that they would both be elected at the same time. 
And while Ch'en Wan-hsien and Ch'eng Chieh-nan both lost in the 
1991 elections, they still won more votes than DABHK candidates 
in other election districts. 
  So it is quite understandable that the HKDL would regard 
these four as its strongest foes. The DABHK was also very 
conspicuous in various public opinion polls, with a 
political-party questionnaire by Hong Kong U's Social Science 
Studies Center showing the DABHK for the first time at the end 
of November 1992 jumping to the fifth best-received political 
party in Hong Kong, replacing right from the start the former 
ranking of the "Liberal Democratic Coalition" [LDC] to place 
fifth. 
  In the year-plus since then, the DABHK's showing has 
fluctuated at around 43-46 percent, with no breakthroughs, 
generally tailing the HKDL, the "Democractic Livelihood 
Progressive Association" [DLPA], the Huitien [Collection Point] 
[CP], and the LP. But meanwhile, HKDL support is down from its 
61 percent in early December 1991 to 55-56 percent recently. 
  Certain key HKDL figures hold that it is a normal 
pheonomenon 
for a political party's public support to slide after a 
general-election victory, which is also often the case abroad. 
But HKDL's difficulties may be far more severe than it 
imagines. 
  While the HKDL has always presented its image as the 
"forerunner of democracy," it has made absolutely no prgresss in 
the 1994 and 1995 election arrangements due to the Sino-British 
dispute. In other words, in the next election, it is going to 
be hard for the democracy faction not to lose the trust that it 
has built up over a long period of time in its platform of 
striving to speed up the pace of democracy. In addition, 
public studies are finding that as 1997 nears, Hong Kong 
residents seem increasingly able to accept the mainland Chinese 
regime. All of these factors might cause a loss of votes for the 
HKDL. 
  The changes in the election system will also carry minuses 
for the democracy faction. After the change to a "system of 
one vote per seat" in 1995, certain current directly-elected 
members with less might will no longer be able to rely on the 
so-called "coattails effect," or be able to depend on the 
name-recognition of others to get elected. In fact, once the 
"one seat system" goes into effect, it is going to be hard for 
the HKDL to continue to coordinate its candidate list with other 
friendly organizations, such as CP and DLPA, with difficulty at 
the time avoiding a situation in which a third party profits 
from the struggle. This is particularly likely to occur in 
districts, such as Youchienwang, Tapu, and Shat'ien. 
  Since the 1991 elections, the concern of the two large 
insider factions, the HKDL and the LP, has often been limited 
only to responding to immediate public events, leaving one with 
a sense that they lack long-range planning. At many times, 
individual members seem to be all-involved in daily 
parliamentary matters, leaving them unable to act freely. With 
1994 here, congressmen of all political parties are starting to 
face reelection pressures, some of whom have talked about 
lacking time and energy, as their affairs in both parliament and 
their election districts are heavier than they had thought. On 
the other hand, the DABHK has only one LEGCO member, T'an 
Yao-tsung, leaving its other leaders without legislative 
pressures, so with much more time to do as they please in 
playing an opposition role outside of parliament. 
  But while all political parties have been focusing on the 
elections in these two years, they have all been neglecting for 
several years a basic development direction. 
  The "Hong Kong Youth Society" commissioned the Hong Kong U 
Social Science Studies Center to conduct in May 1993 a study of 
"young people's views on political organizations." They polled 
558 young people between the ages of 15 and 29. While the 
results have not been widely noted by the media, the relevant 
data is certainly very enlightening about Hong Kong's future 
political developments. 
  The poll showed that over 90 percent of those polled had not 
taken part in any activities sponsored by political 
organizations in the past year. And even when the political 
organizations that young people evaluate most highly issued them 
invitations, 70 percent said that they still could not accept. 
In addition, 60 percent of respondents stated that they would 
neither support political organizations with money or convey 
their views to them. 
  While young people expressed much reservation about taking 
part in the body politic, nearly 60 percent of respondents over 
17 years of age still said that they would vote in the coming 
elections. 
  If the proposal to lower the voting age to 18 is finally 
approved, to include the group of young people who were just too 
young to vote in the 1991 LEGCO election, it is projected that 
those eligible to vote for the first time in the 1995 LEGCO 
election will make up about one-fifth of the whole electorate. 
And while their direction will be enough to impact the overall 
situation, not one political party in the last 3 years has 
worked hard for their support. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20556 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Sharp Words' Between Hao Po-tsun, Li Teng-hui </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94cm0128A Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] in Chinese 
No 353, 18 Dec 93 pp 12-16 </F>

<F P=103> 94cm0128A </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Huang Kuang-chin (7806 0342 5367): "Hao Po-tsun </F>
Sings A Solo in Forcing Emperor to Abdicate; Li Teng-hui 
Brazenly Shows Him A Symbol of Cessation"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The exchange of sharp words 
between Hao Po-tsun and Li Teng-hui at the Kuomintang Standing 
Committee meeting held on 8 December not only openly reflected 
the protracted struggle between the chairman and vice chairman 
of the Kuomintang, but also represented Hao Po-tsun's first, 
official "showdown" with Li Teng-hui and his attempt to "force 
the emperor to abdicate." 
  The fundamental reason leading to Hao Po-tsun's direct 
challenge to Li Teng-hui at the standing committee meeting held 
on 8 December was Hao's complete disappointment of Li's 
so-called principle of sincerity and trust. He tried to make use 
of his speech at the meeting to inform countrymen about the 
possibility of Li Teng-hui's plan to move up the date for the 
direct presidential election. There were three reasons that led 
to what happened at the standing committee meeting. 
  1. On the previous day of the meeting, Hao Po-tsun learned 
from a newspaper report that the State Policy Center had begun 
to carry out studies on constitutional amendments toward 
something similar to the "Fifth Republic" which was often called 
the "semi-presidential system" or the "two-chief system." 
  2. Factions and groups of the National Assembly and the 
"pro-Li Teng-hui" deputies of the National Assembly covertly 
gathered together from time to time, planning to amend the 
Constitution on a large scale in the form of revising the text 
of the constitution in April next year. 
  3. He was also prompted by Hsu Li-nung's withdrawal from the 
Kuomintang and Li Teng-hui's plan to dispel Feng Hu-hsiang from 
the party. 
  Hao Po-tsun was fully prepared to deliver his speech at the 
8 December standing committee meeting. Early in the morning on 8 
December, he went to his office on the Chungshan Road North to 
call his aides to help him draft a written statement. Meanwhile 
he also personally prepared a five-point gist of his speech, 
which he later pointed out to Li Teng-hui. The contents of his 
speech were similar to those of the agreement reached by the 
four Kuomintang heads, namely Li (Li Teng-hui), Hao (Hao 
Po-tsun), Chiang (Chiang Yen-shih) and Sung (Sung Chu-yu) at the 
Taipei Guest House on 11 March 1992 prior to the Third Plenary 
Session of the Kuomintang Central Committee. On top of this, he 
also added the contents of the confidential documents which he 
and several scholars prepared prior to the 14th National 
Kuomintang Congress to "save the party, protect the Constitution 
and safeguard the nation." These contents were also parts of his 
speech when he spoke to the overseas Chinese in Washington D.C., 
during his second trip to the United States. 
  Hao Po-tsun arrived at the Central Committee Conference Hall 
on time. No one knew that this Kuomintang Vice Chairman who very 
seldom made speeches on several occasions had two statements to 
make. The meeting went on smoothly. When discussions were made 
on the fourth item of the agenda and after Minister Kuo Wei-fan 
finished his report on relevant issues concerning the 
"University Law," many standing committee members one after 
another expressed their views on various questions on the 
University Law, the education system, and the allocation of 
funds to public and private schools. When discussions on this 
topic ended, participants of the meeting had begun to pack their 
things and were making preparations to break up. Li Teng-hui 
also made a concluding remark. He asked: "Are there any 
questions? If there is no question, we will then ... [HSIN HSIN 
WEN ellipsis]. Li Teng-hui did not have time to say that "the 
meeting is now over." It was at that time that Hao Po-tsun who 
sat in the front row on Li Teng-hui's left side suddenly raised 
his hand seeking to say something. Although another standing 
committee member Kuan Chung also raised his hand, Hao Po-tsun 
ignored this comrade. Even without waiting for Li Teng-hui to 
call his name, Hao stood up on his own and put forward a 
provisional motion. At that time, some participants had already 
packed up their things, while others had half finished their 
packing. However, all of them were shocked by Hao's sudden 
movement, and unanimously looked at him while holding their 
breaths. 
  As soon as Hao Po-tsun opened his mouth, he said: "I hope 
everyone would excuse me if what I say today is impolite or 
inappropriate to the chairman or any participant of this 
meeting, because what I say today is entirely for the party and 
the nation." 
  Hao Po-tsun then took out the notes he prepared and began to 
read. In addition to what was on the notes, he also bluntly 
said: "I disagree if anyone seeks to change the current system 
to a two-chief system and to increase the presidential power. I 
also disagree if the president tends to favor the president-led 
system. The president-led system involves many things. It is too 
complicated. It involves so many things that even the 
constitutional government system will vacillate. In the past, 
only issues such as the popular election of appointees or of the 
president and the term of the legislature were being discussed. 
Is it strange that all of sudden there are so many problems 
cropping up? In principle, we hope that we are not going for the 
president-led system. Our system should be similar to that in 
Singapore. The Singapore president is also elected by popular 
votes, but there is no president-led system there. According to 
the provisions of the constitution, the president should not 
enjoy so much administrative power. I believe that the party 
should restrain itself in this respect!" He also said directly 
to Li Teng-hui: "It is known outside that the high authorities 
have a plan to move up the date for the direct presidential 
election. It is not so good to let people think in such a 
manner. It may create great disorder. It would also become a 
resource for trouble. It is hoped that Chairman Li would be able 
to clarify this point and inform people that he has no plan to 
do so!" 
  Hao Po-tsun then took out the note of his second written 
statement. That was the note of his speech delivered at the 
"Forum for National Construction" in Washington D.C. in the 
United States on 13 November. Hao Po-tsun requested that his 
speech be put into the record of the standing committee meeting 
after he finished reading the note. 
  During Hao Po-tsun's speech, Li Teng-hui did not look too 
well. Nor did he look at Hao Po-tsun. When the latter finished 
half of his speech, Li Teng-hui all of sudden seemed lost in 
thought. He began to lower his head and took notes. As for those 
who were listening, some acted tense with their hearts beating 
fast. One staff member even nudged another one sitting next to 
him, saying: "Look, the Chairman was mad at all times!" 
Nevertheless when Hao Po-tsun sat down after he finished reading 
his statements, Li Teng-hui stood up and sought to give a 
ruling. However, for a moment he did not know what to do when he 
stood there. After pulling himself together, he then replied 
while nearly "gnashing his teeth." Some one who was present at 
the meeting said that Li Teng-hui was so excited that he had 
twice addressed "Vice Chairman Hao" as "Chairman Hao." Li 
Teng-hui said: "What Chairman Hao (that was the first time he 
wrongly addressed Hao) just said was a rumor outside the party. 
There is no need to put such rumor into the record, because 
there is simply no such thing. I have never made any decision on 
this issue from the beginning to the present moment. All this 
does not count. How can we put this thing into the record? Let 
the Policy Coordination Commission handle this matter!" 
  Li Teng-hui kept on talking. Originally he planned to turn 
over Hao Po-tsun's written statements to the Policy Coordination 
Commission for handling, but he once again thought that it was 
inappropriate, and changed his mind. He said: "If this matter is 
rashly put on the record and subject to official discussion, it 
would then become a source of trouble, because outsiders would 
think that we are once again not on good terms, shouting and 
bickering. What should we do then? All this would certainly 
create disorder within the party!" 
  Li Teng-hui again said: "In fact, no decision was made on 
how the president should be elected. This matter was only 
touched upon during the last meeting on constitutional reform." 
Participants said, it was at that moment that Li Teng-hui 
started to look slightly relaxed and less solemn. Looking 
around, he said to Lin Cheng-chih, a national assemblywoman and 
Chairman of the Committee on Work Concerning women,: "In fact, 
no decision has been made even now on the form concerning the 
presidential election, the term of the legislature and the 
Premier's authority to countersign. I believe, we must study the 
issue on the premier's authority to countersign. Otherwise, the 
premier has to countersign his own resignation when he decides 
to step down. Is there such thing in the world?" Lin Cheng-chih 
promptly nodded. Li Teng-hui went on saying: "Right now, there 
is no need to discuss these issues. Nor should they be put on 
the record. The Party's Central Committee will set up a group 
concerning constitutional reform by the end of December. It is 
hoped that Vice Chairman Hao and other relevant Central Standing 
Committee members and those cadres in charge of day-to-day 
business would be able to participate in the group to discuss 
issues!" At that moment, he stood up to see if anyone had any 
more question. Right after that, he said: "The meeting is now 
over." During that short period, no one raised any hand or 
spoke. Even Hao Po-tsun himself kept quiet. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20557 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar019___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-019 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  25 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG </F>
<H3> <TI>   Investigation Bureau Gets Involved in Elections </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0128B Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] in Chinese 
No 354, 25 Dec 93 p 55 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0128B </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei HSIN HSIN WEN [THE JOURNALIST] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Different Directors of Bureau of Investigation </F>
Get Involved in Elections -- Shen Chih-yueh Did It Openly; Weng 
Wen-wei Followed Old Practice; Wu Tung-ming Emphasized Election 
Appraisals"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] When Shen Chih-yueh was the 
director of the Bureau of Investigation, he was directly 
involved with elections. The bureau not only helped work out the 
election strategies, but also sent out its staff to directly 
supervise and help [the Kuomintang] candidates in election. 
According to information from a staff member of the Bureau of 
Investigation, Hsiao Tien-tsan who was a National Policy Advisor 
to the President once asked the Bureau of Investigation to 
dispatch a deputy department chief named Chang to help him in 
Chiayi County run for the legislature. 
  During the Yuen Ch'eng-chang era, the Bureau of 
Investigation was also involved in elections, since Yuan used to 
work for the Garrison Headquarters. Meanwhile, in order to 
strengthen its ties with the Kuomintang Headquarters, the bureau 
led by Yuen Ch'eng-chang started to print the "Daily Situation 
News" which was dispatched to party and government leaders 
everyday by the bureau's code office. When Weng Wen-wei was in 
charge of the bureau, he also followed Yuen's practice. Some 
changes took place only after Wu Tung-ming took over the bureau. 
  During the early days when Wu took over the bureau, 
there were not many changes as compared with his several 
predecessors. Wu only followed what Weng Wen-wei did by not 
sending people out to keep an eye on election campaigns and help 
candidates win the election. However, his appraisal of the 
situation in the election had become more accurate in each 
passing day because of his rich experiences in the past. During 
the election campaign for the Second National Assembly, the 
appraisal of the situation in election made by the Bureau of 
Investigation was praised by Li Teng-hui. 
  As for the appraisal of the situation and the collection 
of information on elections, Chen Chung-hsin, head of the Bureau 
of Investigation's First Department, pointed out that the Bureau 
of Investigation "no longer made any election appraisal since 
the founding of the Second National Assembly." However, 
Legislator Ts'ai Shih-yuan said that "Wu Tung-ming's words were 
good up to the election of the Second Legislature." It is 
understood that whenever an election took place in the past, a 
joint office was set up for the bureau's First Department which 
was responsible for the collection of information, its Third 
Department which was responsible for political intelligence and 
its Fifth Department which was responsible for working out plans 
to take actions to form a command post for the election. This 
practice ended prior to the election of the Second Legislature. 
No such joint office was set up during this year's election of 
county magistrates and mayors. 
  Nevertheless, Chang Chi-ping, head of the bureau's 
P'ingtung Station was drawn into the cloud of suspicion for 
helping candidates to win the election this year. 
  Usually the Bureau of Investigation very seldom 
investigates and handles cases except devoting itself in 
gathering information on elections. However, the bureau's 
Pingtung Station interviewed and searched Chu Heng-wei, head of 
the Department of Urban Planning of the Pingtung County 
Government seven days prior to the election day this year, 
turning its interference during the last week of the election 
into a major event which affected the ballot. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20558 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economists View Difficulties in 1994 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0322A Shanghai WEN HUI BAO 4 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0322A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai WEN HUI BAO 4 Jan 94 p 1 </F>



<TEXT>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by WEN HUI BAO reporters Wang Jienan (3769 2212 </F>
0589) and Lu Zhengming (7120 2973 2494) from Beijing: "1994: A 
Battle Has Begun To Tackle the Most Difficult Problems in 
Reform; The Key Solution Is To Establish New Systems--Prospects 
of This Year's Economic Reform Viewed by Economists in the 
Capital"] 
  [Text] The year 1994 will be a "foundation-laying" year for 
the edifice of the socialist market economy in China. According 
to economists, in the 1980's, which were marked by the single 
traditional planned economy, any reforming effort, even if 
superficial, could produce some results. In contrast, the reform 
in the 1990's is conducted in a double-track environment, where 
it is necessary to coordinate the reform measures and deepen the 
reform drive under the friction of two coexisting systems. 
Compared with the former, the reform in the 1990's is harder and 
has greater resistance. As economists point out, it is 
confronted with striking difficulties: 
  One of the difficulties is the placement of surplus 
personnel 
laid off by enterprises, especially old enterprises--a problem 
caused by "unemployment during the transitional period" in the 
reform of the enterprise system. Economists opine that the 
transformation of operational mechanisms in state-owned 
enterprises and the establishment of a modern enterprise system 
both mean the acceleration of job rearrangement, which will 
inevitably result in the layoff of some employees. It is, 
therefore, necessary to make an unremitting effort to build a 
job market. However, under the present circumstances where work 
units distribute public housing, retirement pension, and price 
subsidy to their employees and pay their medical and health-care 
bills and where an unemployment relief fund system has yet to be 
established by the government, the following questions have 
arisen: How should we, on the one hand, solve the problem of 
overstaffing of state-owned enterprises through the bankruptcy 
procedure or by the mechanism of keeping the superior and 
eliminating the inferior and, on the other hand, properly place 
the surplus personnel and ensure their well-being? How should we 
speed up the socialization and marketization of welfare 
distribution while accelerating the transformation of 
operational mechanisms in enterprises? These are difficult 
questions that must be solved in the 1994 reform. 
  Economists hold that if we continued to take the 
"double-track approach," that is, "a new method for new people 
and the old method for old people," it would take several 
generations' time to solve the above questions. That could not 
meet the needs of building a market economy. On the other hand, 
it would be a formidable political task to drastically adjust 
the present interest pattern. Besides, our country has not 
fostered sufficient economic strength for the institution of an 
extensive, equitable, and socialized security system. In view of 
this, all that we can do is to make some transformations in 
mechanisms on the basis of the reality. As far as we know, 
departments concerned are presently contemplating a package plan 
to solve the problems. With regard to housing, efforts will be 
made to privatize housing units as soon as possible. To solve 
the unemployment problem, apart from the expansion and 
improvement of unemployment insurance, new outlets and 
diversified placement measures will be sought for those 
employees laid off by enterprises. Principal proposals in this 
regard are making all-out efforts to develop employment agencies 
and improve and perfect the employment service system, beefing 
up job training and job-transfer training to improve workers' 
quality, energetically promoting service enterprises and various 
tertiary industries to create more job opportunities, and 
establishing a policy to encourage people to work in township 
enterprises, the "three-kinds of foreign-funded" enterprises, 
and private enterprises. Meanwhile, efforts will be made to 
reduce the current administrative restrictions on capital 
raising and to simplify the company registration procedure so 
that laid-off employees can raise funds or borrow loans to open 
stores or workshops and act as their own bosses. In so doing, 
they can also hire some surplus personnel. This will provide an 
outlet for the extra employees laid off by state-owned 
enterprises. 
  Another difficulty concerns the relationship between central 
and local authorities. Economists are of the opinion that reform 
efforts over the past 15 years have done away with the 
over-centralized system and made it possible to delegate power 
to enterprises and local governments, thus arousing to a great 
extent the initiative at the local level. However, they say, 
these efforts have also resulted in the over-expansion of local 
government power. In the past reforms, local governments often 
showed a greater enthusiasm than central government departments. 
While storming the old systems, local governments also 
unwittingly impacted the statistical and reporting systems and 
even the basic financial work discipline, especially in the 
fields of banking, financial management, and taxation. This 
situation, if allowed to continue, will affect the authenticity 
of the information on which the state's macroeconomic management 
is based. Yet the fact is that, as the local party and 
government election systems develop, local leaders will continue 
to take the development of their local economic and welfare 
programs as their basic goal. At present, three problems on 
local government activities deserve attention: one, 
counter-regulatory action affecting the higher level; two, 
direct interference in the work of the lower level; and three, 
blockades imposed upon peers at the same level. 
  According to economists, a pure tax revenue sharing system 
can only solve the question of tax revenue distribution between 
the central and local governments. It can in no way serve the 
purpose of redefining the government functions to meet the needs 
of the market economy. We should combine the reform from the 
bottom up with the reform from the top down and beef up the 
central government's guidance for the reform as soon as 
possible. It is imperative to clearly define the administrative 
powers of the central and local governments and take this as an 
important task in reforming the government functions. The 
objective should be that authority for currency issuance and 
macroeconomic regulation and control is held by the central 
government, while administrative powers closely related to local 
work targets are by and large delegated to local governments. 
Examples of the latter are local finances, transportation, urban 
construction, housing reform, social security, environmental 
protection, education, and rectification and improvement of 
loss-incurring enterprises. Meanwhile, efforts should be made to 
adjust those functions inappropriate for local governments. The 
only direct link that the two levels of government should 
maintain with enterprises is taxation. All government regulatory 
activities must be conducted through the intermediary of law or 
market. 
  The third difficult problem lies in financial reform, a task 
closely connected with the question of interests of the 
government versus enterprises and of the central government 
versus local governments. An urgent question in this regard, say 
economists, is how to change, in accordance with the needs of 
the market economy, the present practice that the government 
deals directly with matters of finances, banking, and interest 
rates. It is learned that the central authorities have decided 
to reorganize the specialized state banks into state commercial 
banks, beginning 1994. The reorganized banks will operate in 
line with modern commercial banking practice and will be fully 
responsible for their respective fund mobility and payment 
ability. Meanwhile, the People's Bank of China will enforce the 
nation's monetary policy independently under the leadership of 
the State Council. It will assume centralized control over the 
issuance and basic turnover of the currency and regulate the 
scale of loans. The principal goal of the monetary policy is to 
maintain currency stability. 
  With respect to the prospects and difficulties of the 1994 
reform, economists say that China's reform has entered the most 
difficult, challenging, and hopeful stage where efforts must be 
made to tackle the hardest problems. Whether we can break with 
the old traditions or not has a great bearing on the success or 
failure of this reform. Now, as China's reform is developing in 
depth, those engaged in the work of reform should, as well, 
raise their awareness of the need to reform themselves. Also, 
it is imperative to guard against the distortion of the reform 
by vested interests either deliberately or unknowingly. 
Recently, the central leadership has pointed out that only 
through reform is it possible to grasp the "high technology" 
required for the swift running of the economy, and the new 
systems are exactly such "high technology." We must get a good 
grasp of that "high technology" and do our best to drive the 
"express train." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20559 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  10 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Heilongjiang Enterprise Reform, Technical Upgrading </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0338A Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 10 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0338A </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "New Reform Moves--Promoting Reform of the </F>
Property Right System, Accelerating Upgrading of 
Skills--Provincial Economic Committee Chairman Yu Xi'ou Responds 
to Questions of This Paper's Reporters on Enterprise Reform and 
Upgrading Technology"] 
  [Text] Question: Faced with complete reform of the 
economic system, overall advancement, and breakthroughs at key 
points, how will Heilongjiang's industrial economy be arranged 
in 1994? 
  Answer: In 1994 Heilongjiang will be faced with 
very good opportunities for reform and development and will 
encounter unprecedented challenges. We will concentrate on 
doing a good job with large- and medium-sized enterprises and 
stress doing a good job of handling enterprise reform and 
upgrading. By reform we will free up current productive capacity 
and through upgrading we will develop new productivity. The 
organic integration of the dual tactics of reform and upgrading 
simultaneously employed will lay a firm foundation for the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system and promote 
sustained, coordinated, and sound development of the industrial 
economy. 
  Question: Intensifying enterprise reform is one of 
the keys to industrial economic tasks throughout the province in 
1994. So, what is the thinking on enterprise reform? 
  Answer: The overall thinking on Heilongjiang's 
enterprise reform in 1994 is: To lay a foundation of enterprise 
operational autonomy closely centered on doing a good job with 
the core sector, large- and medium-sized state enterprises, 
fully promoting reform of the property rights system, and 
striving to achieve progressive breakthroughs. We will 
fundamentally convert the mechanisms of large- and medium-sized 
state enterprises that are prepared and establish a modern 
enterprise system suited to the demands of a market economy. At 
the same time, in accordance with the requirements for 
structuring a modern enterprise system, we will accelerate 
comprehensive reform of the macroeconomic control system, the 
market system, and the social security system. We also should 
speed up progress on converting the internal mechanisms of 
enterprises and improvement of the external environment. 
  Question: In recent years Heilongjiang has adopted 
several policy measures to do a good job on large- and 
medium-sized state enterprises. What new plans are there in this 
respect for 1994? 
  Answer: In 1994 we will adopt some new measures 
based on the new situation and tasks that reform and development 
are facing and speed up progress on large and medium-sized state 
enterprises. 
  First we will actively and safely promote a modern 
enterprise 
system. In 1994 the state is selecting 100 large- and 
medium-sized enterprises to establish an experimental modern 
enterprise system. Heilongjiang is recommending three 
enterprises, the Qiqihar Steel Mill, the Jiamusi Paper Mill, and 
the Heilongjiang Polyester Factory, to the State Economic and 
Trade Commission to participate in the national experiment. At 
the same time, the province is selecting 15-20 enterprises to 
establish an experimental modern enterprise system at the 
province level. In 1994 we also will expand the scope of the 
experimental stock system and select 100 large- and medium-sized 
state enterprises to conduct the experiment, concentrating on 
selecting 60 of these large- and medium-sized state enterprises 
that are relatively well managed and have upgraded technology. 
  Second, continue to intensify the implementation of 
Regulations on Converting Enterprise Operating Mechanisms and 
the Regulations on Supervision and Control. The provincial 
economic committee with relevant departments can strictly 
investigate and prosecute violations of the legitimate rights of 
enterprises. We should formulate detailed rules and regulations 
for Heilongjiang to implement the Regulations on Supervision and 
Control of state assets and institute supervision and control of 
the state assets of Heilongjiang's experimental enterprises and 
stress the implementation of the responsibility system for asset 
management and the experimental appointment of a control 
commission. 
  Third, we should accelerate enterprise restructuring and 
improve the internal mechanisms of enterprises. First, we should 
accelerate the reform of the three enterprise systems. Second, 
we should increase efforts to strip away the logistics services 
system. Third, we should resolutely institute bankruptcy toward 
enterprises that have been losing for a long time and have no 
hope of turning around the losses or funds to offset their 
debts. In 1994 the state will set aside 7 billion yuan in bad 
debt reserves to be used as loans to cancel the bad debts of 
bankrupt enterprises. Heilongjiang will actively use this 
opportunity to plan the bankruptcy of about 80 state industrial 
enterprises (two to three of these large- or medium-sized 
enterprises). 
  Fourth, in accordance with the demands of the market economy 
we should enhance enterprise management and administration. 
Presently quite a few enterprises are striving to convert their 
mechanisms. But a considerable number of enterprises have lax 
internal administration and management is "slipping." In 1994 
the state will institute "convert mechanisms, stress 
administration, practice internal skills, and increase 
efficiency," and "in-depth economy results" activities. As the 
state launches these activities, Heilongjiang should continue to 
stress activities to improve quality and decrease consumption 
and tap potential and increase efficiency targeted at "100 Red 
Flag" enterprises and, based on economic returns, set up an 
evaluation to publicize the top five in 110 industries 
throughout the province. 
  Fifth, reduce unreasonable enterprise burdens. In accordance 
with relevant state stipulations on credit interest owed on 
allocations changed to loans, economic committees at every level 
with relevant departments can do a good job on the remaining 
credit interest owed on the 1.46 billion yuan Heilongjiang 
industrial enterprise allocations changed to loans between 1983 
and 1985. Using the base of the remaining credit interest owed 
on state allocations changed to loans, we should select ten 
cities and by category and by time period explore experimental 
opportunities for concrete solutions and strive to include 
Harbin in the list. We also should have multiple channels for 
supplementing enterprise circulating funds and permitting large- 
and medium-sized state enterprise, based on 1 percent of their 
sales income, to draw their own circulating funds, be exempt 
from income taxes, and figure it in their production costs. 
Enterprises that have not recently submitted after-tax profits 
should draw 50 percent of their retained profits to be used to 
supplement circulating funds. We should once again appraise 
enterprise adoption of medium-term loans within the quota and 
give short-term loans outside the quota. 
  Question: Reform of Heilongjiang's small state 
industrial enterprises has made a good start. How will this be 
advanced in 1994? 
  Answer: In recent years, especially in the last 
three years, Heilongjiang's small state industrial enterprises 
have remained in a slump, holding back industry throughout the 
province. Based on the provincial party committee and provincial 
government plan, localities have generally picked up the pace of 
small state enterprise reform consisting mainly of reform of the 
property rights system. The provincial economic committee, on 
the basis of surveys and research, top to bottom integration, 
and one factory one policy, has formulated the plan for the 
Reform of Small Heilongjiang State Enterprises. The plan's 
overall goal is to essentially complete reform of 2,585 small 
state industrial enterprises throughout the province in about 
two years, concentrating on reform of the property rights 
system, to lay a good foundation for the transition to a modern 
enterprise system and move small state industrial enterprise 
development to the fast track. According to the plan, reform of 
small state industrial enterprises will take thirteen specific 
forms: a stock system; a stock cooperative system; "grafting" 
restructuring; leasing operations; "one enterprise, multiple 
systems," asset contracts, participation in and organization of 
enterprise groups, mergers, selling off assets, stripping off 
operations, shutting down, bankruptcy, and other types of 
reform. We already have "tallied" the 2,585 enterprises 
according to the thirteen forms described above. Beginning in 
1994, in accordance with the plan, we will put all of our 
efforts into advancing reform of the property rights system of 
small state industrial enterprises and in that year we will 
complete the reform of 1,210 enterprises. 
  Question: Since upgrading enterprise technology is 
as important as reform, what new measures will be taken in 1994 
to promote the technical upgrading of enterprises? 
  Answer: Although in recent years Heilongjiang has 
increased investment in upgrading technology, the rate of 
increase has always been less than the national average and the 
gap with some provinces has become greater and greater. As of 
now, only 40 percent of Heilongjiang's large and medium-sized 
enterprises are conducting systematic upgrading and have some 
upgrading. If this situation does not change, it will be very 
difficult for Heilongjiang's industry to make great progress. In 
1994 we will speed up the promotion of the upgrading of 
enterprise technology in three respects. 
  First, explore new avenues for reforming the investment 
system for upgrading Heilongjiang technology. Based on 
Heilongjiang's situation, the area of investment in technology 
upgrading is divided into two categories. One category is policy 
investments, which is related to the national economy and 
people's livelihood. They have good social benefits, but small 
benefit to enterprises. Their investment cycle is long and risks 
are great. They are mainly supported by policy and their source 
of funds comes mainly from policy investments and loans. Another 
category is commercial investments. Their economic returns are 
good and they are able to pay back principle and interest on 
loans. Their source of funds comes mainly from commercial loans 
or financing. Reform of the investment system for upgrading 
technology concentrates on doing three tasks well: The first is 
to select state policy investments for technology upgrading 
projects in Heilongjiang's industries with long investment 
cycles and great risks such as transportation, energy, and 
defense; the five major mainstay industries and ten major 
projects; and current enterprises that are applying new high 
technology upgrades, and strive for the state's opening up bank 
support. The second is to enhance macroeconomic controls on 
technology upgrades and guide the orientation of investment 
funds. The third is to transition from a project approval system 
to a project filing system. Beginning in 1994, except for 
special state loans for key projects and major provincial 
technology upgrades for which state loans are requested, the 
provincial economic committee will no longer approve general 
projects and as a rule it will be changed to a filing system. 
  Second, coordinate and integrate technology upgrading with 
reform of the enterprise system and external economic technology 
and broaden channels for funds and increase investment returns. 
First, rely on key projects and promote reform of the stock 
system and, based on a good grasp of the base of the 
experimental reform of the stock system in such enterprises as 
Qiqihar Steel Mill, Heilongjiang Polyester Factory, Hualin 
Rubber, Jiamusi Paper Mill, and Yichun's Guangming Furniture, 
select some enterprises that have key technology upgrade tasks 
to actively and safely conduct stock system reform. Second, step 
up the use of foreign investment "grafts" to upgrade current 
enterprises and continue to implement the plan to use foreign 
investment to upgrade 100 large- and medium-sized enterprises 
and stress the implementation of matching domestic funds for 
projects solicited from Hong Kong and Korean businesses and 
organize mature projects by levels for activities directed at 
different countries to solicit businesses and introduce funds 
and convene the Mudan River "grafted" upgrading on-site exhibit. 
  Third, concentrate efforts on especially stressing major 
technology upgrading projects. In 1994 Heilongjiang plans to 
arrange for investment in technology upgrading on the scale of 
of 4.5 billion yuan, a 28 percent increase over the previous 
year, and concentrate on 37 key projects such as Jiamusi Paper 
and Qiqihar Steel. In 1994, 701 projects will go into production 
or achieve production and they are expected to earn a value of 
output of 3.34 billion yuan and 850 million yuan in profit 
taxes, and earn US$38.04 million in foreign exchange. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20560 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanghai Enterprises To Change Management System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0323B Shanghai WEN HUI BAO in Chinese 18 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0323B </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai WEN HUI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Sun Zhonglian (1327 0022 6647): </F>
"Shanghai Sets This Year's Thorough Reform Goals for Its 
Industrial Enterprises: 600 State-owned Enterprises To Adopt New 
System -- Different Types of Enterprises To Adopt Different 
Measures, So That "The Big Get Stronger and the Small Become 
More Versatile, the Good Are Organized and the Bad Are 
Eliminated"] 
  [Text] What are Shanghai's reform plans this year? 
Recently, a manager in charge of Shanghai's industrial 
administrative department was interviewed by this reporter, and 
he disclosed that Shanghai's plans will focus on the need to 
change the management mechanisms to set up a modern enterprise 
system. In deepening enterprise reform, different types of 
enterprises will adopt different measures, so that big 
enterprises are strengthened, the small ones become more 
versatile, the good ones are organized, and the bad ones are 
eliminated. 
  This reform measure of providing different guidance will be 
implemented in conjunction with the continued implementation of 
the "Provision" in enterprises and as they change their 
management mechanisms. Upon organizing and perfecting some 
enterprise groups, mainstay industries and key trades and 
industries and large enterprises that have attained economies of 
scale to some extent and whose products have already captured 
fairly large market shares will be the first to be empowered to 
manage state-owned assets; the holding company pilot projects 
will be expanded. The management format of smaller state-owned 
enterprises that are not large in scale but have a good future 
will become even more versatile. Some can be reorganized into 
shareholding cooperative enterprises; some can adopt the method 
of leasing and become state-owned, civilian-operated 
enterprises; some may try transferring their property rights to 
the collectives or individuals in a step-by-step process. 
Emphasis will be put on state-owned enterprises that are 
relatively profitable and have had clear success in changing 
their mechanisms; they will be turned into corporations. A set 
of scientific and standardized organizational system and 
management system pertaining to decisionmaking, implementation, 
and supervision will be set up so that enterprises truly have 
property rights in assets as legal persons. Enterprises that are 
inefficient, that are poorly managed, that have no hopes of 
turning around, and cannot be turned into corporations, should 
be merged, drastic restructured, auctioned off, or declare 
bankruptcy, or be leased out or reorganized in order to optimize 
the composition of the stock of state-owned assets and preserve 
and propagate their value. 
  Reportedly, thorough reform of Shanghai's industrial 
enterprises produced new results last year. Various pilot reform 
projects, with a heavy emphasis on yang (imitations 
of the three kinds of wholly and partially foreign-owned 
enterprises), gu (the shareholding system), and 
bao (the contract system), were installed in the 
state-owned industrial enterprises. Almost all enterprises have 
begun reforming their labor, personnel, and allocation systems. 
Enterprise management autonomy as stipulated in the "Provisions" 
has been handed down in most cases. However development is 
uneven, and good enterprises are covering up for the bad ones 
and good businesses are covering up for bad businesses. For this 
reason, Shanghai's industrial management department has taken 
initial steps to set new goals to put more force on reform this 
year. Municipality-wide, around 600 state-owned enterprises will 
basically change their management mechanisms and begin to take 
inventory to determine fund sources. Ten enterprise groups will 
be selected to serve as experimental points and will be 
empowered to manage state-owned properties. Ten will pilot the 
modern enterprise system, and another ten will pilot the 
directional capital-raising shareholding system. In addition, 10 
larger-scale enterprises with sound foundations will be 
nominated to be among the 100 national enterprises to pilot the 
modern enterprise system. 
  To realize this year's new enterprise reform goal, the pilot 
enterprises will comply with the needs of standardization and 
implement a series of reform with respect to the organizational 
system, management system, and labor, personnel, and 
distribution systems, so that gradually property rights are 
clearly delineated, government and enterprises are separated, 
and enterprises will have management autonomy, be able to take 
care of their own profits and losses, initiate their own 
development, and discipline their own behavior. Other 
enterprises will also actively create conditions to accelerate 
the change in mechanisms, set up a modern enterprise system that 
meets the demands of the market economy, and strive for new 
breakthroughs in the enterprise system. Reportedly, many 
enterprises have contacted the relevant departments to volunteer 
their services. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20561 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanghai Predicts Economic Growth in 1994 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0323A Shanghai SHANGHAI GONGYE JINGJI BAO in Chinese 4 
Jan 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0323A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHANGHAI GONGYE JINGJI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zheng Zuguo (6774 4371 0948): "Driving on the </F>
Fast Lane, Undergoing Major Changes: Shanghai's Economy To Leap 
Even Higher This Year: Growth Rate To Reach 14 Percent; Pudong's 
Development To Reach New Height; Financial Transactions To 
Become Even More Orderly; Export Trade To Increase Steadily; 
Importing of Foreign Capital To Make New Breakthrough; 
Infrastructure Input To Increase; Scope of Market Exchange To 
Further Expand; Districts and Counties To Give Impetus To the 
Tertiary Industry"] 
  [Text] There will be new breakthroughs in Shanghai's reform 
and opening up this year, and the national economy will continue 
its trend of sustained, rapid, and healthy development. 
Specifically, the municipality's economic development will 
display the following trends: 
  Economic growth will continue to be fairly strong, 
showing a trend of sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development. In recent years, Shanghai has continued to put 
large amounts of domestic and foreign capital into its economy. 
The marketization process is playing an increasingly prominent 
role in optimizing the allocation of resources; the scopes of 
the mainstay industries are rapidly expanding. This year, given 
Shanghai's market condition, quality, and efficiency, its GNP is 
expected to grow by approximately 14 percent. Because of the 
sudden surge in many large markets this year, the tertiary 
industry will undergo unprecedented development. Its growth rate 
may exceed that of the GNP, and the economic efficiency of its 
industries will continue to set national standards. In the wake 
of the implementation of the classified tax system and the 
continued increase in overall income, local government revenues 
will continue to increase at a steady pace. 
  Development of the financial industry will accelerate; 
fund utilization will become even more orderly. Today, the 
specialized banks are operating more like commercial banks and 
the existing commercial banks have laid a good foundation for 
future development; 28 foreign-funded financial institutions 
have opened in Shanghai. These have created the conditions for a 
financial system which is unified but open, which facilitates 
orderly competition, and which is strictly managed. We can 
anticipate that even though it will be harder to raise capital 
this year, Shanghai's financial market will become even more 
orderly, and construction and production funds are assured. 
  The opening and development of Pudong will be marked by 
progress in basic development which will gather momentum; the 
development of new functions will continue to accelerate, and 
city and district development will keep pace with growth. 
In the three years since the opening of Pudong, the first group 
of 10 major infrastructure construction projects has been 
completed two years ahead of schedule. The construction of the 
first group of 50 commercial buildings in the Lujiazui financial 
district has begun ahead of schedule. The Jinqiao export 
processing zone has taken in more than 200 projects; 30 have 
already gone into production and are among the first to harvest 
the fruits of development. Waigaoqiao's tax-shelter zone has as 
many as 800 projects; the tax-shelter market and the piers in 
the port area are in operation. The New Pudong District, which 
concetrates on international trade, export processing, and 
financial business, will soon reach a high tide in accelerating 
the development of those functions. 
  The construction of a big market system will continue 
to be marked by expanded scope, orderly transactions, and the 
bringing in of more and more functions into play. Shanghai 
already has formed the basic framework of a big market system; 
it already has a fledgling state-class market. Last year, the 
municipality's volume of securities exchange surpassed 400 
billion yuan; there were more than 1,600 seats in the securities 
exchange, with more than 100 different types of stocks being 
traded. Volume of transaction in the metals exchange topped 300 
billion yuan. As the market plays an increasingly prominent role 
in optimizing resource allocation, and with the economy 
sustaining a fairly high rate of growth, the number of big 
markets and the volume of transaction in Shanghai will continue 
to grow, and many economic laws and provisions and market 
regulations will be introduced. A prominent feature of 
Shanghai's big market development this year will be its growing 
impact on the rest of the nation through its fund gathering and 
distribution and resource allocation functions, and it will 
forge even closer ties with the international markets. 
  There will be new breakthroughs in terms of territory 
and scale with respect to the bringing in of foreign capital. 
Foreign trade will be marked by steady recovery. This year, 
there will be continued breakthroughs in terms of projects and 
dollar amount of foreign capital brought in. The secondary 
industry's focus in bringing in foreign capital will be on the 
development of heavy industry and township enterprises. Foreign 
investments in the tertiary industry will be attracted more to 
finance, commerce, and retail. Domestic sales of commercial 
buildings and the adoption of the BOT method will make new 
breakthroughs too. In the wake of Shanghai's readjustment of its 
foreign trade thinkings and the rapidly increasing functions of 
the New Pudong Zone, some enterprises that manage their own 
exports will become more mature; non-commodity trade will 
continue to increase. The rate of increase in foreign exports 
will equal that of the increase in the GNP. Other forms of 
foreign economic cooperation will also make great strides. 
  Urban infrastructure construction will be marked by its 
sharp focus, accelerated progress, and clear results. This 
year should mark a season of bumper harvest in infrastructure 
construction. One by one, a group of important municipal 
construction projects will be completed and put to use. After 
the completion of the Yangpu Bridge, the second phase of the 
waterfront project, and the project to widen Jiangsu Road, the 
inner loop is completely open to traffic; the first phase of the 
combined sewage treatment project is in operation. At the same 
time, another group of municipal construction work is reaching 
high tide. The Number 1 subway track will be tested upon 
completion; construction of the elevated roadway of the Chengdu 
Highway will be accelerated to create a 8.3 km framework of 
roadways. A new round of major construction work has been 
unveiled. Construction of the outer loop roads and the multiple 
track Huangpujiang tunnel will soon begin. Acceleration of 
infrastructure construction will continue to promote the 
development of other related trades and industries and will 
become one of the driving forces behind the rapid economic 
growth. 
  District and county economies will be marked by the 
development of the tertiary industry, especially by the speeding 
up of the development of specialty businesses, to promote 
economic growth. The construction of a large group of 
commercial and tourist facilities will be accelerated in the 
suburban counties. Upon strengthening unified planning, many new 
specialty markets will be developed in the urban areas. A 
central business district will soon take shape. 
  The living standard will rise even higher, and the 
consumer goods market will continue to be brisk. Retail 
sales will increase at a rate of more than 30 percent and volume 
will exceed 80 billion yuan this year. Construction of 
high-quality commercial and residential buildings and vacation 
homes may slow somewhat, but domestic demand for commercial 
buildings and residential homes is still brisk, and construction 
will be stepped up. Markets for decorations and other 
accessories will also grow accordingly. 
  While Shanghai's economy will continue to develop fairly 
rapidly, its economic development still has many unresolved 
contradictions--contradictions that have been around since the 
beginning, but in addition, there will be new effects and new 
problems produced by the central government's strengthening of 
its macro regulation and control and thorough reform. For 
example, there will be further increases in the demand for 
production funds; problems in the original channels for fund 
gathering and distribution will continue to grow; new chains of 
debt may resurface. New thinkings and new countermeasures are 
needed to solve the new fund predicaments. It is urgent that 
Shanghai increases its foreign trade development momentum, and 
it is imperative that enterprises actively open up new markets. 
They must promote development in the investment goods and the 
consumer goods markets and in retail and wholesale businesses 
under the conditions of slowing total demand and intense 
competition. There is a growing number of factors contributing 
to lower enterprise profits and higher enterprise losses. 
  We can predict that this year will be a year full of hope. 
So 
long as it upholds the strategic principle of taking the lead in 
reform and solves its many problems diligently, Shanghai's 
economic development will continue to reach new heights. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20562 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  28 November 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Years of Deficits in Perspective, Solutions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0307A Beijing JINGJI LILUN YU JINGJI GUANLI [ECONOMIC 
THEORY AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT] in Chinese No 6, 28 Nov 93 pp </F>



<TEXT>
26-31 
<F P=103> 94CE0307A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI LILUN YU JINGJI GUANLI [ECONOMIC 
THEORY AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT] </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xie Jiangfa (6200 3068 4099), Associate </F>
Professor at Guangxi Electrical University, Liuzhou campus: 
"Years of Deficits in Perspective, Solutions"] 
  [Text] In the 14 years since the Third Plenum of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee, economic construction, living standards, 
and overall national strength have all taken a giant leap, 
scoring achievements that have caught world attention. In sharp 
contrast, there have been endless fiscal problems in China in 
the same period, including a mounting budget deficit that came 
back year after year. A heated debate revolving around the 
budget deficit is now underway in the theoretical circles and in 
the functional departments from a variety of perspectives. This 
article focuses on government budget deficits in the seven years 
(abbreviated hereafter as the last seven years) between 1986 and 
1992 (including those in the Seventh Five-Year Plan). 
  1. Characteristics of Budget Deficits 
  The Chinese Government ran a budget deficit every year in 
the 
14 years between 1979 and 1992 with the exception of 1985, when 
it reported a tiny surplus as a result of one-time factors, 
accumulating a combined deficit of 130 billion yuan, or 10 
billion yuan annually on the average. If debt incomes are 
discounted, China's budget was in the red every year for the 
past 14 years, with a combined deficit of 400 billion yuan, more 
than 30 billion yuan each year on the average. See table below 
for details. 
  By halving the 14-year period, we see that budget deficits 
of 
the last seven years had the following characteristics: 
  1) The deficits increased persistently all round. 
  Regardless of whether the narrow or broad definition is 
used, 
China ran a budget deficit in each of the last seven years. (See 
table below.) Under the narrow definition, the accumulated 
deficit shot up to 336,559,000,000 yuan, 3.7 times that of the 
first seven years. 


Table 1 Revenue and Expenditures of the Chinese Government 1979-1992 (unit: in billions of yuan) 

Item/Year       1979      1980       1981      1982      1983       1984      1985        1986      1987      1988      1989      1990      1991      1992 

Gross Revenue   110.33    108.52     108.95    112.4     124.9      150.19    186.64      226.03    236.89    262.80    294.79    331.26    358.28    391.21 


Including:      3.53      4.30       8.39      7.94      7.73       8.99      13.83       16.96     27.08     28.3      37.55     45.5      79.41 
Debt incomes              Tc&gt; 7.31 

Gross           127.39    12.17      11.15     115.33    129.25-    154.64    184.48      233.08    244.85    270.66    304.02    345.22    379.39    412.0 
Expenditures 

Difference      -17.06    -12.75     -2.55     -2.93     -4.35      -4.45     -2.16(as    -7.05     -7.96     -7.86     -9.23     -13.96    -21.11    -20.79 
Between                                                                       pub.) 
Revenue, 
Expenditures 

Net             -20.59    -17.05     -9.86     -11.32    -12.29     -12.18    -6.83       -20.88    -24.92    -34.94    -37.53    -51.51    -66.60    -10.01 
Difference 
Between 
Revenue, 
Expenditures 

Notes: 1. Source: "China Statistical Yearbook," 1991, JINGJI RIBAO 6 April 1992. 

2. Difference between revenue and expenditures = gross revenue - gross expenditures. 

3. Net difference between revenue and expenditures = gross revenue -debt incomes - gross expenditures 


  Not only did the government deficits for the last seven 
years 
show a sustained increase, but they were present in the entire 
process. Earlier, the government drew up a balanced budget only 
to see it dip into the red during the execution and 
policy-making stages. Later, it started out with an unbalanced 
budget, so the deficit was there from the beginning and remained 
there through the execution and policy-making stages. This is 
clear from the government's 1992 budget, where gross incomes 
were listed as 391,213,000,000 yuan and gross expenditures, 
411,939,000,000 yuan, yielding a deficit of 20,786,000,000 yuan 
(as published). This kind of persistent, all-round, and 
process-long deficits portend a deteriorating fiscal state for 
the nation. 
  2) Coexistence between printing money and issuing bonds to 
close the budget deficit 
  Basically there are two well-established ways to close a 
budget deficit: one, issue treasury bonds at home and overseas 
to raise funds, and, two, print money. Recurrent expenditures in 
the last seven years amounted to 1,883,433,000 yuan in all, 
while expenditures totalled a whopping 2,189,922,000 yuan, 
resulting in a shortfall of 306,489,000,000 yuan. The issue of 
bonds at home and abroad raised 217,827,000,000 yuan, still 
leaving a gap of 88,662,000,000 yuan. This left the government 
no choice but to print money to balance the budget. As a result, 
the deficits of the last seven years had a duality to them: both 
the issue of bonds and money-printing were used to close the 
budget gap. 
  3) Coexistence between economic growth and rising government 
deficits 
  The Chinese economy enjoyed fast and sustained growth in the 
last seven years, with the GNP expanding at the average annual 
rate of 10.94 percent each year. See table below for 
year-by-year GNP data. 


Table 2. GNP 1986-1992 (unit: in billions of yuan) 

Item/Year    1986      1987      1988        1989        1990        1991        1992 

GNP          969.63    113.01    1,401.82    1,591.63    1,768.61    1,892.41    2,005.95 


  Be that as it may, there was not the slightest improvement 
in 
the government's fiscal plight. On the contrary, the deficit 
rose 16.7 percent annually on the average based on the narrow 
definition and 25.1 percent using the broad definition. The 
deficit outpaced economic growth by 7 to 15 percentage points 
annually on the average. Thus, the last seven years were 
characterized by the coexistence between fast economic growth 
and a deficit rising just as fast. In fact, what distinguishes 
the last seven years is the fact that budget deficits increased 
at a rate higher than the economy. This is the sign of a 
worsening fiscal situation. The average annual growth rate of 
the GNP exceeded 10 percent in the first seven years also, yet 
the budget deficit fell 15 percent annually. We had the best of 
both economic worlds then: economic growth and a shrinking 
budget deficit. 
  4) Coexistence between a budget deficit at the central level 
and local budget deficits 
  The nation was in a fiscal bind in the last seven years, 
running a deficit year in, year out. The fiscal difficulties 
were common to local governments as well as the central 
government: Both were in the red in just about every year. Table 
3 gives a detailed picture of the coexistence of budget deficits 
at the two levels, national and local. 


Table 3: Budget Deficits at Central and Local Levels 1986-1992 (unit: in 
billions of yuan) 

Item/Year    1986     1987      1988     1989     1990      1991      1992 

Combined     -7.05    -7.96     -7.86    -9.23    -13.96    -21.11    -23.75 
National 
Deficit 

Central      -4.55    -12.66    -1.49    +0.03    -0.49     -18.07    -20.64 
deficit 

Local        -2.50    +4.70     -6.37    -9.26    -13.47    -3.04     -3.11 
deficit 


  While the budget deficit of the central government rose 24.1 
percent each year on the average, the budget gap at the local 
level expanded 3.1 percent. In contrast, there was no such 
coexistence in the first seven years, particularly during the 
Sixth Five-Year Plan. Although the central treasury was unable 
to balance its books in those years, local governments ended 
each year with a surplus. That both national and local 
governments are now drowning in a sea of red ink testifies to 
the accelerating deterioration of our fiscal position. 
  2. Causes of Budget Deficits in Successive Years 
  Budget deficits were caused by a host of factors, some 
external to public finance, some having to do with public 
finance itself. 
  1) A broad decline in profitability 
  Measured by whatever indicator--gross social output value, 
GNP, or national income, the Chinese economy grew by more than 
10 percent annually during the last seven years. In real prices, 
the gross social output value rose 14.8 percent each year on the 
average; gross industrial output value, 12.8 percent; and 
national income, 12.9 percent. But robust economic growth has 
not been accompanied by an equally brisk increase in government 
revenue. Take the profit and tax to investment ratio, for 
instance, which is directly related to how much the government 
collects in revenue. The profit and tax to investment ratio has 
been declining in successive years. For enterprises owned by the 
whole people, the profit and tax to investment ratio dropped 
from 20.7 percent in 1986 to 12.4 percent in 1990, a decline of 
8.3 percentage points. Calculations show that because of the 
fall in the profit and tax to investment ratio, the treasury 
collected a total of 125 billion yuan less in taxes and profits 
in the Seventh Five-Year Plan, a drop of 25 billion yuan each 
year. By 1992, the ratio had slipped to just 10.11 percent for 
industry nationwide, a 100 percent decline. This shows that 
economic growth in China came at a high cost; the growth was 
fast but low in profit, thus driving down the profit and tax to 
investment ratio year after year. The plunge in profitability 
lies at the heart of the string of budget deficits over the 
years. 
  2) The decline of government revenue as a share of GNP 
  What the government collects as revenue makes up part of the 
added value created in all sectors of the national economy that 
finds its way into the hands of the government through 
distribution and redistribution. Revenue originates in the third 
phase of industrialization. Given a particular set of 
circumstances, changes in the size of government revenue as a 
share of GNP should be in direct proportion to changes in the 
magnitude of the revenue; the higher the percentage, the greater 
the revenue, and vice versa. The size of the revenue relative to 
the GNP plays a critical role in the formation, changes, and 
development of the deficit. Government revenue accounted for 
more than 20 percent of the GNP every year during the first 
seven years. Since 1987, however, the share has been declining, 
down to 16 percent in 1988-1991 and a mere 15.5 percent in 1992. 
In developed Western countries, government revenue typically 
constitutes over 40 percent of the GNP, and in Asia's four 
mini-dragons, over 25 percent. China was off by 25 percentage 
points compared to the former and 10 percentage points compared 
to the latter. When the percentage is too low, government 
revenue inevitably shrinks and any increase will be slow in 
coming. This is a major cause of China's budget deficits. 
  3) The heavy burden of government subsidies 
  In the last seven years the treasury shelled out 333.8 
billion yuan in all to subsidize money-losing enterprises and 
another 233 billion yuan in price subsidies. Total price tag: 
566.8 billion yuan, far in excess of the sum of budget deficits 
for the same period. While this shows that public finance in 
China is people-oriented and production construction-driven, it 
also leaves absolutely no doubt that the onerous burden of 
government financial subsidies is an extremely important 
explanation of China's fiscal woes, including the budget 
deficits it has been piling up many years in a row. 
  4) Government revenue losses a severe problem 
  The massive amount of revenue that has been lost, 
particularly as a result of tax evasion, is another major cause 
of China's fiscal difficulties and budget deficits in the last 
seven years. Because of flagrant tax evasion, a substantial 
amount of revenue that should have gone into the national 
coffers was simply lost for nothing. Reportedly, the tax evasion 
rate is 10 percent in developed nations and 20 percent or so in 
developing countries. There are no reliable statistics on China, 
but a number of existing studies does give us a glimpse of the 
dimensions of tax evasion and tax underpayment in China. 
According to a survey by the Xiangtan tax bureau in Hunan, 44.2 
percent and 32.3 percent of individual industrial and commercial 
households practiced tax evasion in 1988 and 1990, respectively. 
In 1988, only 3 billion yuan or so were collected in revenue 
from individuals. In 1989, following the nation's first personal 
tax general inspection, the figure shot up to 13.2 billion yuan. 
The increase continued in 1990, hitting 14.5 billion yuan. Be 
that as it may, insiders believe that the government is 
collecting at most half of what is owed the treasury in taxes. 
Every inspection, so said a tax official from the Chaoyang 
district in Beijing, shows that at least 90 percent of the state 
enterprises and collective enterprises had some tax problems, 
large or small. Thus tax underpayment and tax evasion have 
become a chronic problem in tax collection--a big budget buster. 
  5) Budgetary discipline softening and spending getting out 
of 
control 
  Some of the causes of fiscal difficulties can be found at 
the 
revenue end, others at the spending end. At the spending end, a 
striking problem is softening budgetary discipline and the loss 
of control over spending. This manifests itself not only in the 
way the scale of capital construction was widened without 
authorization, including the reckless proliferation of 
nonproductive projects, buildings, hotels, etc., but also in the 
multiplication and over-staffing of government organs at all 
levels. Turning to the number of people on the public payroll, 
the wages of 15 million people came out of the nation's budgets 
in 1979. By late 1991, the number had risen to almost 40 
million, a 267 percent increase over 1979. In 1980, 
administrative costs nationwide amounted to 40.4 billion yuan. 
By 1991, it was 140 billion yuan, up 347 percent compared to 
1980. Some localities waste national funds wantonly, causing 
severe fiscal difficulties. 
  6) Explosion of off-budget funds 
  There is a finite amount of funds at the disposal of the 
treasury at any given point in time. Budget funds and off-budget 
funds are related to each other and money can be shifted from 
one to the other. Under normal circumstances, off-budget funds 
should be lower than budget funds in terms of both the absolute 
increase and the growth rate. Just the opposite happened in the 
last seven years. Off-budget funds soared. Take the 1986-1989 
period, for instance. While budget funds rose a mere 5.86 
percent annually on the average, off-budget funds expanded 
rapidly at the average annual rate of 11.22 percent, double that 
of budget funds. Absolutely speaking, there were almost as much 
off-budget funds as there are budget funds. As more treasury 
funds were shifted outside the budget, the amount that remained 
inevitably diminished. This is another important reason why the 
state became strapped for funds and could not balance its budget. 
  3. The Nature of Budget Deficits 
  For 14 years the Chinese Government ran a deficit in its 
budget year after year, but the nature of the deficit changed 
over time. At the beginning the policy was to "balance revenue 
with expenditures and come up with a little surplus." The 
government started out by drawing up a balanced budget, not a 
deficit budget. However, the subjective did not coincide with 
the objective in the course of implementation, that is, 
projected revenues did not materialize while expenditures 
exceeded what was planned. The result: a deficit, an unforeseen 
deficit that occurred because the projected balance was upset by 
new factors. During the Sixth Five-Year Plan, there was a 
gradual erosion of public appreciation for the fiscal policy of 
"balancing revenue with expenditures and coming up with a little 
surplus," while the inconsistency between the finite nature of 
revenue and the infinite nature of spending was over-emphasized. 
Prompted by a desire for instant gain and dismissing deficits as 
harmless, we relaxed the spending restraint in executing the 
budget and increased expenditures as we pleased. Revenue and 
expenditures thus went out of balance and a deficit ensued, an 
artificial kind of deficit that resulted from conscious 
decisions. As the Seventh Five-Year Plan went underway, the 
policy of "balancing revenue with expenditures and coming up 
with a small surplus" fell by the wayside, the prevailing idea 
then being that "it is alright to run a deficit." Under the new 
policy, the deficit was made part and parcel of the entire 
budgetary process, from its preparation to its implementation. 
It was used to close the gap created by the excess of 
expenditures over revenue, to expand the scale of construction, 
and to run and develop the economy and all sorts of 
undertakings. In essence, what we had was a deficit policy; what 
we practiced was deficit economics. 
  4. Closing Budget Deficits: Major Strategies 
  To overcome our fiscal difficulties and eliminate the budget 
deficit, the most basic solution is to raise the level of 
profitability of the entire national economy substantially 
during the third phase of industrialization, effectively ending 
the situation in recent years when the economy was locked in 
fast but unprofitable growth. Certainly, raising the level of 
profitability is an extremely arduous piece of systems 
engineering, absolutely not something that can be tackled by the 
Ministry of Finance alone. But this does not mean that finance 
agencies should sit by idly and do nothing. On the contrary, 
they must play an active part to push the enterprise along. This 
article focuses on ways of resolving the fiscal difficulties and 
eliminating the budget deficit primarily from the perspective of 
finance agencies. These are some of the more important steps 
that can be taken: 
  1) Clearly define a guiding philosophy for public finance 
  For years after the PRC was founded, it had always been the 
philosophy of public finance in China to "do what one is capable 
of, balance revenue with expenditures, and come up with a small 
surplus." As reform and the open policy went into full swing and 
hampered by the decline in profitability, the gap between 
revenue and expenditures widened by the day. In recent years a 
heated discussion has been underway revolving around the 
question of whether deficit budgeting is any way to close the 
gap. At the heart of the discussion is this: Are deficits good 
or bad? Pedantic arguments and counter-arguments continue to 
fly back and forth, with no conclusion in sight. In essence, 
however, the controversy is really over whether our public 
finance philosophy needs to be reformed. 
  Take a look around the world today. All countries that 
follow 
a deficit economic policy, whether capitalist or socialist, now 
find themselves in a bind: saddled with debts and a string of 
budget deficits and caught in economic turmoil and relentless 
inflation. Rare is the country which manages to break this 
cycle. Even the United States, the paramount capitalist 
superpower, has finally seen the light after tasting to the full 
the bitter fruits of deficit budgeting for years. As soon as he 
assumed office, President Clinton started pushing for an end to 
the deficit and has taken a number of practical steps to trim 
the deficit. As for the developing nations that have adopted 
deficit budgeting, the vast majority of them are being plagued 
by inflation and staggering under a mountain of debts that will 
never be paid off in full, their economies in worse shape than 
ever. What China has been following in recent years is actually 
a deficit economic policy. Although the policy has not yet 
resulted in economic disruptions of disastrous proportions, the 
skyrocketing inflation of 1989 and the subsequent drive to 
improve the economic climate and rectify the economic order are 
clear signals. They also mirror the "time release" effects of 
deficit budgeting. As the peak period of debt repayment looms on 
the horizon, China has gotten to the stage where it must take 
out new loans to pay off old ones. In 1992 debt incomes 
accounted for 20 percent of gross revenue for that year. In the 
same year, however, debt expenditures amounted to 54 percent of 
debt incomes. This is something to be taken note of. In price 
reform, the two tracks are beginning to merge and full-fledged 
price decontrol is now under way. The prices of certain capital 
goods and articles of daily use are rising rapidly. Some 
signals, such as the depreciation of the renminbi against the 
dollar, are all raising the inflationary expectations of 
consumers (and producers too) to various extents. We are now at 
a turning point where consumers expect change; people are 
anticipating a new round of inflation. Accordingly, the 
prolonged and widespread existence of budget deficits, whether 
covered by borrowing or the issue of more money, is harmful. 
Only by adhering to the fiscal philosophy of "do what one is 
capable of, balance revenue with expenditures, and come up with 
a small surplus" can we ensure that the economy and revenue grow 
at the same pace. 
  2) Improve revenue collection management and supervision. 
  Revenue collection is the cornerstone of all public finance 
operations. Thus far finance departments at all levels have done 
an enormous amount of constructive work to strengthen collection 
management and supervision. Their achievements must be 
acknowledged. However, we also should see that tax underpayment, 
tax evasion, and tax cheating continue on a large scale so that 
the treasury cannot get hold of the funds it is entitled to and 
ends up with reduced revenue. Had collection management been 
tightened further, the national coffers would have been enriched 
by 30 billion yuan, or 10 percent. Thus improving collection 
management and supervision is a major tool to overcome fiscal 
difficulties and erase the deficit. Since taxes make up over 80 
percent of government revenue, we should concentrate on beefing 
up tax collection and supervision. Besides improving existing 
methods of proven effectiveness, we should study extensively the 
effective measures that other countries, particularly developed 
nations, have adopted to strengthen tax collection management 
and supervision and combat tax evasion, modifying for 
application in China those that are scientific and suited to 
China's conditions in order to further improve and strengthen 
its tax collection and supervision system. As for measures now 
in use which are known to be effective, such as the annual tax 
general inspection, they should be continued steadfastly and 
improved further. Penalties and punishments should be made more 
severe to prevent continuous revenue losses and deter new tax 
underpayment and evasion effectively. These days tax offenders 
are fined and ordered to pay back what they owe the government 
in taxes. But then they would turn around and continue their tax 
evasion until they face yet another round of the same penalties. 
We must break that vicious cycle. Serious blatant tax evaders 
must be dealt with in accordance with the law and punished 
harshly. In addition, these days localities cut or waive taxes 
and call them preferential policies. The upshot is that tax 
revenues are fragmented and funds that should have flowed into 
the national coffers are misused or siphoned off into other 
channels. We must take pains to stop these trends. 
  3) Tap new revenue sources ceaselessly. 
  The third step finance departments can take to overcome 
fiscal difficulties and eliminate the deficits is to pay 
attention to tap new revenue sources in a timely fashion based 
on the latest progress on the reform and open policy front. In 
this respect Guangdong has broken much new ground profitably and 
achieved a lot of gratifying results. Its experience should be 
disseminated. In 1992 Guangdong sold off 7,010 hectares of land, 
earning 9.4 billion yuan (including urban infrastructural 
matching fees), equivalent to 44.8 percent of the provincial 
government's total revenue for the year. In many prefectures and 
municipalities, land-derived incomes are approaching or have 
exceeded what the local jurisdiction collects in revenue and 
have been dubbed the "second treasury." It is a foregone 
conclusion that land, a state property, will enter the market 
extensively as a special commodity as reform and the open policy 
are furthered steadily and a socialist market economy gradually 
takes shape and develops. Logically speaking, incomes derived 
from the auction of land use rights based on land prices should 
go to the Ministry of Finance, At present, however, the 
government is losing such incomes on a substantial scale as they 
end up in the hands of some collectives, groups, or individuals. 
Land transactions are highly profitable, which explains why land 
speculation has become such a major problem today, with a 
handful of people reaping a windfall at the expense of the 
state. In conjunction with other interested national agencies, 
finance departments should immediately work out laws and 
regulations to lay down clearly the taxes payable by people 
involved in land transactions as well as their legitimate 
profits. They should waste no time in conducting a comprehensive 
and thorough audit and firmly recover all illegal profits to 
benefit the national coffers. Moreover, finance departments at 
all levels should be required to devote manpower to study and 
identify new revenue sources without cessation. The real estate 
market, stock exchanges, high-tech market, and other markets are 
all new revenue sources that must not be overlooked. Tapping 
these new sources will go a long way toward easing our fiscal 
plight. 
  4) Strictly limit and gradually reduce miscellaneous 
government subsidies. 
  Miscellaneous subsidies cost the Ministry of Finance 570 
billion yuan in lost revenue and increased expenditures in the 
last seven years, averaging over 80 billion yuan a year. For 
this reason, we must take stock of every kind of government 
subsidies most carefully. The last thing we should do is to 
impose a single policy across the board. With the exception of 
subsidies to offset policy-induced losses, which should be 
retained, we must require all other operating losses to be 
turned into surpluses within one to two years, after which 
subsidies would be cut off. Public finance in China, we must 
insist, should be production-based public finance, not 
welfare-oriented public finance. No longer should the treasury 
continue to spend vast sums of money to salvage from the bottom 
of the sea of the socialist market economy those enterprises 
that prefer surviving long-term on state hand-outs to struggling 
on their own to turn business losses into profits. To do so 
would violate the law of the market--survival of the 
fittest--and be counter-productive. Turning to price subsidies, 
price subsidies for agricultural capital goods and protective 
procurement price subsidies for agricultural products should be 
retained. As the government moves to decontrol prices gradually, 
other price subsidies, such as those for articles of daily use, 
should be abolished. Instead, the treasury should offer 
subsidies only to those households below a predetermined income 
level. Under the current system, everybody, from 10,000-yuan 
households to 100-yuan households, collects subsidies. That 
practice should be brought to an end. If only government 
subsidies are cut 10 percent a year, the treasury would be able 
to trim spending or increase revenue by 8 billion yuan. This is 
something that must be taken seriously. 
  5) Strictly rein in all sorts of nonproduction expenditures 
and tighten budgetary discipline. 
  Besides revenue-enhancing efforts, an extremely vital step 
to 
eliminate fiscal difficulties is to strictly rein in all sorts 
of nonproduction expenditures. In 1991 China spent 34.78 billion 
yuan in administrative costs, a 610 percent increase over 1978. 
It has been calculated that by halving the public payroll, the 
central government can save about 60 billion yuan a year. 
Purchases by social groups nationwide reached 41.38 billion yuan 
in the first half of 1991, a gain of 17.9 percent over the 
corresponding period a year ago. The health care bill footed by 
the treasury in 1990 exceeded 10 billion yuan. When it comes to 
these and similar massive nonproduction expenses, we must 
stiffen budgetary discipline and strictly prohibit 
over-spending. Finance departments at all levels must stick to 
the spending level in the budget, firmly refusing to pay any 
overspent amount. Furthermore, the squandering of state funds on 
any pretext must be proscribed by formal decree. There is a new, 
unhealthy trend in the special economic zones, Hong Kong and 
Macao: using public funds to throw "10,000-yuan banquets" and 
pay for "1,000-yuan simple meals" just to show off one's wealth. 
Another fad rapidly gaining popularity is to make study trips 
abroad at public expense, gobbling up wealth the workers create 
through hard labor. A one-month study mission to the United 
States costs the government over 70,000 yuan per person. These 
days even perennially under-funded elementary and secondary 
schools have been lining up to send study missions overseas 
bearing all sorts of names. These trends should be checked 
without delay. By tightening budgetary discipline, we can avoid 
over-spending. 
  6) Make the most of and strengthen auditing and supervision. 
  As reform and the open policy quicken their pace, some units 
and individuals have resorted to a variety of illegal ploys to 
participate in economic activities and misappropriate government 
properties and funds, thus siphoning off public assets into 
private hands and making a fortune at public expense. This is 
particularly true of the upstarts who reaped a windfall from the 
third round of industrialization. Now they lead a life of 
decadent luxury every day, spending money like water. It is 
imperative, therefore, that we scrutinize our financial and 
economic law and discipline and conduct an audit on the assets 
of every upstart. Illicit incomes should be recovered and the 
economic climate must be purified. We must create a normal 
economic order consistent with a socialist market economy, 
protect state properties, and encourage people to get rich 
legally. 
  In short, China was plagued by fiscal problems and ran a 
budget deficit year after year in the seven years between 1986 
and 1992, the outcome of a broad decline in profitability and a 
deficit economic policy. The only way to end this plight and 
push ahead with the development of a socialist market economy is 
to look back in earnest and work out practical and feasible 
strategies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20563 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  25 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yang Peixin on Shortage of Funds for Industry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0317A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 25 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0317A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Peixin (2799 1014 2450) of State Council </F>
Development and Research Center: "Why There Is a Shortage of 
Circulating Funds for Industry"] 
  [Text] Since the implementation of the macro-economic 
control program in July 1993, there has been a shortage of 
circulating funds for industry in China. Even now, this 
situation has not been alleviated. In some districts, 
enterprises have stopped production completely or partially, 
because they have no money to buy raw materials or pay wages. We 
must conscientiously study and analyze this situation. 
<H5>  Why Are Circulating Funds for Industry Insufficient </H5>
  The issue of insufficient circulating funds for industry is 
really something which has cropped up in the course of 
exercising the macro-economic control. However, we should point 
out that due to the high rate of growth of our national economy, 
this phenomenon had actually appeared since the first half of 
1993. The macro-economic control and the tightening of the money 
supply have aggravated this situation. 
  The high growth rate of the national economy demands even 
more circulating funds for industry. 
  1. According to an analysis, the amount of investments in 
fixed assets was more than 700 billion yuan in 1992 and 1.1 
trillion yuan in 1993 of which the portion of projects completed 
and went into operation cost about one trillion yuan. The 
minimum circulating funds needed was 100 million yuan. Under 
ordinary conditions, the amount of circulating funds needed was 
about 30 percent of the fixed assets. Therefore, the amount of 
circulating funds needed to buy new equipment for production 
would be approximately 100 to 300 billion yuan. 
  2. The amount of loans used as circulating funds for 
industry totalled 1.5 trillion yuan at the end of 1992, and the 
total industrial output value rose by more than 20 percent. 
Thus, there is a need to increase the amount of circulating 
funds for industry by 300 billion yuan. 
  3. The prices of industrial raw materials have increased. 
According to statistics compiled, the prices of capital goods 
have increased by 30 percent, and the cost of investment by 40 
percent. On the basis of the price increases of capital goods, 
we need to duly increase the amount of circulating funds by 450 
billion yuan. Due to the high rate of growth and the decontrol 
of the prices of capital goods, the amount of circulating funds 
needed would exceed one trillion yuan, of which tens of billion 
yuan are needed in support of national construction projects. It 
is precisely for this reason that from October 1993, the 
specialized banks had poured capital into industrial enterprises 
in the form of loans and in other forms, while the central bank 
had helped the specialized banks in doing refinancing. Although 
the reserve ratio of the specialized banks on their deposits 
rose from approximately 1 percent to 13.9 percent, some of their 
funds have not been released yet. Nevertheless, we should admit 
that the banks have truly increased the amount of loans used as 
circulating funds for industry. Then why is there still a 
shortage of money on the market? From the aforementioned 
estimates, we should realize that due to the rapid rate of 
growth of the industrial output value and the acceleration of 
the price reform, we inevitably need a large amount of 
circulating funds. In seeking a high rate of growth, we must 
pour in a large amount of capital and fixed assets. Without 
money, we are unable to develop our economy. We must also pay a 
price for the pricing reform and expand the supply of 
circulating funds for industry. Right now, many of the 
state-owned industrial enterprises in China still remain on the 
track of planned economy. Their efficiency is still quite low. 
It is difficult for the whole society to keep pace with the 
excessively high rate of growth with its current accumulation. 
This would inevitably cause inflation and price increases, and 
make factories pay more for their raw materials. From this, we 
can see that we actually need and can achieve a higher rate of 
growth in the development of our economy, but the rate of growth 
is still dependent on the monetary and material supplies, and 
the amount of material supplies (including those additionally 
produced and those imported from abroad) is still determined by 
the amount of available funds (including Renminbi and foreign 
exchange). To believe that the rate of growth should be as high 
as possible without taking into consideration the amount of 
available funds and that even if inflation swells, it will not 
affect the rate of growth is an unrealistic idea. 
<H3>  How To Tackle Issues Regarding Shortage of Circulating Funds 
for Industry </H3>
  According to a bank survey, the reasons causing shortage of 
circulating funds for industry are as follows: 
  1. Some of the enterprises in the fields of textile, coal 
and chemicals are not doing well in selling their main products 
and they have a large stockpile of manufactured goods. They owe 
others a great deal of money, while others also owe them a great 
amount of money. No matter the money is easy or tight, the 
enterprises have little circulating funds. 
  2. Enterprises recklessly raised funds and borrowed money, 
and there is always a constant flow of money out of the 
district, causing a shortage of funds in a certain district. 
  3. Enterprises have insufficient circulating funds. Ten 
percent of the 5,000 large- and medium-sized enterprises fail to 
maintain a definite percentage between their circulating funds 
and their total capital, while 20 percent of them fail to 
maintain a fixed amount of circulating funds. The situation in 
smaller enterprises is even worse. They mainly rely on bank 
loans. Once the bank tightens the money supply, they are in 
trouble. 
  4. A part of the circulating funds is used as investments in 
fixed assets. When enterprises have no money to develop 
technical innovations, they use circulating funds to do so. 
  5. Enterprises continue to manufacture slow-moving products. 
  6. Enterprises owe each other more and more money. This 
situation is worse in the fields of machine-building, building 
materials and iron and steel industry. It is mainly because of 
investment curtailment and lack of construction funds. 
  The aforementioned examples indicate that shortage of 
circulating funds for industry has existed long time ago. it is 
main because of the fact that enterprises' tax burdens have 
already accounted for 90 percent of their net revenue (or the 
total amount of profits and taxes). This percentage may reach 94 
percent for some large enterprises. Enterprises have lost their 
function for self-accumulation. Meanwhile, the financial 
authorities have also stopped appropriating any fixed amount of 
circulating funds for enterprises. Nor would they allocate funds 
to help enterprises develop technical innovations. Enterprises 
have no accumulations of their own, and they are unable to 
develop technical innovations without money. Naturally their 
products will become unmarketable. Such enterprises cannot 
compete with their counterparts which are not state-owned. When 
our national economy was rapidly growing in 1992 and 1993, signs 
of reckless fund raising and money borrowing and illegal use of 
circulating funds to develop technical innovations had cropped 
up. After China exercised the macro-economic control, the 
phenomenon of chain debts surfaced among enterprises. Therefore, 
the basic contradiction is the fact that our state-owned 
industrial enterprises are still on the track of planned 
economy, while they are losing their abilities for 
self-accumulation and self-development. Whenever the bank 
tightens the money supply, there will be an even greater 
shortage of funds. Right now, state-owned enterprises are slow 
in carrying out reform and they lack vitality. This is the main 
reason why they are short of funds. The state-owned enterprises 
are unable to keep pace with the rapid development of our 
national economy. They can neither advance nor retreat. To 
earnestly reform the mechanism of state-owned enterprises, help 
them reduce their tax burdens and truly invigorate them is the 
only way to fundamentally tackle the issue of money shortage for 
the enterprises. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20564 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  22 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Textile Output in February </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2203115094 Beijing CEI Database in English 22 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK2203115094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list of the output 
of textiles in February 1994, released by the State Statistical 
Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Item              |Unit              |2/94              |2/93              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000t           |32.62             |45.32             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000pc          |181.53            |252               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cloth             |100m.m            |11.35             |13.34             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of: Pure cotton   |100m.m            |6.04              |7.62              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chemical fiber    |100m.m            |3.77              |4.28              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk              |10,000t           |0.58              |0.62              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk fabric       |100m.m            |1.84              |1.97              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Woolen fabric     |10,000m           |1849.82           |1987              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Knitting wool     |10,000t           |2.22              |2.38              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Garment           |100m.pc           |2.22              |2.11              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Notes: t -- ton, pc -- piece, m.m -- million meters, m.pc -- million pieces| 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20565 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  23 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ministry Issues Feb Output for Top 10 Steel Makers </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2303112494 Beijing CEI Database in English 23 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK2303112494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS)--Following is the monthly output of 
China's top 10 iron and steel companies in February 1994, 
released by the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |                  |                  |(Unit: Tons)      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |2/94              |1-2/94            |Change (Percent)  | 
|                  |                  |                  |Over 1-2/93       | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Capital Iron and  |684,955           |1,211,874         |30.67             | 
|Steel Complex     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Anshan Iron and S-|655,036           |1,367,467         |-0.76             | 
|teel Company      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Baoshan Iron and  |477,888           |1,084,260         |-1.80             | 
|Steel Complex     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shanghai Iron and |521,185           |1,067,542         |3.01              | 
|Steel Company     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Baotou Iron and S-|250,293           |519,052           |3.45              | 
|teel Complex      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wuhan Iron and St-|422,609           |912,923           |10.13             | 
|eel Complex       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Panzhihua Iron an-|191,669           |409,229           |5.00              | 
|d Steel Complex   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Benxi Iron and St-|219,945           |439,681           |3.10              | 
|eel Complex       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maanshan Iron and |172,835           |365,930           |9.94              | 
|Steel Company     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Taiyuan Iron and  |189,300           |403,425           |32.50             | 
|Steel Company     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20566 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  2 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Bureau Issues Jan Raw Materials Output Figures </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK0203144494 Beijing CEI Database in English 2 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0203144494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS)--Following is a list of the output 
of raw materials in January 1994, released by the State 
Statistical Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Item              |Unit              |1/94              |1/93              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Iron ore          |10,000t           |1469.59           |1350.60           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Pig iron          |10,000t           |722.43            |651.00            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Steel             |10,000t           |749.79            |683.90            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rolled steel      |10,000t           |661.29            |557.87            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferro alloys      |10,000t           |20.25             |10.94             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Coking coal       |10,000t           |486.95            |463.62            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ten nonferrous me-|10,000t           |27.31             |24.79             | 
|tals              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of: Copper        |10,000t           |5.22              |5.28              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aluminium         |10,000t           |10.82             |9.55              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Copper products   |10,000t           |3.88              |3.78              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aluminium products|10,000t           |4.78              |3.83              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Alumina           |10,000t           |13.66             |12.31             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sulphuric-iron ore|10,000t           |86.54             |69.53             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Phosphorus ore    |10,000t           |103.34            |125.11            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Timber            |10,000cu m        |501.07            |374               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Artificial board  |10,000cu m        |29.36             |23.72             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cement            |10,000t           |2360.48           |2061.20           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Plate glass       |10,000c           |954.37            |802.82            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Notes: t - ton, cu m - cubic meter, c - case                               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20567 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpcar020___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  7 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hubei Decision on Developing Private Economy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0318A Wuhan HUBEI RIBAO in Chinese 7 Jan 94 pp 1, 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0318A </F>
<F P=104>  Wuhan HUBEI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Decision by the Hubei Provincial CPC Committee and the </F>
Hubei Provincial People's Government on Accelerating the 
Development of the Individual and Private Economy (24 November 
1993)"] 
  [Text] Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee, Hubei's individual and private economy has 
greatly developed. This has had a very positive effect in 
stimulating social production, bringing prosperity to urban and 
rural markets, making things more convenient for the people, 
adjusting the production structure, increasing employment of 
labor, and in increasing revenue for public finance. The 
individual and private economy has thereby become an important 
force within the national economy of the whole province. In 
order to further implement the spirit of the 14th CPC National 
Congress and of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important statements on 
his southern inspection tour, also to more rapidly and more 
effectively develop the individual and private economy in our 
province, and to thereby promote the sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of Hubei's national economy, the following 
has been decided upon: 
  1. Further Emancipation of Minds, Greater Unanimity of 
Concepts 
  1) The individual and private economy is an organic part of 
China's socialist market economy; it is a new growth sector in 
the developing social productive forces. Personnel engaged in 
the individual and private economy are workers in the 
construction of socialism. Rapid development of the individual 
and private economy is one of the major moves toward the 
establishment of the system of socialist market economy, and 
toward raising the national economy of the entire province to a 
new height of accomplishment. 
  2) The following ideology is to guide the development of 
Hubei's individual and private economy in Hubei: It must be 
guided by the spirit of the 14th CPC National Congress, the 
fundamental political line of the party must be upheld, as must 
be "the three advantageous" criteria, the principle of the 
priority of the public ownership system with its long-term 
coexistence with elements of multiple other economic forms, and 
also the principle of competition on equal terms and the 
principle of common development. Our central concerns must be 
the establishment of the socialist market economy, improvement 
of the external environment, accelerated regional legislation, 
standardization of business procedures, and accelerating the 
development of the individual and private economy throughout the 
entire province. 
  3) In all places, in all sectors, and especially among 
leading cadres at all levels, there has to be a further 
emancipation of minds, outdated concepts shall be revised, and 
the important position and function of the individual and 
private economy shall gain full recognition. While we shall 
continue to strengthen the public ownership system, 
extraordinary measures shall at the same time be adopted to 
arouse enthusiasm in all quarters to achieve a breakthrough 
development in the further promotion of the individual and 
private economy. 
  2. Expending Great Efforts To Achieve the Objective of 
Developing the Individual and Private Economy 
  4) For the period from 1993 to 1995, the overall 
developmental targets of Hubei's individual and private economy 
are: Each year one large step forward and throughout the three 
years one great development. On the foundation already laid in 
1992, we shall, up to the year 1995, double the number of 
individually operated industrial and commercial businesses, the 
total number of privately run enterprises, the number of persons 
engaged in the said establishments, and achieve twice as much 
output value and twice as much business volume, namely get to 
1.2 million enterprises, 2 million persons, and 30 billion yuan, 
respectively. At the same time, great efforts shall be made to 
improve the trade structure of the individual and private 
economy, and to accelerate the productive, scientific, and 
export-oriented development of privately run enterprises. 
  3. Simplifying Registration Procedure, Broadening the Scope 
of Business Operations 
  5) All secondary and tertiary industries primarily financed 
by one or more individuals (excluding nonprofit enterprises) 
shall be considered falling within the scope of enterprises that 
have to be registered and administered as individually operated 
industrial and commercial businesses or as privately run 
enterprises. With the exception of party and government 
personnel, staff and workers employed in industrial and 
commercial enterprises, presently serving military personnel, 
and students at schools--anyone capable of running a business 
may--on the evidence of his/her proof of identity and other 
relevant documents, apply to the local administrative organ in 
charge of industrial and commercial affairs for registration. 
New entrepreneurs in remote border areas and in impoverished 
mountain districts may be allowed to start business first and to 
attend to the prescribed registration later. 
  6) Individually operated industrial and commercial 
businesses 
and privately run enterprises may apply to be allowed to prefix 
their own name with the name of their county or higher ranking 
administrative district, and their registration and 
administration may be carried out at the different 
administrative levels. Privately run enterprises of certain 
scale, whether of single proprietorship or whether partnerships, 
may add "gong si" [company] to their names. 
  7) Individually operated industrial and commercial 
businesses 
and privately run enterprises shall be encouraged to set up 
productive, scientific, and export-oriented enterprises. 
Registration requirements, as to number of people employed and 
amount of registered capital, may be lowered for scientific and 
export-oriented privately run enterprises during their initial 
stage of operations. Relevant departments shall be supportive of 
tertiary industries in the areas of education, cultural affairs, 
public health, tourism, and consultative services. 
  8) Individually operated industrial and commercial 
businesses 
and privately run enterprises may trade in all lines of business 
and all kinds of products which it is permissible to trade in, 
according to state and provincial government provisions. As to 
products which it is not permitted to trade in, a one-time trade 
may be transacted with the prior approval of a people's 
government of county or higher rank or with the approval of an 
organ authorized by the governments, provided it will not 
adversely affect the overall situation. 
  9) Business may be conducted in any form or pattern. Where 
appropriate prerequisites exist, privately run enterprises may 
operate, with the approval of the authority in charge of their 
registration, as group corporations, and may also, with the 
approval of the relevant authority, set up enterprises on the 
shareholding system. 
  10) Individually operated industrial and commercial 
businesses and privately run enterprises may take over 
management under contract, lease, or purchase state-owned and 
collective-owned enterprises or institute joint business 
operations with them. If public property is placed under private 
business management, the relevant authority shall effect an 
appraisal of assets, ensure that value of government-owned or 
collective-owned assets is maintained or increased, that 
ownership status of the assets is not changed, and that there is 
no change in the character of the operations carried out by the 
individual or private enterprises. 
  11) Individually operated industrial and commercial 
businesses and privately run enterprises shall be encouraged to 
undertake Sino-foreign joint ventures and cooperative 
enterprises with foreign business firms, also to extend their 
business operations to overseas. Where necessary prerequisites 
exist, privately run enterprises may take up foreign trade, 
either jointly with foreign trade units or through agencies, and 
may also, according to regulations, report their import-export 
trading right to higher authority for record. 
  4. Improving Business Environment 
  12) Governments at all levels shall incorporate the plant 
layout and the various market constructions of 
individually-operated industrial and commercial businesses and 
of privately run enterprises into the urban development plan of 
the locality in question. Market construction shall be 
accelerated by "raising capital in a multiplicity of ways, with 
a multiplicity of participants, but with unified management and 
commonly shares benefits," as well as according to the principle 
of "benefits to accrue to whoever has invested capital." Units 
and individuals are encouraged to start up various kinds of 
markets, and the objective that we shall all strive for 
energetically is to increase the total number of wholesale 
markets from 91 in 1992 to 150 by the latter part of the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan. At the head of this development shall be the 
large- and medium-sized cities and fairly large commodity 
collecting and distributing centers. They shall initiate two to 
three large-scale wholesale markets of substantial capacity and 
broad effective influence to outlying areas, and shall also 
initiate a series of medium and small-scale wholesale markets of 
local character, as also one to two wholesale markets that will 
rank among the ten large wholesale markets of the entire 
country. At the same time, great efforts shall be expended on 
the effective establishment of border trade markets. 
  13) The relevant authorities shall plan for and be most 
supportive in supplying land needed for production and business 
operations of privately run enterprises. If it shall become 
necessary for special reasons to dismantle or relocate business 
sites or plants, the government at the location in question 
shall reach an appropriate agreement beforehand with the 
original user of the land. 
  14) The authorities in charge in medium- and small-sized 
cities and county market towns shall, in accordance with the 
overall city development plan, energetically support the 
reconstruction of walls and residences along the streets turning 
them into retail shops. They shall designate certain sections as 
early-morning markets, as night markets, or in residential 
districts designate the two sides on nonarterial roads for 
stalls and crowds of vendors, and also appropriately arrange for 
business sites for individually operated industrial and 
commercial businesses and privately run enterprises. 
  15) New privately run enterprises that are experiencing 
difficulties during their initial period of operations in paying 
legally prescribed taxes, may be granted reductions or 
exemptions in their industrial and commercial income tax for 
their first year, unless the tax law explicitly prohibits 
reduction or exemption of a tax for certain products or in case 
of the "eight small" [ba xiao 0360 1420] enterprises. If further 
difficulties are experienced beyond the first years, they may be 
granted further tax reduction or exemption, depending on the 
circumstances and on obtaining approval, according to the proper 
procedure under the current system of the tax administration. 
  16) Individually operated businesses and privately run 
enterprises whose development, production, and marketing of a 
new product has been reported to the relevant authority and 
approved by it, may, if their standards are of "national 
ranking," be granted two to three years of tax reduction or 
exemption, and if of "provincial ranking," be given tax 
reduction and exemption for one to two years. If their 
difficulties persist after expiration of the said periods, they 
may be granted further tax reduction or exemption on obtaining 
approval, according to the proper procedure under the current 
system of the tax administration. 
  17) Enterprises set up by individually operated businesses 
and privately run enterprises with foreign firms as joint 
ventures or cooperative management enterprises shall enjoy the 
benefits of preferential taxation policies accorded by the state 
to foreign-invested enterprises. Scientific and export-oriented 
enterprises instituted by individually operated businesses and 
privately run enterprises shall enjoy the benefit of 
preferential taxation policies. 
  18) Tax offices shall collect taxes from individually 
operated businesses and privately run enterprises according to 
law. Arbitrary increases or reductions in taxes are not 
permissible. 
  19) All relevant state agencies and units shall show 
solicitude for and shall support individually operated 
businesses and privately run enterprises, and shall help dispel 
their anxieties and resolve their difficulties. 
  20) In the appraisal of products, in adjudging high quality 
and fitness for exhibition, in import-export formalities, in the 
conferring of titles to their personnel, and in checking for 
permission to travel abroad, individually operated industrial 
and commercial businesses and privately run enterprises shall be 
treated the same as state-owned or collective-owned enterprises; 
examinations shall be conducted and approval granted by the 
authorities in charge according to prescribed procedures. 
  5. Protection of Legitimate Rights 
  21) Any arbitrary imposition of fees, levies, and fines on 
individually operated businesses and privately run enterprises 
shall definitely be stopped. Apart from charges and fines 
prescribed by law and regulations and charges and fines 
authorized by the state and the provincial authorities in charge 
of such collections, arbitrarily decreed fees and fines, 
wherever and whosesoever, are all invalid. Legitimate charges 
and fines must not exceed appropriate limits and standards. The 
various charges and standards shall be properly adjusted and 
made public. If individually operated businesses and privately 
run enterprises are subjected to arbitrary charges, levies, and 
fines in violation of law, regulations, and administrative 
rules, they may be firmly rejected by the associations of 
individual workers and associations of private enterprises, and 
individually operated industrial and commercial businesses and 
privately run enterprises shall have the right to refuse 
payment. They may, furthermore, report such incidents directly 
to the local government or to the individual and private economy 
leading teams. 
  22) No unit or government agency whatsoever may, for reasons 
of initiating an economic entity, leasing out business sites, 
providing services, and taking up shares, change the economic 
character of individually operated businesses and privately run 
enterprises, nor may they arbitrarily transfer their assets. 
There must be no "incorporation into one's unit" and no "linking 
up for support" in these business operations. The authorities in 
charge shall reassess the economic character of state-owned and 
collective-owned enterprises who are such only in name but not 
in reality. 
  23) Business licenses serve to certify the legitimate 
business operations of individually operated businesses and 
privately run enterprises. No unit or individual other than 
those of the state agencies in charge of industry and commerce 
are legally authorized to retrieve or cancel these licenses. If 
economic losses are inflicted on individually operated 
businesses and privately run enterprises by action that exceeded 
the authority of an agency, the person in charge of that agency 
must bear responsibility to compensate for such losses. 
  24) The life and property of those engaged in individually 
operated businesses and privately run enterprises shall be 
absolutely protected. With due approval, security organizations 
may be set up at large- and medium-sized markets and integrated 
specialized markets. Criminal acts that infringe upon the 
legitimate rights and interests of individually operated 
businesses and privately run enterprises shall be punished 
according to law by the public security and judicial agencies. 
  6. Enhance Organizational Guidance 
  25) Party committees and governments at all levels shall 
enhance their guidance of the individual and private economy. In 
the same manner as this has been stressed in the case of 
state-owned and collective-owned enterprises, the same stress 
should be exercised in the case of the individual and private 
economy. There has to be effective coordination and proper 
handling of the major problems in the development and 
administration of the individual and private economy. 
  26) Party committees and governments at all levels shall 
express strong approbation of outstanding contributions made by 
individually operated businesses and privately run enterprises. 
Every unit of the news media shall actively propagate incidents 
of such exemplary cases, propagate the standing and functions of 
the individual and private economy, so as to create a beneficial 
public opinion and atmosphere, favorable to the accelerated 
development of the individual and private economy. 
  27) The departments concerned shall do an effective job in 
organizing participation of individually operated businesses and 
privately run enterprises, of their own initiative and volition, 
at such activities as studies and training, so as to raise their 
overall quality. They shall encourage them to freely pursue 
their business interests, continuously expand the scope of their 
business operations, striving to become "giants en 
miniature." They shall educate and guide those engaged in 
individually operated businesses and privately run enterprises 
to abide by and implement the laws, rules, and regulations of 
the state and all provisions of policy, and to arrive at a state 
of "observing discipline and obeying the law," and of "honorable 
conduct of all business operations." Where conditions would be 
suitable for it, privately run enterprises may establish party 
or youth league organizations and staff and workers unions. 
  28) Supervision and administrative control of the individual 
and private economy must continuously be strengthened. Illegal 
activities, such as evading taxes and resisting taxation, 
manufacturing and selling counterfeit and spurious goods, 
fraudulent purchasing and selling, and gaining dominant position 
in the market by fraudulent means, must be investigated and 
appropriately dealt with. Persons operating businesses without 
license must be urged to register, and those still refusing to 
register shall be ordered to cease operations. 
  29) According to the party's policy of "uniting, assisting, 
guiding, and educating," industrial and commercial associations 
of all ranks shall step up efforts toward strengthening contacts 
between representatives of the individual and private economy. 
Their education shall nurture "patriotism, respect for one's 
trade, and a law-abiding attitude," and their opinions and 
demands should be promptly made know, so that their legitimate 
rights and interests may be protected, and to have these 
associations function as effective intermediaries. They should 
also participate in the formulation of plans for the development 
of the individual and private economy, in the formulation of 
relevant policy, and in commending meritorious achievements. 
Associations of workers in individually operated businesses and 
associations of privately run enterprises of all ranks shall 
give full scope to self-education, self-administration, and 
mutual service among one's own members, so as to promote the 
healthy development of the individual and private economy. 
  30) The Industry and Commerce Bureau, together with relevant 
departments, shall formulate enforcement provisions for the 
present decision. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20568 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mistakes of Private Economy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0318B Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0318B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bian Yongguo (0593 3057 0948): "Private </F>
Enterprises: Get Out of Your `Zone of Errors' and You Will Be in 
Heaven"] 
  [Text] Private enterprises are admired by state-run and 
collective enterprises for their flexible mechanism. After the 
14th CPC National Congress established their legitimate 
position, private enterprises achieved unprecedented 
development. While the public-owned enterprises made every 
endeavor to adopt the strong points of the private enterprises, 
energetically transformed their operational mechanism, and set 
up modern enterprise systems, the operational mechanism of a 
considerable portion of the private enterprises became in 
certain respects imperceptibly influenced by the old mechanism 
of the public enterprises, came to show some of the shortcomings 
of these public enterprises, and also came to show tendencies of 
alienation. It must be realized that the reason why these 
enterprises had become privately operated enterprises, and why 
they can go on to prosper and develop, is that they have certain 
strong points which the public-owned enterprises do not have. If 
private enterprises would want to have an even better future and 
experience further healthy development, it is now most important 
for them to put a stop to the process of emulating the old 
mechanism of the public-owned enterprises and to get out as 
quickly as possible from their "zones of errors." 
  Having No [Domineering] "Mother-in-Law" and Wanting One, 
Discarding the "Grey Hat" for a "Red Hat" 
  Private enterprises have gradually evolved under the system 
of planned economy; they have grown out of public-owned 
enterprises, and then again grown up and developed among 
public-owned enterprises. It was, therefore, only natural that 
the old managerial patterns of the public-owned enterprises were 
filtering into the private enterprises. Under the influence of 
such infiltration, a peculiar phenomenon has appeared: On the 
one hand, state-run and collective enterprises, furiously angry 
with their [domineering] "mothers-in-law," had thrown off their 
[domineering] "mothers-in-law," while, on the other hand, 
private enterprises are looking for "mothers-in-law" and seeking 
someone to act as "patron." Some private enterprise executives, 
including some industrialists of certain stature, are actually 
clamoring for and demanding that governments of every rank 
establish organs for the administrative control of private 
enterprises, and that they deputize one senior administrative 
official to be particularly in charge of private enterprises, 
thereby changing the present situation where no such forceful 
administrative control exists. At the same time, some private 
enterprises are one after another discarding their "grey hats" 
in exchange for "red hats," or are linking up with collectives, 
or set up spurious collectives, or outwardly proclaim themselves 
to be enterprises on the shareholding and cooperative systems, 
or are hanging up the shop signs of partnership businesses. It 
must be admitted though, that these private enterprises acting 
in this way thereby indicate, first of all, that their 
environment is not yet sufficiently unrestrained to allow for 
their free existence and development, so that they are in many 
respects worse off than the state-run and collective 
enterprises, and that they are therefore compelled to take 
countermeasures. It also indicates that the private enterprises 
themselves lack the spirit of self-assertion and self-reliance, 
the spirit of breaking new ground and forging ahead, and that 
they are therefore inclined to seek succor under a "red label" 
or "red hat" to benefit their own advancement. This is a zone of 
much erroneous understanding. Judging by the spirit of the Third 
Plenum of the 14th CPC Central Committee, the things that the 
private enterprises are now hoping to get are precisely what was 
to be gotten rid of in the reform. Many "mothers-in-law" can, 
of course, be helpful, but practice has proven that the 
disadvantages outweigh the advantages, and that they will in the 
end hamper progress. The "red hat" may for a time still make 
one's head impervious to wind and rain, but following the 
suppression of the "theory of the economic ingredients" [i.e. 
residual ingredients of other systems being maintained in the 
dominating economic system] this attitude may lose its 
effectiveness in the not too far away future. One has to get out 
from this "zone or error." 
<H3>  Continuing the Unreasonable Distribution System, Being Free 
of Them and Yet Seeking the Restraints of Conventions </H3>
  A considerable number of private enterprise executives will 
either not dare to do anything unconventional and unorthodox 
because of their narrow mode of thinking; or will, on the other 
hand, under the residual influence of the old distribution 
pattern of the public-owned enterprises--some of these persons 
having only recently changed over from a public-owned enterprise 
"feeding trough"--continue, consciously or unconsciously, the 
lump sum gross payroll distribution method that has been used 
all along by the state-run and collective enterprises. They will 
not dare take even half a step beyond what they assume as safe 
territory. Although these private enterprises are not at all 
unaware of the fact that they are now closely emulating the 
distribution system of the public-owned enterprises, they will 
still, wrongheadedly and erroneously, claim that they are giving 
a brilliant show of a law-abiding, rule-obeying attitude in 
their business operations, and that they are the modern type of 
private enterprises. In actual fact it is precisely this 
distribution system, now continued in docile conformity with 
conventions, that obliterates the flexibility in distribution in 
the private enterprises and weakens the most significant 
advantage of private enterprises. At present, all public 
enterprises strenuously endeavor in their reform efforts to 
break out from the constraints of their former conventions, 
widen the grading in distributions, gain the ability to raise or 
lower, in order to stimulate the enthusiasm of all cadre, staff, 
and workers. The private enterprises, on the other hand, move in 
the opposite direction, is that not sad. For all these reasons, 
the private enterprises are urged to stop assimilating with the 
public enterprises in these respects and are urged to go their 
own way, which they really ought to go. 
<H5>  With Loud Booms and Bangs, a Craving for Hollow Reputation </H5>
  Recently, some private enterprises of quite some proportions 
underwent a change in that they abandoned their former spirit of 
frugality and turned away from their arduous and thrifty ways of 
trading and marketing. Now, their invitations to symposia went 
out to all over the world, just as the large public-run and 
collective enterprises used to do. On the occasion of its fifth 
anniversary, one private enterprise did not shrink from spending 
a million yuan to hire a plane for highly placed personalities 
to come from Beijing and other places for the celebration, 
arranged an order-placing meeting, and was seeking to gain a 
hollow reputation rather than achievements of substance. These 
acts result to a large extent from the old mode of business 
operations and marketing practiced by the public enterprises. At 
present all state-run and collective enterprises are eager to 
adopt the strong points of the private enterprises; they are 
continuously improving themselves. If the private enterprises 
are so very much bent on emulating the old ways of the public 
enterprises of doing business and marketing, what "strong 
points" will there be left in them? Only by getting out of that 
"zone or errors" will they be able to regain their vitality. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20569 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  15 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> TRANSPORTATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   High-Speed Train Project Planning Underway </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0275A Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO in Chinese 15 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0275A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gu Dechang (6328 1795 2490): "High-Speed Trains </F>
-- High-Speed Rail Construction Is Now Being Accelerated on the 
Guangzhou-Shenzhen Line, With Initial Proofs Completed for the 
Beijing-Shanghai Line, and the First High-Speed Train Expected 
To Roll Around the Year 2005"] 
  [Text] Every Chinese, from north to south and east to west, 
now knows the hardships involved in buying train tickets and 
riding trains. Black-market train ticket transactions have 
become a headache for the public security sector that have not 
been stopped despite repeated attempts. 
  China's rail transport industry has grown rapidly in the 
over 
four decades since the founding of the PRC, with rail-operation 
mileage at 53,565 km by 1992, up 140 percent from 1949. 
Moreover, rail freight volume is up over 20 times, while our 
population has nearly tripled. So in contrast, railway 
construction remains severely lagging. 
  China's per capita rail length is now equivalent only to 
that 
of a cigarette, leaving Chinese railways ranking lower than 
100th place in the world based on territorial area. As to 
running speed, the world has at least 25 countries with trains 
running at a top speed of over 140 km per hr, with running speed 
above 100 km per hr, while China has only a few lines on which 
trains run at a top speed of just 120 km per hr, with running 
speed generally at only 10-100 km per hr. 
  This low volume and slow speed, in addition to our rail 
transport industry being responsible for 52 percent of our 
passenger service and 70 percent of our freight volume, has left 
our railways operating at overload capacity while fighting for 
consumption and equipment, with rail trunk-line transport in 
all-out shortage, and both capital and consumer goods entering 
and leaving east, south, southwest, northwest, and northeast 
China piled up like mountains. Sichuan Province, commonly known 
as a land of plenty, has not even one multiple-track line, 
leaving Governor Xiao Yang [5135 4441] to sigh about Sichuan's 
productive forces being packed in a bottle. National 
trunk-line passenger volume is similarly exploding, with 
exceptional service shortages every spring. During the 1993 
Spring Festival, Shanghai experienced 8 consecutive days of 
passenger volume averaging 560,000 a day, Chengdu had over 
50,000 passengers stuck in stations, and the surging crowds in 
the Guangzhou station broke through six arm-thick iron railings. 
  So how are we to change our rail transport industry's 
shortages and slowness? In recent years, everyone from Central 
Committee and State Council officials to communications and 
transportation experts, scholars, and industrialists have been 
paying attention to and exploring this question, with almost all 
holding that we need to speed up the pace of our railway 
construction, doing all that we can to build new lines and 
upgrade old ones. But what sort of new lines are we to build, 
and how are old lines to be upgraded? I interviewed many 
concerned figures on these details, with most holding that the 
basic way out for China's rail transport industry is to raise 
its running speed, by building high-speed railways. In recent 
years, high-speed rail construction has gradually found its way 
onto our economic-development agenda. 
  High-speed rail refers to a railway system with speeds 
topping 200 km per hr, using special lines with no grade 
crossings and absolute running safety. It concentrates high 
technology in fields, such as pulling force, rolling stock, line 
and track structure, communications signals, driver command and 
control, driving organization, and operating model, having 
advantages, such as large transport capacity, high speed, good 
safety, low consumption, little pollution, and small area 
occupied, having become the general railway-development trend in 
today's world. 
  When Japan's new east-coast trunk-line from Tokyo to Osaka 
began commercial operation in 1964 at a speed of 210 km per hr, 
it was the world's first highspeed-rail system. France's 
high-speed train, the TGV, began operation in 1981. Italy's 
Baishi highspeed train connected Milan to Rome in 1988. 
Germany's high-tech ICE train went into official operation in 
June 1991. Spain started to use a rail service system with 
speeds over 250 km per hour in 1992. Britain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, and the former Soviet Union have also built their 
own highspeed railways. And in addition to the European 
countries, others, such as the United States, South Korea, 
Canada, India, and Australia, are also planning their own 
highspeed railways. The world now has 8,000 km of highspeed 
railways, with the fastest running trains being France's TGV 
(515 km per hr), Germany's ICE (406 km per hr), and Japan's 
WIN350 (350.4 km per hr). 
  High-speed rail construction in all countries generally goes 
through stages, such as discussion, planning, demonstration, 
project-establishment, construction, and commercial operation. 
Japan set a 7-year record for the whole cycle, which is 
generally about 10 years in other countries. I learned from my 
investigations and interviews that China's high-speed rail 
construction is assimilating advanced world experience, by 
combining the discussion, planning, and demonstration stages 
into one, with a series of design and planning details now in 
systematic progress under the leadership of four commissions and 
one ministry (the State Planning Commission, the Economics and 
Trade Commission, the State Restructuring of the Economic System 
Commission, the State Science and Technology Commission, and the 
Ministry of Railways). 
  To greet the return of sovereignty over Hong Kong to China 
in 
1997, by providing China's high-speed rail construction with a 
scientific experimental line, the State Council decided to build 
a high-speed railway from Guangzhou to Shenzhen (with a top 
speed of 160 km per hr and a running speed of 100-120 km per 
hr). In March 1990, the Ministry of Railways' S&amp;T Research 
Academy formed an expert taskforce to jointly tackle the key 
problems involved. Then in December 1991, the official 
foundation-laying ceremony was held at Shilongqiao with, by the 
end of November 1993, the line's bridge upgrading being 
basically completed, engine and car samples having been 
developed, and construction smoothly underway, now in the 
crucial stage of all-out rail-laying and station-upgrading on 
the whole line. Plans are for this high-speed railway to be 
finished and opened to traffic in 1994. 
  On 19 April 1992, Fujian's local railway head office signed 
a 
contract of intent with Japan's Jingkawa Trust and Investment 
Group, with the two parties signing on 15 July the 
cooperative-grounds agreement documents. This agreement 
provides for Sino-Japanese cooperation in building a new 
bullet-train line from Fuzhou to Xiamen, to be completed by no 
later than 1998, at which time bullet trains will speed between 
Fuzhou and Xiamen at 210 km per hr. While a number of factors 
have kept bilateral cooperation on this line from making 
substantive progress, leaving the bullet train still in "a sort 
of dream" state, concerned figures indicate that the Chinese 
Ministry of Railways and Fujian Province are very determined to 
build this highspeed railway, either as a joint venture or 
alone, to turn this dream into a reality. 
  In late September 1992, a high-level forum was held at the 
Jingxi Hotel in Beijing, whose theme was how to develop China's 
highspeed railways. It was proposed at this conference that the 
development of China's highspeed railways should begin with the 
Beijing-Shanghai line, and then proceed to the construction of 
the Beijing-Guangzhou and Beijing-Harbin lines. 
  The Beijing-Shanghai line is China's busiest north-south 
artery, being 1,462 km long. It runs through four eastern 
coastal provinces and the three large municipalities of Beijing, 
Tianjin, and Shanghai, connecting the two major economic zones 
of Beijing-Tianjin-Tang Shan and the Chang Jiang [Yangtze] 
Delta. Along this line, the population makes up 26.2 percent 
of China's population, the GVIAO accounts for 37.9 percent of 
China's, and the per capita national income is over twice the 
national average. While this line accounts for only 2.8 
percent of China's railway mileage, it is responsible for 14.3 
percent of China's railway passenger turnover, with a 
passenger-traffic density 5.2 times the national average, and a 
freight-volume density 3.6 times the national average. The 
experts hold that building a highspeed railway first between 
Beijing and Shanghai will be of extremely far-reaching 
significance to our whole national economic development. 
  Long before this high-level conference, experts from the 
Ministry of Railways and concerned departments had done much 
preliminary work for the building of the Beijing-Shanghai 
highspeed railway, studying the overall program and plan. This 
conference then strengthened everyone's resolve. It is 
understood that the Ministry of Railways' Third Research Academy 
has completed the "feasibility-study report for the 
Beijing-Shanghai highspeed railway," which holds that highspeed 
trains on this line will travel at 250-300 km per hr using 
highspeed engines and cars, with the key equipment being 
purchased abroad. The whole 1,400-plus km line will be elevated 
and closed, and gradually developed into separate passenger and 
freight lines. Once the Beijing-Shanghai railway is finished, 
its annual passenger and freight volume will reach 100 million 
trips and 100 million tons respectively, shortening the travel 
time from Beijing to Shanghai from 17 to 6-7 hours, to make it 
possible to "set out in the morning and arrive by evening," not 
to speak of its impact on national economic development and 
efficiency. 
  As to the investment, projecting price changes, the overall 
investment will reach 30 billion RMB. The experts hold that 
the Ministry of Railways should be the major investor, paying 
6-7 percent of the 3 billion yuan a year over the 10-year plan. 
Then, construction funds raised every year for the 
Beijing-Shanghai railway could amount to 15-20 billion yuan. 
This would ensure the funding. And provinces and 
municipalities along the line could also invest through shares, 
or use land for share-investment, to take part in the building 
of the highspeed railway in line with national preferential 
policy. 
  As to ticket prices, Beijing-Shanghai highspeed-rail 
passengers could pay two-thirds the price of CAAC airline ticket 
prices for the same distance. This would meet the terms for 
repaying the capital with interest, in addition to the possible 
sale of stocks and bonds, the use of foreign loans, and even the 
attraction of overseas technology and equipment for 
joint-venture shareholding. 
  The construction of the Beijing-Shanghai highspeed railway 
will promote tourism, industrial and commercial, and real estate 
development along the line, which will have a great impact on 
eastern China over the next decade. 
  Concerned figures and certain experts and academics have 
appealed to the policymaking sector to make a resolute decision 
as quickly as possible after detailed examination and approval 
of the feasibility report and further demonstration, so that the 
Beijing-Shanghai highspeed railway can be established as a 
project and put under construction as soon as possible. 
  Certain figures hold that if it is pushed hard, it will be 
entirely possible for construction to start on the 
Beijing-Shanghai highspeed railway in one to four years, with 
construction to be completed in about a decade, by which time, 
China's rail transport industry will have pioneered a new age. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20570 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  14 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Analysis of Jiangxi Rural Labor </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0287A Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 14 Jan 94 pp 1, 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0287A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Li Dongchu (2621 2639 0443): "The Third </F>
Assault -- Analysis of Flow of Rural Labor Force From Jiangxi to 
Different Regions"] 
  [Text] On the issue of the so-called "migrant upsurge" 
which has shocked the whole society in recent years, this 
article conducts a penetrating analysis in close connection with 
the actual situation in Jiangxi and in the light of the 
realization of national industrialization, rural urbanization 
and agricultural modernization. What the article says is 
reasonable. It is worthy of reading. The so-called "migrant 
upsurge" is often used from the city dwellers's point of view. 
From rural dwellers's point of view, it is a shift of surplus 
manpower in a form of rural labor export. This is precisely a 
major problem that we must solve in carrying out rural reform 
and development. After the Spring Festival, a new so-called 
"migrant upsurge"; that is, an upsurge of rural labor export for 
the new year will soon arrive. In what way can we correctly 
understand and deal with this major event? How can we guide it 
to meet the requirements of the socialist market economy? How 
can we handle this major event well? 
  If it is said that the rural household contract 
responsibility system with remuneration linked to output is the 
first assault and that the vigorous development of rural 
enterprises the second assault, then the so-called "migrant 
upsurge" is precisely the third assault to China's ossified 
outmoded system of planned economy in the past. This tide for 
reform and opening up and for development and prosperity is 
another creation and contribution made by peasants to China's 
great reform program. The current tide of civilian workers is 
gaining momentum year after year. It involves more and more 
people and covers an increasingly wider area. In addition, with 
the vigorous development of China's national industrialization, 
rural urbanization and agricultural modernization, the so-called 
"migrant upsurge" will further expand. Some people say that the 
nation-wide "migrant upsurge" involves 50 to 60 million people, 
while others say 70 to 80 million people. According to a 
sampling survey conducted by the Jiangxi Rural Survey Team in 
more than 2,000 rural villages in over 30 counties in the 
province, the number of Jiangxi peasants who work either 
seasonally or all the year round in other provinces reached 
1.588 million in September 1992, marking an increase of 85 
percent as compared with that at the end of 1991. This number 
rose to 2.13 million during the same period in 1993, accounting 
for 15 percent of the total rural labor force in the province 
and registering an increase of 34.2 percent over the same period 
in 1992. 
  Naturally that fact that Jiangxi's rapidly increasing export 
of labor to other provinces is neither accidental nor man-made. 
Its emergence and development are inevitable in the course of 
carrying out reform and promoting rural economic development in 
China. It is an important sign reflecting peasants' emancipation 
of their thought and demonstrating social progress. It has its 
social roots and intrinsic requirements. The following natural 
and strong "forces" are fostering this trend. 
  1. Pressure. Jiangxi has 34 million mu of arable land and a 
rural labor force of 14.28 million people. If a calculation is 
made on the basis of the fact that each peasant handles five mu 
of farmland, the province only needs 6.83 million peasants for 
its rural areas. It would have a labor surplus of 7.45 million 
people. This has created a high pressure on the countryside. 
"Where should the people go?" Many good arrangements for the use 
of rural labor force have been made such as the comprehensive 
utilization of agricultural resources, the development of 
"three-high" agriculture, the establishment of village and 
township enterprises and the building of small cities and towns. 
However, peasants have also noticed that the supply of labor 
falls short of demand in special economic zones and the coastal 
developed areas. These are the places where the surplus labor 
force in Jiangxi's old liberated areas and less developed 
districts can be fully utilized. 
  2. Pulling force. Since the implementation of the household 
contract responsibility system with remuneration linked to 
output in the rural areas, peasants have consciously and 
unconsciously applied the law of value, and begun to "do 
whatever is money-making." If one goes out to work outside of 
Jiangxi, one can make 2,000 to 3,000 yuan per year. If one stays 
at home and carry out farming, he can only make several hundred 
yuan a year. Realizing the huge difference and the high 
remuneration, how can the poverty-stricken peasants remain 
indifferent? The instinct to shake off poverty and become 
well-to-to and the kind of natural movement that "water tends to 
flow to the lowland and people tend to seek improvements at all 
times" makes peasants feel uneasy. They will not resign 
themselves to being confined to the pieces of land where they 
have worked hard for generations. They demand to leave the 
farmland and their hometown, move to somewhere else and look for 
other jobs. As a result, peasants have tried one thousand and 
one ways, overcome all kinds of difficulties, endured untold 
hardships, crossed ten thousand crags and torrents and accepted 
jobs that no one else wants to become "ordinary workers." 
  3. Temptation. First of all, those who left their hometown 
send a great deal of money home. Girls who used to live in the 
hills have become modern "young ladies." They spend money 
freely, and often talk about the "beautiful world outside." 
They have repeatedly awakened those who live in the hilly 
districts and often dream about becoming rich; and induced them 
to make decision to go out and see the world. Those who live in 
the hilly districts no longer mechanically sing that "eating 
brown rice and burning charcoal, I am as happy as a fairy." They 
spread the news to hundreds of people. With the old guiding the 
new, their relatives calling other relatives, neighbors 
notifying other neighbors and friends helping other friends, 
they leave their farms and mountain villages in groups for 
Guangdong, Fujian, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Shanghai or Beijing. The 
quiet old liberated area in Jiangxi is now seething with 
excitement. 
  4. Thrust. As a matter of fact, agriculture has been 
neglected in many localities. The comparative advantage of grain 
crops and cotton is small, thus increasing the thrust to the 
peasants to leave their farmland. 
  5. Force of guidance. The macro-climate in carrying out 
reform and the relaxed external environment have created fine 
conditions for the export of the labor forces. In the past, 
peasants were not allowed to "leave their land and hometown." 
Right now, peasants may go south or north to see the outside 
world by using their identification cards. In this connection, 
the government does not "conduct check-ups in villages and 
townships and subject those who seek to leave the countryside to 
the approval of the county authorities." It actually provides 
peasants who want to leave with information, training, services 
and protection. If it is said that the objective conditions 
provided by the reform program turns the export of the labor 
force into a possibility, then the enthusiastic support, 
guidance and services provided by the government have turned 
this possibility into a reality. 
  People's views on the "migrant upsurge" are similar to their 
views on the rural household contract responsibility system with 
remuneration linked to output and on the vigorous development of 
village and township enterprises. At the very beginning, people 
do not know much about it. Some people praised it, while others 
denounced it. Originally the term "migrant upsurge" was 
journalist language. It seems to be a derogatory term which 
peasants dislike. Right now, peasants are asking for a correct 
term for their activities to go to different districts. Experts 
believe that China's reform begins from the countryside. 
Peasants have created the household contract responsibility 
system with remuneration linked to output and developed the 
village and township enterprises. Right after that China's 
reform was extended from the rural areas to the cities, and 
attracted worldwide attention. Currently, peasants have once 
again brought about the flow of rural labor force to other 
districts. This is another great pioneering undertaking made by 
peasants after they had attained their right to carry out and 
manage their production on their own. This is something 
inevitable in the course of building the socialist market 
economy. Peasants have walked out of the countryside, out of a 
closed environment to the outside world, and to the society to 
promote development and progress by tens of millions. This is 
something most gratifying to the people. Peasants have further 
emancipated their minds. They have fiercely assaulted the 
dualist social structure which separates the cities from the 
townships and the workers from the peasants; and shifted the 
large number of rural surplus labor force to the secondary and 
tertiary industries. Meantime, they are also creating 
conditions for carrying out fairly large-scale operations in 
farming, accelerating the building of small cities and 
townships, developing village and township enterprises and 
realizing agricultural modernization. 
  Experts point out that people have different views on 
economic phenomena such as the "migrant upsurge." This is 
something inevitable. However, all new-born things have gigantic 
vitality. Following the development of the "migrant upsurge," 
people have finally become more clear about the role of this 
tide and the profound historic significance. In the past, some 
people called this trend a "blind flow." They even called the 
"migrant upsurge" as "blind flow of laborers" and regarded such 
blind flow of laborers as great scourge like fierce floods and 
savage beasts. They also blamed "blind flow of rural laborers" 
for disrupting the transportation and bringing unbearable 
pressure to the cities. 
  When we examine an issue, we should always pay attention to 
its course, essential aspects, and the main trend. With regard 
to the "migrant upsurge," it should be correctly termed as an 
abrupt phenomenon of a large number of rural labors flowing to a 
certain district to seek employment without obtaining accurate 
information on job availability and going through the proper 
procedure and arrangement. Such "migrant upsurge" took place in 
Guangzhou, Wuhan and other localities. As for the "blind flow of 
rural laborers," they only happened in some areas, and they 
should be considered as individual cases. We cannot generalize 
the entire situation by citing some individual examples. Nor 
should we brand everything as bad. The flow of population was 
nothing new since ancient times. Market economy itself is "an 
invisible hand." It will not call itself market economy if 
there is no risk at all. China's railways are always quite 
overloaded. The traveling of a large number peasants by railway 
during the Spring Festival naturally gives the railway 
department additional pressure. The excessive number of 
travellers often cause disasters in some localities. However, 
under no circumstances should we totally negate the "migrant 
upsurge," and shift all responsibilities to our peasant brothers 
and sisters. Nor should we attribute all the problems in public 
security in the cities to the "migrant upsurge." 
  The existing problem right now is not mainly on the export 
of labor itself but on the fact that the relative conditions for 
social management still fails to keep pace with the vigorously 
developing situation. We will be able to offset the negative 
effect of the "migrant upsurge," so long as we carry out our 
work conscientiously, deepen the reform and achieve our goal in 
"orderly exporting the labor force, controlling the import of 
labor, providing good services to the flowing labor force, 
working out measures to make readjustments and handle emergency 
cases." 
  At the very beginning, the Jiangxi Provincial CPC Committee 
and the provincial government have paid great attention to the 
export of labor. They have carried out their work in this 
connection actively and on their own initiative. As early as in 
1987, Governor Wu Guanzheng had already said that on the basis 
of the rapid economic development in the coastal areas, Jiangxi 
must implement the policy of "supporting the export of labor, 
working out follow-ups and replacing those who have left." He 
called for efforts to keep the doors of Jiangxi's mountain 
villages wide open and vigorously organize those who wish to 
leave to go to the coastal areas. The offices under the 
administration of the provincial government set up in Guangzhou, 
Shenzhen, Amoy, Shanghai and Beijing regard the export of labor 
from Jiangxi as a major item in their work. The party and 
government departments in various localities in the province 
have consciously regarded the export of labor as another task in 
support of rural economy after the vigorous development of 
village and township enterprises. Work stations to help labor 
export have been set up in various prefectures, cities, counties 
and townships in Ganzhou, Jian, Shangrao, and Fuzhou where there 
is a larger number of surplus labor. There are departments and 
people specially assigned to provide guidance and to serve, 
help, protect and help those who seek to leave the province. 
Some localities have also made follow-ups to truly help millions 
of peasants who wish to leave the province to work in other 
provinces and to solve their problems. 
  As for the labor markets operated by nongovernment 
organizations, various localities have adhered to the principle 
of not trying to interfere with them, drive them out of business 
or making things difficult for them. They allow, encourage, and 
help them adopt all types of forms and measures to export labor. 
In order to alleviate the pressure on the railway transportation 
imposed by such "migration upsurge," Jiangxi has made full use 
of its geographical superiority to facilitate the flow of labor 
out of the province. Many localities have sent out buses to 
Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Shanghai for use by workers from 
Jiangxi, winning wide acclaim from the large number of civilian 
workers and the railroad department. During this year's Spring 
Festival, the Jiangxi provincial government made special 
arrangements and called on various prefectures (cities) and 
counties to take initiative to make things easy for workers out 
of Jiangxi to return their hometown in the province to spend 
their Spring Festival. It urged them to dispatch persons or send 
out buses to places where most of workers from Jiangxi are 
working to help them come back and return. A provincial-level 
leading comrade said that we will be able to help our rural 
labor flow smoothly to various districts in good order; promote 
what is beneficial and abolish what is harmful; and steadily and 
healthily develop this trend, so long as we have the government 
guidance and market demands, keep traffic open between cities 
and the countryside, adopt various measures to help the flow of 
rural labor, provide good socialized services and improve the 
legal system in this connection. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20571 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  16 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Survey of Shanxi Peasant Burdens </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0287B Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO in Chinese 16 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0287B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing NONGMIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Liu Junxiang (0491 0689 4382): "Survey </F>
of Situation in Shanxi Province To Reduce Peasant Burdens] 
  [Text] Not long ago, our reporter accompanied the 
law-enforcement and inspection team of the State Council on 
peasants' burdens to go to Shanxi Province to check how the 
government policy on reducing peasants's burdens is being 
implemented. Since the beginning of this year, especially since 
the announcement of the joint emergency circular by the two 
general offices on 19 March, the Shanxi Provincial CPC Committee 
and the provincial government have explicitly abolished, 
corrected, annulled and prohibited those documents, 
fee-collecting measures and erroneous practices which run 
counter to the provisions of the "Regulations" announced by the 
State Council. The State Council's policy on peasants' burdens 
(which should not exceed 5 percent of their per capita net 
income) is being basically implemented in Shanxi. According to 
an estimate, peasants' burdens were reduced by 261.739 million 
yuan this year and their per capita burden dropped by 11.69 
yuan, representing 2.18 percent of their per capita net income 
in 1992. Measures have also been taken to reduce peasants' 
burdens in the 435 funding programs for the 1992 fiscal year, 
which had exceeded the 5 percent limit as specified by the State 
Council, accounting for 64.7 percent of the total amount to be 
reduced and amounting to 75.154 million yuan. 
<H5>  Burdens Hurt Peasants' Feelings </H5>
  Are peasants' financial burdens in Shanxi Province heavy? To 
what extent do peasants suffer from such burdens? 
  According to the 1992 annual statistic report on peasants' 
burdens, there were four prefectures and cities, 42 counties and 
672 villages and townships where taxes and charges levied on 
peasants on a per capita basis exceeded the 5 percent limit 
specified by the "regulations." Those villages and townships 
where peasants' burdens exceeded the 5 percent limit were mainly 
in the farming areas in the grain-producing farming areas and 
remote mountainous districts in Xinzhou, Luliang, Jinzhong, 
Linfen, Yuncheng, Yanbei and Changzhi. The number of villages 
and townships in the Xinzhou Prefecture, where peasants' burdens 
exceeded the limit accounts for 72 percent of the total number 
of villages and townships in the prefecture. According to 
surveys conducted in various localities, there are more than 100 
different funding programs in most of the prefectures and 
cities. A survey in 51 townships and 171 villages in Linfen 
prefecture shows that as many as 123 different types of charges 
and fees are being levied on peasants by 48 different 
departments. Peasants in some localities are unable to 
withstand the unreasonable apportions and excessive charges on 
them. Such apportions and charges have also affected the 
relationship between the party and the masses and shaken the 
people's confidence in the party. For example, the authorities 
in Hongzhiyi Township in Yuncheng City increased the 
agricultural tax and imposed unreasonable service charges on 
peasants. When peasants could not afford to pay, the authorities 
then organized public security personnel with handcuffs to 
collect fees and taxes. They had illegally assaulted peasants, 
and detained 10 peasants and students in six villages. 
<H5>  Cases Are Investigated and Handled To Win People's Confidence </H5>
  The Shanxi Provincial CPC Committee and the provincial 
government have decided to regard their task in alleviating 
peasants' financial burdens and tackling the issue of peasants' 
heavy burdens as one of the two major tasks in rectifying the 
party style and building a clean and honest government. While 
organizing their staff members to screen all relative documents 
and carry out self-examination and correct their own errors, 
they have also investigated and handled several typical cases in 
which some authorities at the different levels have violated 
laws and discipline to increase peasants' financial burdens. 
  An incident occurred at the end of 1992 in Shentangping 
township, Kelan County. The head of the township and a secretary 
of the township party committee, together with judicial and 
public security personnel with handcuffs and truncheons, broke 
into 30-odd peasants' houses in Kangjiahui Village to collect 
fees and charges. They took away peasants' television sets, 
sewing machines, bicycles, push carts, furniture and grain 
crops. The provincial, prefectural and county authorities 
jointly investigated the case and timely took disciplinary 
actions against those lawbreakers who were involved in the 
incident. The authorities also returned all the belongings taken 
away from peasants' houses and apologized to the peasants for 
the wrongdoing. 
  Eight peasant families including one headed by Liu Hailian 
moved into the Zhaizi Village in Zhongyang County several years 
ago. This year, the villagers committee decided to impose 
another 1,000 yuan on each family for "moving into the village" 
in addition to the 1,000 yuan it had already collected, 
otherwise no farmland will be allocated to them to grow their 
grain crops. Peasants of these eight families appealed to the 
provincial authorities for help. After receiving the appeal, 
Secretary Hao Tianxi of the Zhongyang County CPC Committee, 
immediately assigned someone to look into this matter and solved 
the problem in three days. Peasants jubilantly said that the 
party and the government fully support us. We must work hard to 
carry out production in order to repay the leading comrades for 
what they did for us, they added. 
<H5>  Unreasonable Charges Still Prevail </H5>
  Since the general offices of the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council issued the "Emergency Circular on 
Realistically Reducing Peasants' Burdens" on 19 March, 
especially after the telephone conference sponsored by the State 
Council on the work of alleviating peasants' burdens, the Shanxi 
Provincial CPC Committee and the provincial government have paid 
even greater attention to reducing peasants' financial burdens. 
Besides abolishing the "three advocation's and five 
consolidation's", they have stopped implementing all documents 
and regulations on collecting fees from peasants. Later, they 
screened all documents from the top level to the bottom level, 
while carefully examining all funding programs from the lower 
level to the higher level in various localities. According to 
statistics, 2,977 documents and 3,378 funding programs 
concerning peasants' financial burdens were screened, and a 
total of 449 erroneous practices which violated the 
"regulations" of the State Council were prohibited. 
  When all documents on peasants' burdens were carefully 
examined, unreasonable charges were canceled and erroneous 
practices which violate the "regulations" of the State Council 
were prohibited. Normally no one should dare to impose any 
unreasonable charge on peasants. However, this was not true. 
Even in August 1993, there remained some departments and 
townships which still seriously violated the guideline laid down 
by the "Emergency Circular" of the two general offices. They 
defied the orders and the prohibitions, and continued to collect 
unreasonable fees from peasants. Our reporter cited the 
following examples during his tour: 
  From May to September 1993, the Bureau of Electric Power, 
the Bureau of Land and the Bureau of Farm Machinery in Pianguan 
County continued to collect electric power maintenance fee, land 
registration fee and farm machinery administration fee at the 
township level. 
  From April to July, 11 departments in Yangcheng County 
including the Bureau of Land, the Bureau of Farm Machinery, the 
Bureau of Electric Power and the Bureau of Communications still 
illegally collected fees of 28 types from peasants totaling 2.43 
million yuan. Twenty of the 25 townships in Yangcheng County 
continued to illegally levy fees on peasants. The number of such 
illegal funding programs reached 27, totaling 2.74 million yuan. 
  The Bureau of Communications in suburban Jincheng City laid 
down a rigid rule demanding that each of the 31 villages in the 
Jinmiaopu Township buy two sets of videotape called: "Eight 
Diagrams Specified by the Book of Changes [one of the "Six 
Confucian Classics"]. It collected 39 yuan for each set. 
  From March to August, one township and six units in Qinshui 
County still violated the guideline laid down by the documents 
of the central, provincial and city authorities in this 
connection, and continued to illegally collect fees from 
peasants for the development of collective economy. 
  The Bureau of Civic Affairs in Lingchuan County demands that 
all young people who wish to register for marriage must attend a 
"pre-marriage class," watch a videotape for the newly wed and 
buy a book, an audio cassette tape and two badges. It collected 
40 yuan from each registrant for all this. 
  After all the aforementioned problems were discovered, the 
Pianguan county and the various counties under the 
administration of the Jincheng county had seriously handled all 
these cases on time. Most of the fees collected had been 
returned. 
<H5>  Peasants Still Dare Not Radiantly Smile Yet </H5>
  "After paying enough to the state and retaining enough for 
the collective, what is left belongs to peasants themselves." 
This is the people's general impression on their income from 
labor after the implementation of the system under which 
production groups assume full responsibility for the fulfillment 
of production plans in the rural areas in 1983. In fact, this 
has become the basis on which the collective collects money from 
peasants. During our reporter's surveying trip, many peasants 
said that there are figures based on which we make payments to 
the state, but there are no figures to show the exact amount of 
money which we need to pay to the collective. How much is 
"enough"? There is no definite figure. It has become a system 
under which we must pay what we are asked to pay. When our 
reporter mentioned the abolishment of the miscellaneous funding 
programs and the provision specified by the State Council that 
all the fees collected at the village and township levels 
"should not exceed 5 percent of the peasants' net income," they 
jubilantly said that now there is a highest limit and that the 
collective can no longer collect money beyond the limit. 
  In order to effectively control peasants' financial 
burdens and prevent these erroneous practices on peasants' 
burdens from resurfacing, a card system on peasants' financial 
burdens has been set up on a provincial basis. The "Control Card 
for Peasants' Burdens" has been issued to 5.95 million farming 
households free of charge. When our reporter conducted his 
survey and called on peasants in Pianguan County, Pingyao County 
and Qinshui County, he saw these cards on several occasions. The 
portion of the peasant's total income for (budgeted) public 
accumulation at the village and township levels that the subject 
peasant must pay and the number of work days for community work 
that he or she must contribute for this year were clearly 
written out on the card which is often regarded as peasants' 
"amulet." "With this card on hand, we feel at ease. We know how 
much we should pay and how many work days of labor we should 
contribute," said peasants. 
  The party committees and the governments at various 
levels have removed the shackles on peasants so that peasants 
can take a deep breath and straighten themselves. They are happy 
and smiling. However, they are still somewhat worried about the 
possibility to find their burdens once again increased after the 
autumn harvest and their hope dashed. Peasants are worried 
amidst their joy. What do the policy and law enforcing cadres at 
the county, township and village levels think about all this? 
Not long ago, the Law Enforcement and Inspection Team of the 
State Council on Peasants' Burdens distributed questionnaires 
among village and township cadres in 143 counties in Shanxi 
Province. Among the respondents, 9.1 percent of cadres said that 
they would follow the instructions of their superiors. When our 
reporter conducted his survey in the Nanyijian Township in 
Pingyao County, a township party committee secretary bluntly 
said: "We will collect more fees after the autumn harvest, if 
our expenses exceed our budget." Although there are not many 
cadres who belong to this category, their fuzzy legal concept 
and unhealthy work style in defying orders and prohibitions 
cannot but make peasants feel uneasy. 
  We should no longer hurt peasants's feelings. Let us hope 
that there will be no relapse in the future. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20572 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   CASS Report on Grain System Reform, Issues </TI></H3>
<H4>   After Grain Market Deregulation </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0285A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Facing Issues in the Wake of Grain Market </F>
Deregulation"] 
  [Text] Editor's Note: China's grain 
problem is a major topic of international significance. Grain 
system reform in China's market economy has become a hot spot to 
which economists and government policy departments pay close 
attention. Thus, this newspaper is printing portions of the key 
problems research report (the full text of which consists of 
approximately 70,000 words) of the Rural Development Institute 
of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. This report was 
managed and written by the noted agricultural economist, Mr. 
Deng Yiming [6772 0001 7686]. It is hoped that this report will 
cause more experts and scholars to pay close attention to and 
further examine the problem of grain market reform. 
  By now grain prices have been substantially deregulated 
throughout the country, and grain markets have been opened up. 
However, because of the incompletely developed market mechanism 
as well as frictions between the new and the old systems, some 
new problems will unavoidably appear in the wake of grain market 
deregulation. Only by facing these problems squarely can reform 
be further intensified. 
<H5>  The Grain Price Fluctuation Problem </H5>
  Price fluctuations are unavoidable during the period of 
change from planned grain procurement and marketing to a market 
mechanism. The reasons are three: 
  1) The peasant household grain self-sufficiency rate is 
high, 
but the commodity rate is low. 
  In China, approximately 80 percent of the population is 
engaged in agriculture, and the grain self-sufficiency rate is 
approximately 70 percent. Thus, during lean harvest and bumper 
harvest years, the decline and rise in the market supply of 
grain is greater than in a country in which all grain is 
commodity grain. 
  2) The peasant household degree of self-sufficiency is high, 
but the elasticity of supply and demand is slight. 
  In China, where the degree of self-sufficiency in grain 
production is fairly high, the elasticity in grain supply and 
demand is much lower than in a country where all grain is 
commodity grain. According to price elasticity theory, when the 
supply and demand curves change causing a rise or fall in 
prices, supply and demand curve elasticity determines the size 
of the price change. In China, which has high self-sufficiency 
in grain production, once the grain market is deregulated, 
market price fluctuations are bound to intensify because of the 
low elasticity of supply and demand. 
  3) The risk avoidance behavior of grain producers and 
consumers. 
  Chinese peasant households farm on a very small scale, each 
household farming an average 6.4 mu. The same applies to the 
scale of products farmed. The commodity grain rate is low, each 
household supplying approximately 600 kilograms of commodity 
grain a year. Storage capacity is very small. Peasant household 
reaction to market prices is very much the same. In bumper 
harvest years when market supply increases, grain prices fall. 
Peasant household expect prices will fall further, so they rush 
to the markets to sell off their grain. This causes a sudden 
increase in the grain supply. Supply is far greater than demand. 
This drives grain prices far down. In lean harvest years when 
market supply declines, grain prices rise, and peasants expect 
that prices will rise further. They hoard their grain, thereby 
further decreasing the supply of grain in the market. This 
drives prices up, intensifying market grain price fluctuations. 
  In China, city and town residents are the main grain 
consumers. An overwhelming majority of them have low incomes, so 
they are unable to withstand great ups and downs in prices. 
Market deregulation, which causes a slight grain shortage, 
frequently results in panic buying, which causes a tremendous 
rise in grain prices in turn. When grain market prices fall, 
urban residents expect that grain prices will continue to fall. 
A wait-and-see attitude results in low market demand for grain, 
so the market price continues to fall. The foregoing features of 
grain producer and grain consumer production and consumption is 
risk avoidance behavior following the setting of grain prices by 
the market. This behavior seeks to reduce to the minimum both 
production and consumption risk. 
<H5>  The Problem of Grain Price Differences </H5>
  During the period of state monopoly procurement and 
marketing, the price paid peasants for their grain was held down 
in order to industrialize rapidly, and transportation expenses 
were borne by the state. This permitted the maintenance of low 
consumer prices, which were in keeping with low consumer wages. 
Thus, industry made super profits. However, this dampened 
peasant interest in growing grain, thereby accentuating the 
difference between supply and demand for grain. In order to 
increase the grain supply to ameliorate the difference between 
supply and demand, the state had no choice but to raise the 
grain procurement price tremendously during the late 1970s while 
keeping the consumer's price the same. This produced a grain 
production and consumption price inversion, the shortfall made 
up by the state treasury. By 1990, the public grain subsidy 
amounted to 42 billion yuan. The treasury found this to be an 
unbearable burden, so a rise in the sale price of grain became 
imperative. As a result of two consumer price rises, the 
procurement and the market price has become identical. There is 
virtually no difference between the grain production and 
consumption price. The next step will be to deregulate grain 
markets, impelling grain producers, dealers, and consumers 
toward the market. Once grain markets have been deregulated, the 
grain production and consumption price difference is expected to 
widen. 
  1. Analysis of the reasons why the grain production and 
consumption price will widen following grain market deregulation. 
  First is system change factors. Following grain market 
deregulation, the state will abolish government subsidies to 
producers and dealers. The following formula will be used to 
handle prices between producers and consumers: grain producer 
price + grain dealer price (transportation and selling costs + 
profit) = consumer price. The identical buying and selling price 
will become history. Second is transportation and marketing 
system efficiency factors. The size of the difference between 
the grain producer and grain consumer price depends on the 
efficiency of the transportation and marketing system. If 
efficiency is high, the difference is small; if efficiency is 
low, the difference is great. The current state of China's 
transportation and marketing system is as follows: 
  First, more than 90 percent of the dealings in commodity 
grain in China are by state-owned grain enterprises. Once grain 
markets have been deregulated and state-owned grain enterprises 
are pushed into the markets, they will very likely become grain 
corporations of a monopoly character that manipulate market 
grain prices to garner super monopoly profits. This will widen 
the difference between the production and consumption price. 
Second, since the scale of production and consumption of China's 
grain producers and consumers is small and extraordinarily 
scattered as well, in addition to which the infrastructure is 
antiquated and markets are greatly cut up, transportation and 
marketing system profits and storage losses are very great. Once 
grain markets are deregulated, bank interest rates will rise 
again. That will dramatically increase transportation and 
marketing costs, thereby leading to a widening of the production 
and consumption costs. Third, China's road and communications 
facilities are antiquated, and markets are very much chopped up 
weakening contact among markets. In addition, storage facilities 
are inadequate. Storage losses are great and costs are high. 
This increases the difference between grain producer and 
consumer prices. 
  2. Detrimental effect of the widening of the difference 
between grain production and consumption prices. 
  Once grain markets are deregulated and the difference 
between 
grain production and consumption prices widens to a certain 
point, the result will be detrimental to both producers and 
consumers, and ultimately the damage to people having low 
incomes will be greatest. Politically speaking, the peasants 
grumble about too low grain prices. They wish grain prices were 
somewhat higher so that their income would be somewhat greater. 
Consumers complain about grain prices being too high. They wish 
grain prices were somewhat lower so that they did not have to 
pay as much. This puts pressure on the government. In addition 
are problems such as the price risks of grain producing areas 
and needy marketing areas. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20573 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   CASS Report on Grain System Reform, Issues </TI></H3>
<H4>   Reforms in Price System </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0285A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Straightening Out the Grain Price Control System"] </F>
  [Text] Government's macropolicy on prices powerfully 
affects the macroclimate for market reform of the grain system. 
Therefore, in the process of carrying out reforms whereby the 
market regulates the buying and selling of grain, corresponding 
changes must be made in the macroeconomic price system. Reforms 
must be made to straighten out the overall price system and 
grain production, transportation and marketing, and relations 
among microeconomic consumption systems, as well as to reduce 
frictions between the macroeconomic system and microeconomic 
systems, and to stimulate smooth market reform of the grain 
system. 
<H5>  Grain Prices </H5>
  Grain prices hold a key position in the overall price 
system. 
They are the most important tool that the government can use to 
guide the national economy toward intended development goals. 
Once grain markets are deregulated, prices are determined by 
market supply and demand; hence, overall prices, including 
exchange rates, profit rates, wage rates, and tax rates should 
be decided by the market supply and demand mechanism. Using the 
market mechanism as the orientation, the following two things 
must be done to straighten out the relationship between the 
grain system and overall prices. 
  1) Raise the Relative Price Level of Grain 
  It is the relative price level of grain that determines the 
rate of return from peasant grain farming. This is to say that 
given a set grain price, if the prices of things need for grain 
production are low, returns from the growing of grain are large. 
Conversely, they are small. Before the deregulation of grain 
markets, the relative prices of grain and products other than 
grain were government regulated and controlled. Despite the low 
price that the government paid for grain, prices of products 
other than grain were also relatively low, so the difference in 
the price ratio was still not too large. Following deregulation 
of the grain markets, the relative price level of grain will be 
determined by the market mechanism. Then, the price of grain may 
decline relative to the price of products other than grain. 
  The reasons for this are, first, grain supply and demand 
elasticity is less than the elasticity of supply and demand for 
products other than grain. When market supply and demand 
determines the price of grain and products other than grain, the 
relative price of grain may steadily decline. Second, the 
production cycle for grain is longer than for industrial goods, 
funds turn over more slowly, the fixed assets utilization rate 
is lower, and prices change much more slowly. Grain production 
is prone to disastrous weather conditions, diseases, and insect 
pest infestations. Sometimes a devastating natural disaster 
occurs that results in no output from all the inputs. Grain 
production technology also advances much more slowly than for 
industrial production. All these factors cause an increase in 
grain production costs. 
  Third, grain prices rise more slowly than prices of 
industrial goods. This is mostly because of the numerous 
industrial production links in which products go through 
multiple processing by industrial concerns, each processing 
increasing the price. This causes a steady rise in prices. 
Grain, however, is purchased from the peasants for shipment to 
grain shops. Its original state is not changed. Even if it is 
processed, the number of processing steps is relatively small. 
Consequently, the price changes slowly, the relative price of 
grain steadily falling. 
  The drop in the relative price of grain will lead to a 
steady 
worsening of trading conditions between industry and 
agriculture, and a steady decrease in peasant earnings. This 
will have an extremely adverse effect on the macroeconomy. 
Therefore, following grain market deregulation, decline in the 
relative price of grain must be prevented to increase the 
peasants' income. 
  2) Straighten Out Relationships in the Overall Price System 
  The relative price of grain is the key element in the 
overall 
price system. Once the relative price of grain is increased, a 
portion of government fiscal and consumers income will be 
transferred to the grain producers. This will necessitate a rise 
in consumer wage rates for otherwise the standard of living of 
urban staff members and workers will fall. Hidden taxes must be 
made open. If the peasants' unreasonable burdens can be halted, 
the grain tax rate may be correspondingly increased. 
<H5>  Raise Interest Rates </H5>
  Once grain markets have been deregulated and a market 
mechanism has been largely established throughout the country, 
interest rates will have to be increased for the following 
reasons: 
  1) The need for capital will increase tremendously. Take 
grain production, for example. Ministry of Finance plans show 
expenditures for agriculture of 250 billion yuan by 2000. Such 
expenditures are needed to attain the goal of increasing grain 
output from 300 million tons to 520 million tons by 2000. They 
include an anticipated expenditure of 26.7 billion yuan renminbi 
for investment each year. 
  This plan calls for 60 percent of this money to come from 
peasants savings, only 10 percent being provided by the state. 
Realization of this magnificent goal will require raising 
interest rates in order to induce the peasants to increase 
savings. 
  2) Low interest rates lead to banks diverting to other 
purposes credit that should be used for grain procurement. Loans 
are provided to urban industries or township and town 
enterprises in order to earn better interest. This leads, in 
turn, to grain enterprises diverting credit to operate tertiary 
industries, to build dwellings, and to buy bonds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20574 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   CASS Report on Grain System Reform, Issues </TI></H3>
<H4>   Establishing Grain Price Stabilization </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0285A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Found a Grain Price Stabilization System"] </F>
  [Text] In order to solve the problems that may occur in the 
grain system in the wake of grain market deregulation, the 
government will have to thoroughly reform the macroeconomic 
regulation and control system. It will also have to straighten 
out the interrelationship between the internal and external 
grain systems under the market mechanism to make them more in 
keeping with the market operating mechanism, thereby improving 
the operating efficiency of the internal and external systems. 
  The grain market stabilization system involves the 
interrelated roles and coordination of numerous stabilization 
factors. The application of a single factor will positively not 
attain the goal of market stabilization. These stabilization 
factors include: a floor price, a ceiling price, cushioning 
reserves, a stabilization fund, a futures market, exchange 
rates, and grain imports and exports. 
<H5>  Setting of the Floor Price </H5>
  The level at which the floor price is set affects the 
transfer of benefits among the state treasury, the peasants, 
consumers, and dealers. If the floor price is set too low, 
though government expenditures may be reduced, and though grain 
dealers and consumers may also benefit somewhat, the peasants' 
interests will not be protected. If set too high, no benefit 
will accrue to grain dealers, consumers, and the industrial 
sector, and government expenditures will also increase. We 
believe the standard for setting the floor price should be 95 
percent of the average market price for the previous five years, 
this amount serving as the floor price for the coming year. 
<H5>  Setting of the Ceiling Price </H5>
  On the basis of the experience of developed market economy 
countries, stabilization of grain market fluctuations within 15 
to 20 percent is deemed a very great success. How to set China's 
ceiling price will depend on transportation and marketing system 
expenses and profits following grain market deregulation. 
Inasmuch as China's treasury is short of funds today, setting 
the ceiling price at between 15 and 20 percent of the floor 
price will be rather difficult. Our view is a widening to 
between 20 and 25 percent. 
  In addition, grain import and export prices must be taken 
into consideration in setting the ceiling and floor prices of 
grain. The floor price should not be lower than the grain export 
price, and the ceiling price should not be higher than the grain 
import price. 
<H5>  Cushioning Reserves </H5>
  Cushioning reserves are an important tool in government 
grain 
market stabilization. In bumper harvest years when grain prices 
fall, in order to prevent a further slide in grain prices, the 
government should buy grain from the peasants at the previously 
formulated floor price to produce an upturn in the market grain 
price that protects the peasants interests. In lean years when 
grain prices rise above the ceiling price, the cushioning 
reserves may be used to buy grain to be dumped on the market to 
drive down market grain prices thereby protecting the consumers' 
interests. The cushioning reserve entails the use of a loading 
and unloading mechanism to maintain a floor price and a ceiling 
price that stabilizes market grain prices. The practice of 
developing countries shows this to be a stabilization method for 
which an extremely high price must be paid. During consecutive 
bumper harvest years followed by consecutive lean harvest years, 
in particular, it becomes extremely difficult to hold down to 
the lowest level the quantity of grain in storage and costs. 
Therefore, use of the cushioning reserve to stabilize markets 
must be applied flexibly in combination with the grain 
import-export mechanism. If very ample storage facilities are 
available, grain may be imported when the international price is 
relatively low rather than when a shortage occurs. When the 
world market price rises, grain may be exported. This can reduce 
the effect internally of world grain market price fluctuations. 
In addition, the profits earned by importing at low prices and 
exporting at high prices can be used to pay storage costs. 
  A cushioning reserve does not necessarily entail losses. If 
sufficient difference is allowed between the floor price and the 
ceiling price, and management is effective, it is possible to 
pay for its entire cost. 
<H5>  Stabilization Fund </H5>
  A stabilization fund is an important means that government 
can use to stabilize grain market prices. It provides financial 
support for stabilization of the system. The two main means of 
using a stabilization fund to stabilize grain markets that all 
countries employ are as follows: First is to apply it in 
combination with the cushioning reserve, and have it serve as 
financial support for the cushioning reserve. Its main function 
is to ensure that government has the funds to purchase the 
peasants' grain at the floor price. Its other functions are to 
provide peasants loans, to import grain, and for other 
government-approved purposes. Second is the use alone of the 
stabilization fund to stabilize the market. In a bumper harvest 
year when grain prices fall below the floor price, the 
stabilization fund is used to subsidize the peasants for the 
price difference. In a lean harvest year when grain prices 
exceed the ceiling price, grain producers contribute to the 
stabilization fund. 
  The main source of money for the stabilization fund is state 
disbursement of public funds. A smaller amount comes from grain 
producer payments, and from the profits of grain dealers. 
Following deregulation of China's grain markets, the peasants' 
"three links" [the linking of parity price sales of fertilizer 
and diesel fuel to peasant fulfillment of grain production 
quotas] subsidy, the agricultural tax, and the six subsidies to 
grain enterprises may be lumped together in the grain 
stabilization fund for payment to the State Grain Reserve for 
use in purchasing cushioning reserve grain and for grain imports 
and exports. 
<H5>  Founding of Futures Markets </H5>
  Investors futures trading plays an important role in the 
stabilization of market grain prices. During a bumper harvest 
year when supply is greater than demand and market prices fall, 
futures buyers can make large purchases of futures contracts, 
thereby increasing grain market demand. This produces a 
balancing trend between market grain supply and demand, which 
restrains a drop in the grain price. During lean harvest years 
when supply is less than demand and grain prices rise, futures 
contract sellers can dump large quantities of futures to cause 
an increase in market grain supply that eases the grain shortage 
and restraints a rise in grain prices. Therefore, by buying when 
grain prices fall and selling when grain prices rise, futures 
traders produce a trend toward balance in market supply and 
demand for grain to attain the goal of stabilizing grain market 
prices. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20575 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   CASS Report on Grain System Reform, Issues </TI></H3>
<H4>   Regional Specialization of Farming </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0285A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Regional Specialization of Farming"] </F>
  [Text] We propose abandonment of the policy whereby "every 
family grows grain, every household being small but all 
inclusive," instituting regional specialization of grain farming 
instead. 
<H5>  Necessity for Grain Region Specialization </H5>
  First of all, the principle of comparative benefits requires 
regional specialization of grain. The tremendous difference 
between one region and another in the quantity and quality of 
natural and economic resources forms a basis for regional 
specialization. Places relatively rich in resources are better 
suited to the production of the commodities they can produce in 
abundance. The price of the commodities that they produce by 
using the resources they have in abundance is lower than in 
other regions. If the price of a commodity differs between two 
regions, a profit can be made from the development of regional 
trade. 
  The specialization that stems from comparative benefit 
enables a region to produce more goods for shipment; it 
stimulates investment in and expansion of low cost industries; 
and it forces high cost industries to cut back production, 
thereby strengthening regional specialization. 
  Second, the multiple value effect of regional grain 
specialization is increased. Regional growth that is based on 
regional specialization and for which trade between regions 
serves as a vanguard means that shipment of specialized 
commodities promotes other industrial sectors. Grain area 
specialization that increases grain shipments can increase 
demand for commodities such as chemical fertilizer, electric 
power, farm machinery, agricultural pesticides, plastic 
sheeting, and diesel fuel. This role is termed a follow-on 
relationship. The development of grain specialization can also 
promote the development of grain processing industries. This 
role is termed a precursor relationship. 
  Third, grain region specialization helps increase the grain 
labor productivity rate. Grain crops are living plants whose 
biology must be matched to a proper living environment if they 
are to produce commodities of good quality in large amounts. 
Growing grain crops in areas that lend themselves to production 
and from which economic returns are high enables laborers to 
accumulate production experience and helps improve specialized 
skills; thus, regional specialization means relatively high 
labor productivity rates. 
  Fourth, grain region specialization can impel the peasants 
toward a market economy. In China, more than 80 percent of the 
population are peasants who produce grain largely for 
themselves. The amount of commodity grain produced for 
consumption by the remaining 20 percent of the population in 
cities and towns is extremely limited. Grain region 
specialization demolishes the existing self-sufficiency economy 
in which "every family grows grain, every household being small 
but complete." When specialized farming of grain is concentrated 
in certain areas, the marketing areas that formerly produced 
grain to supply their own needs withdrawing from grain 
production, the grain marketing area has to use its own cash 
crops or industrial goods in exchange for grain from producing 
areas. Regional specialization of grain increases the amount of 
demand for commodity grain; it opens rural markets for grain. 
Even when grain prices fall, sales increase. The multiplied 
sales may very likely be greater than the former total income. 
In discussing the regional specialization of grain, we emphasize 
the comparative advantage principle, but from the standpoint of 
the growing of grain in specialized areas and peasants obtaining 
maximum income, the diversification principle is also extremely 
important. Since grain crops are highly seasonal, three problems 
unavoidably arise. 
  One is that if nothing is done but farm grain, during the 
winter season there is no work to do. The work force and the 
means of production are idle. Second, income distribution is 
uneven during the year. Third, the time between planting and 
harvesting of grain crops is inordinately long. The crops may 
sustain a natural disaster, which damages the peasants' income. 
Grain farming alone carries very great risks, so objectively 
diversification is needed. Grain crops and other agricultural 
sectors are interdependent and promote each other's development. 
The development of one can spur the development of all the 
others. Damage to one means all the others are limited. Only 
diversification can bring the greatest returns. 
<H5>  Grain Region Policy </H5>
  In view of the comparative benefit principle, we believe 
that 
grain production should be developed in grain producing areas 
and in needy marketing areas by instituting specialized farming. 
The state treasury and financial policy should tilt a great deal 
toward these two areas so that the income peasants receive from 
the growing of grain in these two areas is no lower than income 
from other than agriculture. The state should ensure that grain 
prices in these two areas cover costs plus the average profit 
rate in society, commodity grain for the whole country being 
mostly provided by grain producing areas, needy marketing areas 
striving to attain self-sufficiency. 
<H5>  Grain Shipping and Marketing System Decisions </H5>
  Following grain market deregulation, the grain shipping and 
marketing system functions should be performed entirely by the 
market, all grain procurement, marketing, shipment, and storage 
being carried out through the market. Market prices should be 
set on the basis of market supply and demand. 
<H5>  Decisions About Grain Shipping and Marketing System Goals </H5>
  The ultimate goal of the grain shipping and marketing system 
is to narrow the market price difference between grain producers 
and consumers, permitting both grain producers and consumers a 
relatively satisfactory price. Narrowing of the production and 
marketing price gap requires lowering of shipping and marketing 
costs first of all. Second, it requires improvement of shipping 
and marketing efficiency as well as the elimination of monopoly 
to enable the greatest market contact with traders, but not on 
too large a scale so that their decisions do not manipulate 
market prices. 
<H3>  Microeconomic Decisions of Shipping and Marketing System 
Enterprises </H3>
  In the provinces and cities that have already deregulated 
their grain markets, grain retailing enterprises work through 
markets: Government subsidies have either been abolished or will 
be abolished within three years, and the wages of staff members 
and workers will be uncoupled from state wages within a limited 
period, thereby making grain retailing enterprises truly 
responsible for their own profits and losses, for developing 
themselves, and for limiting themselves. Thus, all enterprises 
in the shipping and marketing system are facing a market 
competition environment. They no longer perform the task of 
stabilizing market prices, this task being borne by the 
state-financed stabilization system, i.e., it is borne by the 
State Reserve Bureau system. This is not to say that the two 
systems have no relations with each other. In a market economy, 
the two systems are interdependent and mutually restricting. 
  In a true market economy, the profit that shipping and 
marketing businesses make is the difference in the price paid to 
the producer and the price paid by the consumer. If they buy 
grain when prices are low during the grain harvest period, store 
it, then sell it in a non-harvest period when grain prices have 
risen, they earn a seasonal price differential. They may also 
make a profit on arbitraging the grain market price differential 
in different areas. However, if most grain traders arbitrage, 
the price differential between one area and another tends to 
disappear. The difference between the price paid the producer 
and the price obtained from the consumer includes not only the 
seasonal price difference, but also the additional price of 
shipping and processing. This means that each time the grain 
passes through a shipping or marketing link, an additional price 
is added to the price paid the producer. 
  1. Shipping and Marketing System Storage Decisions 
  Grain production is strongly seasonal. If the off season 
price is very much higher than the harvest season market price, 
the retailer can buy it at a low price during the harvest 
season, store it, and sell it at a much higher price during the 
non-harvest season. Grain dealers have to contend with the 
market climate. Just how much grain they buy to store has to do 
with the following year market price forecast as well as whether 
bank interest rates will rise. It has to do with the four way 
division of profits among the state, grain dealers, producers, 
and consumers. 
  2. Grain Dealing Enterprises Arbitrage Decisions 
  Once the grain market is deregulated, the unevenness of 
grain 
supplies in different areas will mean a substantial difference 
in market prices between one area and another. 
  In a market economy, grain dealers have information showing 
that grain prices are lower in one market than in another. They 
buy grain from the low price market and ship it to the high 
price market where they sell it for a profit. If many market 
dealers are doing the same thing, the prices in different 
markets tend to even out, the price differential disappearing. 
This is because supplies in the low price markets decline 
causing a rise in prices, while supplies in high price markets 
rise causing a decline in prices. Thus markets in different 
places are linked together by their arbitrage decisions of 
traders with the result that price differences between markets 
reflect only normal shipping and marketing costs. 
<H3>  How Government Intervenes in the Shipping and Marketing 
System </H3>
  Since shipping and marketing are replete with numerous 
external factors such as an extreme grain shortage in multiple 
natural disaster years, market regulation will result in a 
tremendous rise in grain prices, which consumers will fine hard 
to bear. Likewise in exceptional bumper harvest years, grain 
prices will fall tremendously occasioning enormous losses for 
the peasants. The existence of these external factors means that 
market laws no longer apply. In addition, highly efficient 
transportation and marketing systems require highly efficient 
communications, transportation, and storage facilities. They 
require that all contract regulations and statutes be carried 
out, and they require credit for storage and processing, and the 
provision of market information for all market participants... 
These can be built only with government investment. Therefore, 
modernization of the grain shipping and marketing system 
requires improved efficiency. Government must intervene to the 
proper extent. 
  The goal of government intervention in the shipping and 
marketing system is to narrow the difference between the price 
paid to producers and the price charged consumers. The size of 
the difference in this price depends on the shipping and 
marketing system's actual costs and the efficiency of the 
services that the shipping and marketing system provides the 
market. If costs are high, government can increase investment to 
lower shipping and marketing costs. For example, it may lower 
state-owned granary rent, or it may issue low interest loans to 
the shipping and marketing system. It may also provide special 
shipping price subsidies for railroad and highway grain 
shipments. If shipping and marketing system efficiency is low, 
the government should improve market competition conditions to 
conditions for all market participants to enter the market, or 
provide better information. However, for government intervention 
to be beneficial, skill in intervention must be emphasized. 
While enlivening the macroeconomy, a good job of macroeconomic 
management and coordination must be done. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20576 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   CASS Report on Grain System Reform, Issues </TI></H3>
<H4>   Grain Production Decisionmaking </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0285A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 12 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Grain Production System Decision Making"] </F>
  [Text] The grain system includes the grain production, 
shipping and marketing, and consumption systems. The main 
entities in these three systems are the grain producers, 
dealers, and consumers. Once the market controls grain dealings, 
the macroeconomic decisions of the three major entities will be 
of crucial importance. 
  Government's macroeconomic decisions are the external 
climate 
in which peasant microeconomic decisions about grain production 
are made. Once the grain markets have been deregulated, 
government policies for the stabilization of market grain 
prices, for the regulation of macroeconomic prices, and for the 
regionalization of grain farming are bound to help the grain 
production system. They will bring into line state macroeconomic 
decisions and peasant microeconomic decisions. 
<H5>  Choice of Macroeconomic Grain Production Models </H5>
  The state should prescribe a production model in keeping 
with 
China's circumstances that is based on the present state of the 
economic structure, the trend in supply and demand for grain, 
and the state of agricultural resources. 
  A look at the history of grain production in China shows 
three models at different stages, namely the pioneering model, 
the fertility maintenance model, and the innovation guidance 
model. 
  1. The pioneering model period ran from 1949 through 1957 
during which the grain growing area and yields per mu increased 
in China to contribute 50 percent of total output. 
  2. The fertility maintenance model period began during the 
end of the 1950s. During this stage, China's cultivated land 
area and grain growing area gradually declined. The only way to 
increase grain output was to increase per unit of area yields. 
Consequently, maintenance and improvement of soil fertility 
became a more important part of the daily agenda. During the 
1960s and 1970s, large scale building of water conservancy 
projects, leveling of fields, and increasing the soil's organic 
content were employed to maintain soil fertility and improve the 
soil's ability to produce grain. Thus, during the 1960 and the 
1970s fertility maintenance model was the main model used to 
increase grain output. 
  3. The innovation guidance model period. With the advent of 
the 1980s, the "innovation guidance" model was consciously or 
unconsciously selected as a means of grain production. When land 
became scarcer and rent increased, technological progress 
appeared as an innovative way to save the land's biochemistry; 
When manpower became scarce and wages rose, technological 
progress appeared as an innovative way to save mechanical 
equipment used for work. 
  Land is extremely scarce in China, and the amount is 
decreasing by more than 4 million mu each year. Following 
institution of the output-related contract responsibility 
system, the role of intensive farming as a means of increasing 
yields approached its extreme limit. Without innovations in 
agricultural production technology to increase material inputs, 
further increase in grain production would be impossible. 
  After entering the 1990's, the sole choice for further 
increases in grain output was to increase material and 
technology inputs. Biochemical innovations were need to extend 
key elements in short supply was the only way to increase grain 
output. This was a macroguidance principle that the government 
had to bear firmly in mind at all times in the development of 
grain production. The underlying implications of his principle 
is the need to increase relative returns from the growing of 
grain to increase peasant income, thereby enabling the peasants 
to afford new commodity inputs. 
<H5>  Grain Production Microdecisions </H5>
  The climate in which peasants made grain production 
decisions 
changed fundamentally following the change to market dealings in 
grain. Market price and opportunity costs became the main basis 
on which peasants made decisions. In a market economy, the 
peasants make the following three kinds of decisions: 
  1. Job and product decisions. Peasant households must choose 
from among a series of industries the one in which they want to 
work. However, because of financial, skill, management, and 
social relationship limitations, most peasants cannot work in 
anything but agriculture. They must make a choice from within 
agriculture. They base their decision about what crops they will 
grow on the relative profit to be made. Clearly, relative prices 
are the main basis for peasants microdecisions. The government 
may use financial subsidies to raise (or lower) the relative 
price paid for grain (or cash crops), or it may use import and 
export controls to change the relative price of any given crop. 
Alternatively, it may use exchange rate policy to change price 
levels, thereby influencing peasant decisions. 
  2. Resources decisions. Once the peasants have decided what 
crops to grow, they must next decide how best to allocate scarce 
resources. Here, the manpower and capital that peasant 
households of different size with different amounts of money may 
use to produce a certain amount of grain differs. However, in 
deciding the proper allocation of manpower and capital, 
different kinds of peasant households mostly consider factors 
such as the price of manpower and capital. 
  3. Input-output decisions. Following deregulation of grain 
markets, when grain will have to be sold through markets, 
peasants will have to use the price of inputs and the price of 
outputs, and the amount of inputs and the amount of output to 
figure the amount of their gain in order to maximize profits. 
<H5>  Grain Consumption System Decisions </H5>
  The grain consumption system is the final link in the grain 
system. Under a grain consumption market allocation mechanism, 
consumers opportunities to make free choices are greater. This 
raises the problem of consumer microdecisions. However, since 
the market is left to operate as it will, and since attainment 
of the goal of equitable distribution throughout society is 
impossible, government must intervene in consumption, and this 
gives rise, in turn, to macroeconomic decision problems. 
<H5>  Macrodecisions About Grain Consumption </H5>
  Macrodecisions about grain consumption rely on an analysis 
of 
grain consumption trends. The history of grain consumption in 
China and other countries shows the following several trends in 
grain consumption. 
  1. The amount of direct consumption per capita tends to 
decline while the amount of indirect grain consumption tends to 
rise, and total grain consumption tends to rise. The direct 
causes of total grain consumption increase are total population 
increase and a rise in per capita income. 
  2. As per capita income rises, the demand for grain changes 
from quantity to quality. Thus, per capita income increase may 
cause uneven increase in grain demand. This unevenness is 
manifested largely in a premium quality grain demand income 
elasticity that is greater than for low quality grain, and an 
income elasticity for premium quality grain demand that is 
greater in rural villages than in cities. This means that when 
city and rural per capita income increases at the same rate, 
rural demand for premium quality grain is greater than in cities. 
  3. More and more grain is processed into food. The 
percentage 
of consumption of whole grain decreases steadily in both city 
and countryside families while the percentage of processed grain 
consumed rises steadily. This trend may be seen from the 
increase in output value of China's grain processing industries. 
  Given the above trends in grain consumption, what 
macrodecisions should the government make? First, in view of the 
steady increase in grain consumption as per capita income 
increases, since it is a general rule that consumption is 
greatest when income is moderate, and since China has now 
entered the ranks of nations having a moderate income, grain 
consumption in China is now at the peak period. Therefore, the 
state should increase investment in grain production, increase 
the price of grain relatively, and do all possible to increase 
peasant income to enable peasants to buy commodity-type goods 
for investment in order to increase grain production 
tremendously so that the increase in grain supply can satisfy 
the increase in demand. Second is increase in high income 
elasticity food production. Since rural demand for premium grain 
increases as per capita income increases, production of these 
high income elasticity foods should be increased. Otherwise a 
tremendous gap between supply and demand will be created. This 
is already a very serious problem. The supply of premium quality 
rice cannot meet demand, but early indica rice is in great 
oversupply. Production of high income elasticity premium rice or 
animal foods requires greater resources inputs. For example, 
more irrigation water and more fertilizer are needed to grow 
paddy than to grow sorghum. Therefore, government should set a 
fairly substantial quality price differential to encourage the 
peasants to grow premium quality grain. Third, since grain 
demand income elasticity is greater in rural villages than in 
cities, and greater in needy areas than in developed areas, 
universal education, improved transportation and communications, 
and the expansion of grain production in rural and needy areas 
would lower the grain demand income elasticity of rural village 
and needy area populations. This would be more effective than 
simply considering income increase measures. Fourth, subsidies 
for specific purposes should be given low income people. 
<H5>  Microdecisions About Grain Consumption </H5>
  The deregulation of grain markets has increased consumers' 
opportunities to make free choices. However, these choices are 
affected not only by the consumers' income level and prices, but 
by individual preferences as well. 
  1. Consumer decisions when grain prices rise. 
  Following grain market deregulation, the overall price level 
of grain may rise. Consumers will then readjust the mix of their 
commodity purchases on the basis of their income and individual 
preferences. 
  2. Consumer decisions after income increase. When consumer 
income increases, at a fairly low income level, the amount of 
grain purchased increases very rapidly. At a fairly high income 
level, however, the increase becomes slower and slower. This 
reflects an increasingly smaller percent of income spent on 
grain as family income increases. This is consistent with the 
laws of Engels and Bennett. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20577 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Heilongjiang Grain Stocks </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344I Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 1 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344I </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At present Heilongjiang Province has 7 billion 
kilograms of grain in storage. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20578 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  14 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jiangxi Improves Livestock Industry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344J Nanchang JIANGXI RIBAO in Chinese 14 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344J </F>
<F P=104>  Nanchang JIANGXI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At the end of 1993, Jiangxi Province had removed 
17 million hogs from stock, a 12 percent increase over 1992. 
Jiangxi has 161,000 households specializing in raising 
livestock, accounting for 2.4 percent of rural households. In 
1993 the output value of the livestock industry was 10.2 billion 
yuan, accounting for 30 percent of the gross value of 
agricultural output. In 1993 gross output of meat in Jiangxi 
was 1,610,000 tons, egg output 253,000 tons, milk output 29,000 
tons, and per capita consumption was raised to 40.6 kilograms, 
6.4 kilograms, and 0.73 kilograms respectively. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20579 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  31 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Corn Export Plan for 1994 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344U Changchun JILIN RIBAO in Chinese 31 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344U </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun JILIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 the corn export plan for Jilin Province 
is 4,845,000 tons, of which national exports are 3,700,000 tons, 
barter trade 495,000 tons, and special reserves 650,000 tons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20580 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  5 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Military Grain Supply System To Change </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344O Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 5 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344O </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] Beginning in April 1994, China will reform the 
military grain supply system, and change the current system of 
purchasing grain for the military at the state-set price. After 
purchasing the grain at the negotiated price, grain will be 
supplied to the military at a stipulated price. Central and 
provincial financial departments will share the price difference 
for military grain supplies. Finances for military grain will be 
managed by the provincial-level financial department. Grain 
departments will be responsible for purchasing grain for the 
military, and ensuring its supply. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20581 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  1 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liaoning 1993 Farmer Income </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344K Shenyang LIAONING RIBAO in Chinese 1 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344K </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang LIAONING RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 per capita net income of farmers in 
Liaoning Province was 1161 yuan, a 4.1 percent increase over 
1992 after deducting for inflation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20582 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  14 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Seed Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344P Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 14 Feb 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344P </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At present the seed area for improved crop 
varieties in Anhui Province is 1 million mu, and seed output is 
180 million kilograms. Anhui is now basically self-sufficient 
in hybrid seeds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20583 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  2 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhejiang Increases Grain Procurement Prices </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0344R Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO in Chinese 2 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344R </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINXI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 in addition to the contract procurement 
grain price, the standard for the added price will increase from 
3.74 yuan per 50 kilograms in 1993 to about 7 yuan. The 
guaranteed price for early rice contract procurement will 
increase a few yuan over the 24.60 yuan per 50 kilograms in 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20584 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  4 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shandong, Liaoning Wheat Area </TI></H3>
<H4>   Shandong Wheat Area </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0344L Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO in Chinese 4 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344L </F>
<F P=104>  Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] At present the wheat area in Shandong Province 
is 70.5 million mu, a decline of over 1.3 million mu from 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20585 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  12 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shandong, Liaoning Wheat Area </TI></H3>
<H4>   Liaoning Wheat Area </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0344Q Shenyang LIAONING RIBAO in Chinese 12 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0344Q </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang LIAONING RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 the wheat area in Liaoning Province will 
increase from 3.26 million mu in 1993 to 4.5 million mu. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20586 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar020___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-020 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  26 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Improving Heilongjiang Farm Exports </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0341B Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 26 Jan 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0341B </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by: Coordinating Group, Examination of Problems </F>
With Heilongjiang's Export-Oriented Agricultural Industry: 
"Developing Heilongjiang's Export-Oriented Agriculture: 
Wonderful Prospects With a Difficult Start"] 
  [Text] In the past two years, 28 varieties of agricultural 
by-products from Heilongjiang have earned $1 million each in 
exports. The good tendency of agriculture to develop towards an 
export orientation has improved the objective and subjective 
situation for starting an export oriented agriculture in 
Heilongjiang. However, we must understand clearly that there is 
still a considerable gap compared with more advanced provinces 
or regions in export oriented agriculture, regardless of whether 
one means breadth or depth. 
  Major problems demanding conscious resolution are: 
  1. The current system is unsuitable. It lacks strong 
organization and leadership, and the responsibilities of 
departments in charge are unclear. Coordination is weak, so 
there is no joining forces. In many places, export oriented 
agriculture is in a state of self-development. Looking at the 
foreign trade system, state controls are too tight for 
Heilongjiang's exports of agricultural by-products; some 
backbone export products remain strictly controlled by an export 
plan, which dampens enthusiasm for earning foreign currency from 
exports. For export of some agricultural by-products, there 
exist such problems as complicated procedures, many official 
procedures, lack of price transparency, somewhat unreasonable 
profit sharing, etc. This has forced some agricultural 
by-products into export channels in other provinces. For 
example: hua [3323] mushrooms produced in Yanshou County have to 
be exported through Hainan's foreign trade department. The 
Shuangcheng Furfural Plant exports furfural through the foreign 
trade department at 5,700 yuan per ton, but the plant can only 
get 3,600 yuan; the profit distribution is very unreasonable. 
  2. Processing and circulation is still the weak link. 
Although the integration of trade, industry, and agriculture, 
and the merging of production, processing, and marketing have 
brought about rapid development from a quantity standpoint, 
there has not really been much done when it comes to developing 
an export oriented agriculture, and for leading enterprises like 
the Shuangcheng Nestle Corporation, Ltd, the results have been 
even fewer. Many of our leading enterprises are low quality and 
low level, their products having no market competitiveness, so 
that the majority of the agricultural by-products we have for 
export are raw materials. Statistics from the Farm 
Administrative General Bureau of Heilongjiang, primary products 
occupy over 90 percent of the annual exports of agricultural 
by-products, and more than 80 percent for the entire province. A 
lack of leading enterprises has made some bases very unstable. 
Some cattle bases are in decline, to the depression of dairy 
product plants and delays in payment for milk expenditures. In 
Bing County and Wuchang, there is large-scale raising of beef 
cattle, but so far there has not been a thorough processing 
enterprise. 
  3. The infrastructure is poor. The current shortage of 
railway and road transport is a serious obstacle to the 
development of foreign trade. In some border ports which cannot 
be reached by rail, poor roads makes import and export of goods 
erratic, seriously countering these ports' advantages. 
Telecommunications facilities are backward in many areas, which 
affects shipping information, and restricts commodity 
circulation and economic development. 
  4. A shortage of intelligence. After some remote areas 
became 
open ports, the quality of personnel in these areas just did not 
measure up. There is a lack of foreign trade administrators and 
foreign language talent. 
  5. Policies have not been implemented completely. There are 
many official procedures, many complicated steps, and farmers 
have to obtain licenses to go to the market. Heilongjiang's Farm 
Administrative General Bureau complain that farms cannot share 
favorite policies of their localities. People also complain that 
current economic laws and regulations, especially those 
involving foreign affairs, are imperfect. In addition, there is 
a lack of arbitration, making foreign trade disputes difficult 
to resolve promptly. 
  Looking at the experiences of Heilongjiang's advanced models 
or that of other provinces, in order to develop export oriented 
agriculture, Heilongjiang must insist on being led by big 
international and domestic markets, and make further adjustments 
in its agricultural mix. Second, it must be vigorous in its 
operation of export oriented agricultural by-product processing 
enterprises. Primary agricultural products do not suit the 
international market well, nor the requirements of the growing 
domestic market; in intense market competition, economic 
efficiency is just as hard to attain. In those places in 
Shandong and Dalian which have been successful at export 
oriented agriculture, all breakthroughs were first made by 
leading enterprises. The great and lasting development of 
Shuangcheng cattle production in Heilongjiang relies chiefly on 
such export oriented leading enterprises as the Nestle 
Corporation, Ltd. These processing enterprises have not only 
opened up export channels for foreign trade, they have also 
provided the impetus for local agricultural by-products 
production. Third, we must vigorously develop bases for 
commodity production. Establishing well-known, excellent, and 
exceptional bases for the production of agricultural by-products 
is a precondition of guaranteeing commodity quality, variety, 
and wholesale supply. So, we must change our scattered, 
single-family operations into a concentrated, linked, production 
base having "one trade in one village", "one product in one 
village", carrying out systematic production, processing, and 
marketing, integrating trade, industry, and agriculture. These 
bases should have professional organizations offering full 
services, including information, production, processing, 
storage, shipping, and sales. Fourth, we must vigorously absorb 
capital and technology from other provinces and countries. 
Bringing in capital and technology from other provinces and 
countries is a shortcut to developing export oriented 
agriculture. Not only will this solve the problem of a shortage 
of capital in the start-up phase, it may also arrange and 
implement the product market while bringing in capital. 
  Developing export oriented agriculture is a massive 
systematic project. We should organize professional teams to 
acquire information from the domestic and international markets. 
We should both know the current market demand situation and 
master developing and changing trends in the future. We must 
reduce export restrictions on agricultural by-products, release 
a part of the inspection and approval rights to localities, and 
especially should relax policies on grain exports. The 
provincial government should release certain exporting rights 
for agricultural by-products to localities, enterprises, and 
enterprise groups. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
