<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61008 </DOCNO>
<HT>  "jpuac001___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Beginnings of Kazakh Air Forces Considered Promising </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679F Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) pp 32-33 </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel M. Syrtlanov under the rubric </F>
"Military Reform: In the Air Forces of Commonwealth Countries": 
"The Virgin Skies of Kazakhstan"] 
  [Text] Judging by the constructive solutions to economic 
and social issues, the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to make 
intelligent use of its skies as well. The first steps in the 
emergence of the national army already testify convincingly to 
the steadfast attention that is being devoted in the republic to 
the formation of their own air forces. This process is being 
conducted on the basis of the realities of the current day and 
experience that has been obtained--both their own and that of 
the leading aviation powers of "near" and "distant" foreign 
lands--and is, most importantly, figured for the long term. 
  "We have to solve difficult problems in the course of 
military reform. But knowing my people, I am convinced that we 
can manage it," was the opinion of the first commander-in-chief 
of the Air Forces in the history of the resurrected nation, 
Deputy Minister of Defense of the Republic of Kazakhstan for 
Aviation Major-General of Aviation A. Volkov. At the beginning, 
you will agree, faith in oneself and one's subordinates is a 
factor of no small importance in achieving success. Recall what 
is happiness for a commander--when you rise up to attack and 
don't have to look around. 
  There is another circumstance deserving of respect that 
cannot fail to be mentioned when analyzing the process of 
military reform in the republic as a whole. Having gained the 
genuine right to sovereignty, Kazakhstan has not rushed to 
affirm itself at a forced pace with the break-up of old 
structures or the complete rejection of the gains of the past. 
Everything that is valuable and useful has been taken up here 
with the zealousness of the far-sighted master. Taking into 
account the fact that they had to begin the creation of their 
own armed forces in parallel with defining the "outlines" of the 
future military doctrine and the conceptual framework for 
military organizational development, this stance appears to 
correspond the most to common sense. 
  The Air Forces of the republic will include units and 
subunits of bomber, fighter/bomber, fighter, reconnaissance, 
transport and army aviation from the composition of the Air 
Forces of the former USSR. The Ministry of Defense of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, in accordance with that decision, has 
already worked out the principles for the creation of the 
services dealing with pay, food and clothing, and has thought 
out ways of upgrading the aircraft inventory in the future. On 
the agenda are making the structure of the Air Forces more 
efficient, concluding agreements for the delivery of combat 
hardware and its repair, and interaction with other nations of 
the CIS that have signed the "Collective Security" Treaty. Then 
it will obviously be possible to discuss the training of 
national cadres for the Air Forces. 
  It would be incorrect, by the way, to assert that the 
difficulties of an economic nature that have come up in all the 
republics of the former USSR have bypassed Kazakhstan. But here 
they have been able to overcome the evil costs of the stagnant 
order despite everything. 
  Life sometimes dictates its own terms when determining the 
expediency of this or that solution. When it was necessary to 
replace engines that had used up their service lives on some 
combat aircraft, they had to make barter deals with the Air 
Forces of a neighboring republic that at the time had an acute 
need for airfield servicing and support vehicles. One need not 
be an authority on marketing to define something like that, I 
would say, as vulgar entrepreneurship in the sphere of military 
organizational development. But where do you go if there is no 
other way out, and one is not seen in the foreseeable future? 
  The problems being discussed are far from simple ones. 
Deliveries of assemblies and spare parts, as well as fuel, have 
been cut back as a result of the disruption of production and 
other ties. While they are getting out of the situation somehow 
with parts, the lack of fuels sometimes forces them to plan 
flight shifts only in amounts that barely support the 
maintenance of the proper level of training proficiency of the 
crews. 
  The question of manning many aviation units and subunits 
with 
personnel remains unresolved. The chief of staff of the Air 
Forces of the republic, Major-General Yu. Shanin, who has served 
15 years in Kazakhstan, elaborated that certain military 
collectives have a shortfall of officers of roughly 10 percent, 
and of warrant officers of up to 30 percent. Add to that about 
seven hundred in line to obtain housing, and it becomes clear 
how important it is to maintain those people with a good word, 
to demonstrate concern for them. We can thus understand the 
commander of the Air Forces of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
Major-General of Aviation A. Volkov, who has been looking after 
the social protections of the servicemen and inveighing for an 
expansion of housing construction at the aviation compounds 
since the first day he took up his position. 
  Even in Moscow before my departure on the trip, I read in a 
newspaper about the supposedly oppressed situation of the 
Russian-speaking population living in the republics of Central 
Asia. I do not know about elsewhere, but Kazakhstan does not 
deserve such a frankly provocative reproach. Dispassionate 
statistics confirm, on the contrary, that the republic must 
provide for an influx of specialists of the indigenous 
nationality into the army even today. It is one thing that the 
local youths used to enter the military schools or 
warrant-officer schools unwillingly. It is another thing--and 
this must finally be frankly acknowledged--that even those who 
linked their fate with military service rarely received the 
right to serve in their own land, and even more rarely had the 
opportunity to make a military career. Even though the zealous 
attitude of Kazakhs to the fulfillment of their service 
obligations is well known to all, some had to share with them 
the burden of military service. 
  I want to be understood correctly. The attraction of Kazakh 
youth to take part in the defense of their homeland is not an 
end in itself. The presence of national cadres not only in the 
Air Forces, but first and foremost in them, will sooner or later 
ensure the stability of the military policy of Kazakhstan and 
eliminate the negative consequences of migration processes, 
which have already started whether we like it or not. Whence the 
tasks of military-patriotic indoctrination of the youth and 
propagation of the combat traditions of their countrymen that 
are being advanced to the command of the units and subunits by 
Minister of Defense of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
Colonel-General N. Nurmagambetov. The leadership of DOSAAF, 
which is continuing to devote the most steadfast attention to 
the development of air clubs, also sees a role for itself in 
this important cause. 
  Yes, when gathering the first harvest, one must already be 
thinking about tomorrow--so as to cultivate worthy successors to 
the aviation glory of the republic, successors to front-line 
soldier and two-time Hero of the Soviet Union Talgat Begeldinov 
and other aces of military times. 
  The considered approach of the leadership of the republic to 
the realization of the program of military reform confirms that 
the upturned virgin lands of the Kazakh skies, protected by 
mighty wings, will provide good shoots without fail. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61009 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     GEO-IK Satellite System for Research and Geodesic Support </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679G Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) pp 38-39 </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679G </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Yu. Rusakov and Colonel V. Gorev under </F>
the rubric "Space Science--For the National Economy": "The Space 
Geodesist"] 
  [Text] Geodesy is the science of the Earth, studying its 
shape, structure and evolution, and one part of it--space 
geodesy--performs those same tasks with the aid of spacecraft. 
  A state geodesic network--an aggregate of geodesic points 
located in a certain order on the country's territory--has been 
created and is being developed for practical utilization, and is 
subdivided into classes depending on the distance between the 
points and the precision of their determination. The use of 
spacecraft makes it possible to clarify the coordinates of 
points on the state geodesic network of the first class and 
develop it in inaccessible regions, as well as to perform 
geometric and dynamic tasks of geodesy. 
  The geometric tasks are reduced to determining the position 
of points on the Earth's surface and establishing the geodesic 
ties between continents and islands to adjust them to the 
uniform global system of coordinates, reference individual 
points and objects to triangulation networks and provide support 
for cartography. The shape and dimensions of the Earth are 
clarified, and potential gravitational anomalies of the field 
and the laws of changes in them are determined. 
  This is accomplished via precise measurements and strict 
mathematical calculations, the processing and analysis of which 
make it possible to determine the nature of the movements of 
individual portions of the Earth's crust, help to ascertain 
typical indications of the precursors to earthquakes and, in the 
future, to predict them. 
  All are familiar with the scope of the misfortune that 
natural disasters, and earthquakes in particular, bring to 
mankind. There are an average of 20 powerful tremors around the 
globe every year, one of them catastrophic. There are more than 
100,000 a year in all. They lead to significant and rapid 
changes in the Earth's crust. The shifts in height ranged from 
1.71 to 3.47 meters in Japan in an earthquake in 1923, while in 
India there were shifts on the order of 1.4 meters in 1934. 
  The slow movement of the Earth's crust also brings many 
unpleasantries. The inhabitants of coastal regions of Holland 
have been battling the encroaching seas for centuries now, 
building and augmenting dikes in their path. Some harbors and 
straits in Scandinavia, on the other hand, have become so 
shallow that they can no longer receive oceangoing vessels as a 
result of the uplifting of the land. The capital of Mexico, 
Mexico City, dropped an average of 5.6 meters from 1880 to 1956, 
and Tokyo 3.5 meters in this century alone, with a tenth of that 
city ending up in the Pacific Ocean. The same fate threatens 
Venice. The settlement of the soil in cities occurs from the 
vibration of thousands of machine tools, urban transport engines 
and engineering explosions. It has been established that the 
buildings are settling two or three times faster on major 
streets in Moscow than on side streets. The settlement is still 
measured just in millimeters over several decades, but it must 
be taken into account in the same way as the movements of the 
Earth's crust in the areas of oil and gas pipelines, mineral 
fields and reservoirs. 
  Anomalies in the force of gravity that arise as a 
consequence 
of the uneven distribution of the Earth's density reflect its 
internal structure, especially of the Earth's crust. Space 
geodesy is thus widely used when researching the structure of 
the Earth, prospecting for minerals and studying seasonal 
changes in meteorological factors such as the yearly and daily 
fluctuations in atmospheric pressure, the level of ground water, 
soil moisture content etc. The gravitational field affects the 
trajectory of the flight of shells, missiles and satellites; 
that is why the role of gravimetric determinations is 
exceptionally important. 
  The methods of space geodesy are founded on observations 
from 
Earth satellites, used as mobile aperture sights with 
coordinates that are known at the moment of observation (flares 
or missiles dropped by parachute from a high-flying aircraft or 
balloon were used in the 1920s). The essence of one of the 
methods (synchronized) is as follows. We have two initial points 
A and B and two points to be determined C and D (see figure). In 
order to calculate the coordinates of the latter, it is 
sufficient to measure simultaneously, and in a uniform system, 
the coordinates of the vertical and horizontal angles to the 
satellite at no fewer than two positions. The solid angles 
&agr;&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt; , &agr;&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt; , &bgr;&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt; , 
&bgr;&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt; , &ggr;&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt; , &ggr;&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt; , 
&dgr;&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt;  and &dgr;&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  are computed according to 
them. The points S&lt;inf&gt; i&lt;/inf&gt;  and S&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  are then 
obtained by solving the triangles ABS&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt;  and 
ABS&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt; , and the coordinates of the unknown points C 
and D from the shape S&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt;  S&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  CD. It is 
necessary to have a minimum of three initial points and two 
observations of the target position from above for a more 
reliable determination of the coordinates of an aperture sight. 
The data are processed using the least-squares method. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-17A>           Figure </FIG>

&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  Optical (angular and rangefinder) as well as radio 
(rangefinder, Doppler) systems measuring the position of the 
craft in relation to ground points are used to reference points 
relative to which the spacecraft is located in the field of view 
over a certain period of time (or simultaneously). The high 
precision of the measurements is ensured by fixing the time of 
measurement as set by the on-board standard. 
  Work on the creation of a uniform system of coordinates for 
the whole Earth's surface and the establishment of geodesic 
links between continents and islands was begun in our country in 
1973 using Kosmos series spacecraft. The GEO-IK geodesic system 
is currently in operation, and makes it possible to perform the 
basic and applied tasks of creating a basic 
astronomical-geodesic network and regional geodesic networks for 
Antarctica, Europe and Asia, including the geodesic referencing 
of islands, supporting operations on the Pacific shelf, 
determining the characteristics of the Earth's gravitational 
field and the maritime geoid and the parameters of the rotation 
and shape of the Earth, as well as the foundations for 
topographic pictures of major objects under construction. 
  The system includes a space segment, including one or two 
satellites, a ground command-and-control system for the craft 
and a land-based geodesic system with a center for the 
processing of special information and an observation point (up 
to 80 points on the entire Earth's surface). 
  The spacecraft are placed in circular orbits 1,500 
kilometers 
high, with an inclination of 74&deg; or 83&deg;, by a Tsiklon 
launch vehicle from the Plesetsk cosmodrome. The distance 
between the reference points is up to 6,000 km. The support zone 
is the entire surface of the Earth, including the polar regions. 
The craft is equipped with a gravitational orientation and 
stabilization system, a system for light signaling, angular 
reflectors with an effective area of 0.024 m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  and a 
radio system, including a radio altimeter (accuracy of 
measurement of altitude to sea level of 3--5 meters), a Doppler 
system and a transmitter for the rangefinder polling system. 
  The ground stations include radio Doppler gear supporting 
measurement of the radial component of the spacecraft velocity 
in non-polling mode relative to the ground observation point 
(mean square error of 1--3 cm/sec), an astronomical installation 
to determine the direction to the spacecraft (mean square error 
of 1.5"), radio rangefinding polling gear for measuring the 
distance from the ground observation point to the craft (mean 
square error of 3--5 meters) and a laser rangefinder for these 
same purposes (mean square error of 1.5 meters). 
  The information received from the ground observation 
stations 
on the communications channels comes to the center for 
processing special information, where a database is created from 
which all of the information is issued by the computer upon 
customer request. The number of users is unlimited. This 
information, along with traditional means, makes it possible to 
perform the tasks of geodesy. The space geodesic systems support 
the creation of regional geodesic networks, the foundations for 
mapping, the fulfillment of requests for coordinate references 
of points in a required system of coordinates etc. with higher 
quality, and some tasks only it can perform (supporting 
operations on the Pacific shelf, studying its topography, 
geodesic referencing of islands). Gravimetric surveying using 
spacecraft considerably accelerates the study of the Earth's 
gravitational field. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-19A>           The GEO-IK spacecraft system </FIG>





    Analogous work on the creation of a state geodesic network 
is 
underway in the United States, where the WGS-84 system of 
geodesic parameters, allowing support for a precision of the 
determination of geodesic points of 1--2 meters, is the 
foundation. The Geos-3 and Geosat spacecraft, among others, have 
been used for these purposes. The coordinates of ground points 
and the relief of the ocean surfaces have been determined, the 
shape of the geoid has been clarified and a gravitational model 
of the Earth has been created using them. The Lageos-2 craft is 
currently in orbit. The launch of the Gravsat-A and Gravsat-B, 
which should provide for the measurement of parameters of the 
field with a precision of 0.1 meters for the height of the geoid 
and the determination of the acceleration of the field of 
gravity with a precision of 1 mgal (0.001 cm/sec&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt; ), 
is planned to study the fine structure of the Earth's 
gravitational field. 
  Navigational spacecraft are also used to develop the 
geodesic 
network and perform individual geodesic tasks. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61010 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     History of Soviet Lunar Program After N1-L3 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679H Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) pp 42-44 </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679H </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. Afanasyev under the rubric "By Reader </F>
Request": "The `Lunar Theme' After N1-L3"] 
  [Text] Readers of our journal who have become 
familiar with the N1-L3 project (AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA No. 12 
of 1991 and Nos. 1, 2 and 9 of 1992) have noted that the story 
of the Soviet lunar program was seemingly broken off in 
midsentence. Taking into account the wishes of I. Konyukhov from 
Leningrad Oblast and R. Gnatyuk from Ukraine, among others, we 
are continuing to cover the work on lunar topics that was 
conducted in the USSR after the events described earlier. 
  V. Mishin, who headed the Central Design Bureau for 
Experimental Machine Building [TsKBEM] after the death of S. 
Korolev, facilitated the pursuit of the lunar program with all 
of his strength. But the leadership of the sector and the 
country, under the impact of the successful landing on the moon 
by the American astronauts, felt the accomplishment of the N1-L3 
project in its initial version to be without prospects. The 
rapid shutdown of the program did not follow, however, owing to 
the enormous amount of work that had already been done, even 
though the financing and pace were reduced sharply. They were 
evidently still nursing the hope "on high" that something would 
throw off the Americans, and then it would be possible to make 
up what had been omitted and "jump ahead" with a vigorous push. 
  The aimlessness and ambiguity of this position were obvious. 
In order not to lose accumulated experience and simultaneously 
to reach the assigned goal--to land on the moon--the TsKBEM 
developed, at the suggestion of V. Mishin, a variation of a 
lunar space-rocket system--the N1-L3M. It was broadly proposed 
to speed up the N-1 launch vehicle and create a new ship for the 
flight according to an original, dual-launch system. The 
preparation of the necessary infrastructure for the emplacement 
of a lunar base in the not-too-distant future and the 
performance of expeditions of moderate duration (up to three 
months) was planned, instead of short-term visits to the surface 
of the "night luminary." It turned out that a real possibility 
of the fulfillment of the new program could appear as early as 
1978-80, and under financing that did not go beyond the bounds 
of the budgetary appropriations for the N1-L3. 
  The insufficient reliability of the docking of the lunar 
orbital craft (LOK) with the lunar craft (LK) launched from the 
surface of the moon was deemed to be one of the weakest areas of 
the N1-L3 project. The fault for that was the poor capabilities 
of the electronic systems of the craft, the insufficient extent 
of the study of the conditions of navigation close to the moon 
and the impossibility of giving the cosmonauts comprehensive and 
prompt support from Earth, as was done in the docking of craft 
in near-Earth orbit. New approaches were required. 
  A flight according to the "direct configuration" without 
dockings in orbit would have been simple, but not economical. 
The whole ship makes the landing on the moon in that case. After 
the fulfillment of the research program, the returnable portion 
of the craft launches from the moon, while the re-entry craft 
(SA) separates from it as it approaches the Earth and enters the 
atmosphere with second escape velocity, with a controlled 
descent and parachute landing. A launch vehicle (RN), however, 
had to be created for such a flight, using even the simplest and 
lightest craft, that would have had approximately one and a half 
times the lift capacity of the N-1. 
  The possibilities for the gradual augmentation of the mass 
of 
the payload had been made inherent in the N-1 project from the 
very beginning, but only the acceleration of the first stage of 
the N-1--which would add only about 10--11 percent to the 
payload mass--was realistic in the near future. 
  It was thus decided to stick with a modified version of the 
"direct configuration," in which the lunar craft and the braking 
rocket unit would be launched into near-Earth orbit separately 
with their own N-1. Each would then first reach flight 
trajectory to the moon with the aid of its own starting and 
braking engines (RTB), and then selenocentric orbit where the 
docking would occur. If the docking were to fall through, the 
cosmonauts would return to Earth. The braking unit would be used 
for the descent of the LK from lunar orbit and to shed speed, 
and it would then separate at a certain height above the moon's 
surface. A soft landing took place with the aid of the engine 
installation (DU) and the landing struts of the LK. The 
separation of the landing adapter and liftoff with the engine of 
the LK operating at full thrust were necessary for return. The 
ship was to enter a selenocentric orbit after launch from the 
moon, from which it would take a heading toward Earth or shift 
at once onto a return trajectory. 
  The use of the "direct configuration" made it possible to 
equip the craft with a complicated system of more advanced radio 
gear for the precise and reliable performance of maneuvers 
connected with searching, meeting and docking in lunar orbit. 
Such a larger LK would moreover have had greater freedom of 
maneuver close to the surface to select a landing site. 
  The creation of some new elements of the system was 
envisaged 
in this project, along with the widespread utilization of the 
work that had been developed under the N1-L3 program. While a 
somewhat modified D unit from the L-3 could have been used as 
the braking unit, the craft itself and the RTB had to be created 
virtually anew. 
  The RTB, replacing the G unit and partially the D unit of 
the 
L-3 system in the N1-L3M project, was to become the first Soviet 
high-energy stage. The installation of four oxygen-hydrogen 
ZhRDs [liquid rocket engines] was proposed, and their 
development entrusted to the OKB [Experimental Design Bureau] of 
A. Isayev in the second half of the 1960s. And while only 
drawings had come out for the RTB, the ZhRDs were brought to the 
stage of live ground tests. The first Soviet cryogenic engine, 
built according to an improved, self-contained configuration, 
proved to be very economical and reliable. It surpassed the 
analogous American ZhRD, developed by the firm of Pratt and 
Whitney for the upper stage of the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. 
The design bureau continued to improve the engine despite the 
shutdown of the lunar program, making it competitive in the 
world markets. Several of the first flight models of this ZhRD 
and the technical documentation for its manufacture under 
license will thus be sent under contract to the India Space 
Agency. 
  The craft itself for the N1-L3M project was outwardly 
somewhat reminiscent of the L-3 LK system. It consisted of a DU 
that was, as a whole, analogous to the Ye unit of the LK of the 
L-3 project, with the lunar landing installation attached 
underneath and the cocoon-shaped habitation module (OB) above. 
The engines of the DU were backed up, operated on long-term 
storable, self-igniting fuel and had the capability of thrust 
regulation across a broad spectrum. The OB had the re-entry 
craft, with an airtight instrument compartment in the lower 
portion. The cosmonauts were to leave the SA and operate within 
the internal spaces of the OB during various operations in 
flight and on the lunar surface, providing not only freedom of 
access to the control instruments but also a good view, easing 
the choice of landing site. The separation of the OB and the 
departure of the SA from it occurred when approaching the Earth. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-21A>           N-1F, Vulkan and Energiya </FIG>





    After the successful completion of th Apollo program, the 
Soviet lunar project lost its prestige in whatever form it was. 
Money for the N1-L3M variation was not allocated. The program to 
assimilate the moon was moreover re-oriented toward unmanned 
flights, with a gradual reduction in the number of launches of 
automatic stations and the subsequent curtailment of that 
program under the slogan "The study of the moon is completely 
finished," owing to delays in the flight testing of the N-1 
rocket. 
  The work on the N1-L3 had effectively been reduced, under 
pressure from the Ministry of General Machine Building, to the 
development of the N1 rocket since the very beginning of the 
1970s, so as to at least create a launch vehicle. All four of 
its launches were unsuccessful, which had a depressing effect on 
the executors of the program and one of Schadenfreude 
for the opponents of the rocket, of which there were more than 
enough by that time. The creators of the N1 were being "called 
onto the carpet" more and more, and they had to prove their 
correctness each time. The rhythm of the work was disrupted 
owing to the confusion, and rumors were circulating in the 
corridors of the "firms" of the supposedly imminent "shutdown" 
of the N1. 
  The work on the N1 at the newly formed Energiya NPO 
[Scientific-Production Association] was curtailed completely a 
very short time after the removal of V. Mishin from the post of 
head of the TsKBEM and the designation of V. Glushko for the 
post in May of 1974. 
  Academician Glushko proposed the creation of a number of new 
launch vehicles even before coming to the TsKBEM, formed via the 
parallel combination of various quantities of standard units. He 
planned to install a ZhRD with a thrust of more than 1,000 
tonnes of force in each of them, in which all of the advanced 
ideas in the realm of engine building and the great experience 
of the GDL-OKB that he came from would be employed. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-22A>           Lunar expeditionary craft </FIG>





    The specialists of the OKB of S. Korolev had criticized that 
idea as early as the beginning of the 1960s from the standpoint 
of the non-optimal division into stages, the utilization of 
toxic components and the lack of conformity to the criterion of 
cost-effectiveness. The academician, however, skillfully 
manipulating the terms "reusability" and "universality," 
convinced the leadership of the country of the necessity of 
replacing the N1 rocket, which had not proved itself, with a 
"universal series of reusable launch vehicles," which were to 
become the foundation of the new conceptual model of the space 
transport system of the USSR. The staffers of the department 
developing the N1 spent a whole year after the designation of V. 
Glushko to the post of head of the Energiya NPO trying to prove 
to the new general director the irrationality of creating a new 
generation of launch vehicles. He was implacable, however, and 
in October 1974, submitting a comprehensive plan for the 
association for the next few years, he gave it to be clearly 
understood that there was no place in it for the N1. But the 
developers did not get started on the design engineering of such 
a system, reminiscent of the Glushko "series" only in the most 
general outlines, until 1976. 
  One could have thought that V. Glushko shut down the lunar 
program, but that is not so. He "killed" just the launch 
vehicle. The academician had an entirely different opinion of 
the lunar program. One of the paragraphs in his 1974 
comprehensive plan envisaged the creation of a long-term 
scientific-research base on the moon. V. Glushko proposed the 
lunar expeditionary craft (LEK) as the principal means of 
transport for delivering cosmonauts and payloads. He proposed it 
instead with the colossal Vulkan launch vehicle. The new rocket, 
which went beyond the prior notions of Glushko, was clearly 
inferior to the N1 in aesthetic terms, even though it won out in 
characteristics. It had a launch mass roughly 60 percent greater 
than the N1, could insert a payload of 200 tonnes into 
near-Earth orbit or deliver 54 tonnes to Venus and 52 tonnes to 
Mars. The delivery of the LEK to a selenocentric orbit was 
proposed to be accomplished using the Vezuviy cryogenic unit 
using an oxygen-hydrogen ZhRD with small thrust but high 
specific impulse. 


N-1F, Vulkan and Energiya Launch Vehicles 

Characteristics of the    N-1F            Vulkan           Energiya 
launch vehicles 

Launch thrust,            5,070           7,520            3,600 
tonnes-force 

Launch mass, tonnes       3,025           4,700            2,400 

Payload mass: 

--in near-Earth orbit,    105             200              102 
tonnes 

--to fly to moon,         34              65               35 
tonnes 

--for lunar orbit,        22              43               23 
tonnes 


  The LEK was created to perform an expedition according to a 
purely "direct configuration," and consisted of three 
units--landing and liftoff stages and a habitation module. The 
landing stage, equipped with a powerful main and four steering 
ZhRDs, was reminiscent in configuration to the eight-sided 
descent stage of the Apollo lunar module. The OB and the liftoff 
stage were similar to those units on the N1-L3M. 
  One version of the expedition would have the crew launched 
in 
an SA located inside the habitable unit of the LEK. The launch 
of the crew to an unmanned LEK, with the subsequent docking of 
the craft and transfer of the cosmonauts to the OB of the lunar 
craft, using a Soyuz placed in orbit separately was proposed, 
however. The flight of the LEK was otherwise standard for the 
"direct configuration": launch from near-Earth orbit and entry 
into lunar orbit with the aid of the Vezuviy RTB, then 
separation of the LEK from the empty unit and descent to the 
surface with the aid of the engines in the descent stage. Later, 
after the cosmonauts had concluded their business on the moon, 
the takeoff stage was to put the OB onto a flight trajectory to 
Earth using its own engine. The SA would separate from the OB 
before entry into the atmosphere. 
  The country's leadership had no enthusiasm whatsoever for 
the 
"new" lunar program, and did not rush to allocate funds to 
implement the plans of V. Glushko. The task of creating a 
reusable transport craft that faced domestic space science in 
those same years pushed the projects on lunar topics into the 
background. Glushko tried to convince the "higher-ups" of the 
necessity of financing the program to assimilate the moon until 
the very last days of his life, but he was not able to do so, 
even though the development of individual portions of the system 
reached the preliminary design engineering stage. 
  In answering the question of whether the possibility of 
manned flights to the moon exists today, one may say that the 
Energiya space-rocket system, even in its current state, makes 
it possible to send a craft to the moon that is greater in mass 
than the L3. Today, however, there are neither realistic plans 
for such craft nor the financial underpinnings for such 
expeditions. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61011 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Articles Not Translated </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  00000000 Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) </F>

<F P=103> 00000000 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  In the Name of the Supreme Soviet (Lieutenant-Colonel 
(Retired)) D. Melnik c2 
  Where To Serve? (Lieutenant-Colonel S. Valchenko) 10-11 
  The "Berkuty" (S. Skrynnikov) 12-15 
  We Flew Alone in the Skies... (Lieutenant-Colonel S. 
Sergeyev) 19-26 
  "Karpeka No. 2" (Colonel V. Zaretskiy) 26-27 
  Air Aces (P. Bogdanov, A. Shcherbakov) 28-29 
  The Luftwaffe Begins and... Loses (G. Litvin) 30-31 
  The Il-28 and the Canberra (M. Levin) 34-35 
  My Pilot's Logbook (A. Markusha) 36-37 
  The Flights That Never Happened... (S. Shamsutdinov, I. 
Marinin) 40-41 
  KOSMINFORM 44 
  Prolonged Flight (V. Smirnov) 45-46 
  Red Military Pilot of the Bootmakers (Colonel A. Kanevskiy) 
47 
  New Air Forces Uniforms (48-49) Major A. Nekrakha 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61012 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Publication Data </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679J Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679J </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  English title: AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS 
  Russian title: AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA 
  Editor: V.V. Anuchin 
  Publishing house: Voyenizdat 
  Date of publication: February 1993 
  Signed to press: 9 Feb 93 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61013 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Major-General Yanakov on Future of Air Forces Schools </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679A Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) pp 2-4 </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major-General of Aviation Ya. Yanakov under the </F>
rubric "Military Reform and Higher Educational Institutions": 
"The Five-Year Plan--Pluses and Minuses"] 
  [Text] The higher military aviation schools for 
pilots and navigators of the Air Forces will shift to a 
five-year course of study for cadets starting with the 1993/94 
academic year, by order of the Minister of Defense of the 
Russian Federation. This is expected to make it possible to give 
the graduates a basic higher professional education at the level 
of contemporary world standards. 
  The realization of the new system for training aviation 
cadres also entails the appearance of a number of problems whose 
resolution frequently goes beyond the bounds of the jurisdiction 
and capabilities of not only the leadership of the military 
schools, but also the bodies for their immediate administration. 
The editors, in giving the floor to today's author, are counting 
on an interested and attentive attitude toward the issues raised 
by him on the part of the corresponding directorates and 
services of the Air Forces high command. We hope that the 
discussion thus started will be continued by the readers, and 
first and foremost by those who have a direct relationship to 
this topic--the commanders, professors, instructor and training 
personnel, cadets and attendees of the schools and academies of 
the Air Forces. 
  The training of a pilot costs the state hundreds of millions 
of rubles. There are scientific-research centers in some 
countries that specialize in working on problems of reducing the 
cost and improving the quality of the training of aviation 
personnel. The "2000" program has now been adopted in the United 
States; it envisages the creation of efficient training 
complexes that permit a significant optimization of this 
process. We have also approached the solution of this problem in 
earnest in our country, owing to the cutbacks that have begun in 
the armed forces. 
  It has become obvious that the staffing levels of Air Forces 
military-educational institutions are intolerably large (more 
than 35 percent of the overall size of the Air Forces). The way 
out of this situation would seem to be a simple one--several of 
the schools need to be closed. But more intent study of the 
question shows that a mechanical reduction in them could lead to 
a repetition of the mistakes that were made in 1959 by the 
country's leadership, which caused an acute scarcity of aviation 
personnel several years later. They soon had to resurrect the 
pilots' schools that had been abolished (the Borisoglebsk and 
Barnaul VVAULs [Higher Military Aviation Schools for Pilots]), 
and catch up for the omission for even longer than that. 
  The leadership of the Air Forces higher-educational 
institutions has been conducting research over the last three 
years to make the training of flight cadres more efficient. It 
has made it possible to conclude that it is essential to take 
radical steps that would fundamentally improve the educational 
process and raise the quality of training of the cadets to the 
required level with a decrease in the amount of permanent 
staffing of the higher-educational institutions (by 30 percent). 
  This conceptual framework for the training of flight cadres, 
it seems to me, is organically inherent in re-organizing the 
planned composition of the aviation group on the territory of 
Russia, and facilitates overcoming the shortage of specialists 
along with a further rise in the fighting ability of aviation 
units. Some 10--15 years are planned for its realization--a 
deadline that makes it possible to accomplish what is conceived 
without haste. 
  Our assumptions are supported by the Minister of Defense and 
the Commander-in-Chief of the Air Forces. The flight 
higher-educational institutions have been converted to five-year 
study, and the development of new curriculums and programs has 
begun. The first step on the road to reform has been taken. The 
question is whether others will follow. I do not ask this by 
accident, since even today the incarnation of our ideas has been 
called into question. The increased course of study of the 
pilots, of course, will not solve the problem in and of itself. 
It can provide results only as part of other measures that are, 
by the way, not included in the program for the overall 
re-organization of the system of training for aviation personnel. 
  By considering the training of pilots in light of the 
re-organization of the Air Forces of Russia being pursued and 
the Law on the Reform of Higher Education, we should determine 
first of all just what sort of specialist we need, and then give 
answers to the following questions: 
  --do the education and professional training of graduates 
correspond to the level of technical complexity of the new 
aircraft systems entering service with the Air Forces, and what 
are the prospects for their further improvement? 
  --is the intellectual cultivation of the personality ensured 
in training at an aviation higher-educational institution, so as 
to correspond to the social changes in society and the 
development trends of statehood in Russia? 
  --is the future pilot ready for service under contract, 
under 
which he can change the nature of his activity under certain 
conditions in a way that is painless for him and society? 
  The contemporary combat aircraft system is a kind of 
"minifactory." But its on-board computers and other complex 
systems that have absorbed the advanced achievements of science 
and technology and, aside from everything else, are developing 
constantly, are all inert without the participation of the 
person. The training of specialists should prove to be, at a 
minimum, an order of magnitude ahead of scientific and technical 
progress. 
  Let us analyze what we have been teaching the cadets at the 
schools to this point. Almost a third of study time, starting in 
the second year of training, they are in practical flight 
activities. To speak of any rise in the level of their 
theoretical training during this period is to engage in 
self-deception. And it is conducted, bluntly speaking, with one 
aim anyway--to meet formally the norms for the hours of classes 
stipulated for higher schooling. You will thus agree that the 
training of specialists with higher education within the former 
framework is impossible in the face of the new requirements. 
Cadets at the flight higher-educational institutions, you may 
recall, year after year studied only the minimum number of 
disciplines whose assimilation was necessary before basic 
practical flight activity. The whole educational process was 
linked with that, and naturally did not permit the observance of 
elementary principles and methods of teaching. What is more, 
there was not enough time for a profound study even of the 
special sciences necessary to the future pilot. Need it be said 
that the fundamental (general-theoretical) portion of the 
schooling, owing to its small volume and the break-up of the 
program into semesters, did not provide the requisite level of 
mastery of special disciplines by the cadets. They were thus 
never trained for operations under special conditions, and 
little attention was devoted to physical fitness. And we wonder 
why more than half of all flight accidents are connected with 
the human factor here. What scientific institution and who can 
answer the question of how much we would save if we were able to 
increase the professional longevity of the pilot an average of 
at least three years? 
  The volume and content of the current programs at the 
schools 
in the humanities are moreover so poor that we cannot speak of 
any intellectual education of the individual worthy of our 
country. We openly admit that the flight schools are still 
oriented more toward the "trade" than toward education. There 
are still a host of shortcomings here as well. Everyone would 
agree, for instance, that it is extremely inefficient and 
irrational to use the teaching time allocated under the old 
standards for practical flight work. Its quite large volume is 
determined not by norms for flight time per cadet, but rather a 
calendar time frame within which one may organize flights with 
them. It thus frequently turns out that the flights of the 
training group (air squadron) are conducted while a certain 
portion of the cadets in them do not become active, owing to 
shortages of aircraft or the overloaded airspace, among other 
things. So it obtains that instead of 5--6 hours a week, the 
cadet at, say, the frontal-aviation schools flies an average of 
half, and at helicopter schools one third, of the norms. The 
losses of training time owing to this absurdity are enormous 
over the training cycle. 
  The required flight commitments are not ensured with the 
proportion of training regiments and airfields existing at the 
schools today, and that means that the loss of training time is 
apparent. The situation can and must be rectified by decreasing 
the number of cadets planned for flights. It would moreover be 
expedient to conduct practical flight work in only two years, 
rather than three. 
  There is another nuance here as well. Flights exclusively 
during the summer months lead to six-month layoffs, which force 
more than a third of the flying time envisaged under the program 
to be spent on restoring lost skills of piloting technique. The 
requirements for the training of cadets in advanced types of 
flights (weapons delivery in pairs, by day with IFR, at night) 
are not able to be fully realized. The higher-educational 
institutions, with quite a few aircraft and airfields, use them 
for the training of cadets only five or six months out of the 
year, which not only reduces the operational efficiency of the 
physical plant for training, but also leads to a considerable 
increase in the cost of training the flight cadres. About half 
(!) of the yearly flying time both at the schools and at the 
aviation training centers falls to the share of the permanent 
staff, who have openly low qualifications. 
  A rise in the professional level of training and a reduction 
in the turnover of instructor pilots is possible only via 
raising status and pay levels. Only then can we get started with 
an 18--24 percent reduction in their numbers. The financial 
resources released thereby, according to our calculations, will 
be entirely enough for material incentives for the activity of 
the instructors. The Air Forces command and the Ministry of 
Defense have the last word on this issue. 
  The pilot currently completes three stages in his training: 
flight school--aviation training center (UATs)--line unit. It is 
entirely obvious that his emergence as an aerial warrior must be 
considered through the prism of training at all stages. Only in 
that case can we evaluate the degree of perfection of the system 
for personnel training. 
  The cadet completes theoretical training and a program of 
training on a trainer aircraft with flying time 220--230 hours 
at the school over four years. The graduates, over 10--11 months 
at the UATs, master the type of combat aircraft on which they 
will be flying later, and receive the qualification of military 
pilot 3rd class. They train for another three-four years after 
arriving in the line unit so as to become a pilot 1st class, 
that is, become full-fledged aerial warriors, as they say. You 
will agree, should the line units really be engaged in the final 
training of the pilots? But that is just one aspect of the 
issue. Another is whether it is rational to drag out their 
training for seven or eight years. The principal share of the 
accompanying material expenses, after all, go for the practical 
assimilation of the combat aircraft, with one hour of flying 
time on it 5--10 times (depending on the type) more expensive 
than on a trainer. It has been demonstrated in practice that the 
flying time required for the training of the future pilot 
depends largely on the cadet's level of assimilation of the 
trainer aircraft. Whence a conclusion suggest itself--conduct 
the flights with the cadets without a break for a span of 15 
months, eliminating the month's break, instead of practical 
flight work drawn out over three years. The graduate could in 
that case already have reached the 2nd-class level inside the 
walls of the higher-educational institution, automatically 
predetermining his success in mastering a combat aircraft in the 
future without increasing flying time or the time frame for the 
conduct of practical flight work. It would only remain for the 
line unit to train the young pilots for a year and a half or two 
years for combat operations in the full amount. The period of 
emergence of the pilot in the "school--UATs--line unit" system 
could thus be reduced to four or five years. Tempting, is it not? 
  We will be realists. The physical plant of the 
higher-educational institutions, the level of training of the 
professors and instructors, the program support for the cadet 
training process and the degree of perfection of the training 
complex all do not permit the full realization of the new ideas 
at once. This means that they must be implemented gradually, to 
the extent of the creation of the conditions for converting to 
training in the corresponding directions. The gradual 
reformation of the system for pilot training would be 
intelligent on this plane. 
  The first stage envisages the conversion of the 
schools to a five-year term of study with the realization of the 
new requirements for higher education, with a focus on flight 
training for cadets in the later years depending on the 
individual abilities of each, along with changes in the 
composition and structure of the higher-educational 
institutions. It is also essential to provide, in conjunction 
with this, for the development of new curriculums and programs, 
improvement of the work of professors and instructors and the 
conversion to practical flight work at base airfields. Two or 
three flight schools would then suffice entirely for Russia, 
instead of the existing five. The first stage could possibly be 
realized before 1995--1997. 
  The second stage is the further development of the 
physical plant of the most promising schools, allowing an 
increase in the number of attendees at them from 600--800 to 
1,500--2,000, along with the creation of a refined 
infrastructure for the higher educational institution. The 
improvement of the curriculums and programs will make it 
possible to move to training the graduates for all flight fields 
and specializations and to adopt a contract training system. The 
conclusion of that work, including the technical refitting of 
the flight higher-educational institutions, is possible by 
2003--2005. 
  The third stage envisages completion of the 
transition to flight training for cadets at a new training 
complex manufactured domestically, and to the training of pilots 
according to the "higher-educational institution (theoretical 
training for the second level of higher education with the 
awarding of a bachelor of science degree)--flight school 
(assimilation of training aircraft)--UATs (flight training on a 
combat aircraft)" model. Such fundamental changes, however, are 
possible only provided the programs providing comprehensive 
support of the training process are realized, and first and 
foremost positive social changes in the life and status of the 
officer in society. 
  The number of training institutions will be reduced by two 
or 
three times under conditions of a sharp reduction in the 
quantity of aviation personnel needed for all branches of the 
armed forces. The further development of higher educational 
aviation science, improvement of the training process with a 
regard for the optimization of the mix of military-educational 
institutions, coordination of work among them and accomplishment 
of a transition to the training of aviation personnel under 
contract all become topical in this regard. That is 
unfortunately still difficult to achieve. A program to develop 
the physical plant of the higher-educational institutions, 
called upon to be the foundation for intensifying the training 
process, has yet to be approved, for example. 
  The absence of a long-term program for the development of 
the 
higher-educational institutions during the period of cutbacks in 
the Air Forces could cost us dearly in the near future. The 
situation is aggravated by the fact that many of the officials 
on whom the making of decisions depends, either owing to a lack 
of time or frequently even desire and patience to get to the 
heart of the problem, are not receptive to the idea of pursuing 
profound reform of education at the educational institutions of 
the Air Forces. They are misinforming the leadership of the Air 
Forces and the Ministry of Defense, without looking at the heart 
of the matter, with their incompetent and superficial judgments, 
and are impeding the adoption of progressive programs for the 
development of the higher-educational institutions and the 
training of cadres. 
  I am not laying it on too thick. A real threat has arisen 
not 
only of the disruption of educational reform at Air Forces 
higher-educational institutions, but also their ability to train 
the necessary quantity of highly skilled aviation specialists in 
the future as well. The guarantee of the fact that mistakes will 
not be made in re-organizing the military-educational 
institutions and pursuing the reform of education are the 
comprehensive and public discussion and affirmation of the 
conceptual framework for the development of the 
higher-educational institutions and the adoption of promising 
long-term programs for them. The leadership of the branches of 
the armed forces, without repudiating in general the idea of 
uniting the aviation schools, are in fact slowing up the 
reforms. This is also being facilitated by the latest "reforms." 
Two of our helicopter schools have thus been transferred to the 
ground forces. But the Air Forces continue to train the aviation 
engineers and technicians, specialists in rear support, 
communications and pilots in transport aviation for those same 
ground forces, and they in turn train helicopter pilots for the 
Air Forces and other branches of the armed forces. The same 
situation has also taken shape in the "mutual relations" of the 
Air Forces with the PVO [Air-Defense Troops] and the Navy. 
Everything is mixed up. The artificial disunification of kindred 
educational institutions is having a negative effect as a whole 
on the development and improvement of the 
scientific-methodological work of the higher-educational 
institutions and the training of professors, instructors and the 
future pilots. The need for training institutions as part of the 
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation is increasing, 
owing to the impossibility of ensuring the optimal utilization 
for the Air Forces higher-educational institutions under 
conditions of redundancy in the training of aviation specialists 
by the branches of the armed forces, which leads to an increase 
in expenditures for training. 
  It has become obvious by now that one cannot do everything 
in 
a day. Work is needed in the future to improve the system of 
training of aviation cadres, change the supervisory style of the 
military-educational institutions and coordinate 
scientific-methodological work inside their walls. These tasks 
can be accomplished only through joint efforts. So what is the 
matter?! 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61014 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Long-Range Cruise Missiles Launched Successfully From Tu-160 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004A Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 4-7 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel S. Valchenko under the rubric "For High </F>
Combat Readiness": "Resurrection--The Tu-160 is Part of 
the Russian Air Forces!"] 
  [Text] The crew of a Tu-160 supersonic missile 
aircraft launched a long-range cruise missile for the first time 
in the Russian Air Forces on 22 Oct 92. 
  The crew was headed on this flight by Lieutenant-Colonel A. 
Zhikharev. The co-pilot was Lieutenant-Colonel N. Moiseyenko, 
and the navigators were Lieutenant-Colonel A. Gavrilov (aerial 
navigation, weaponry) and Lieutenant-Colonel A. Pakulev (EW, 
communications). They are all top-rated specialists and masters 
of their trade. The commander has 400 hours of flying time, out 
of a total of 1,600, on the Tu-160. The operations of the air 
strike system on the route were monitored by the crews of a 
flying laboratory--an airborne command and telemetry station 
(KIP). 
  The Tu-160 went up from the base airfield at precisely the 
appointed time. Lieutenant-Colonel A. Zhikharev brought the 
aircraft out to the permitted launch zone. Having received the 
confirmation to release the cruise missile, the crew executed 
the launch and took a heading for the airfield. 
  The KIP aircraft tracked the missile, recording the 
parameters of its autonomous flight. The KIP transmitted that 
the target had been hit after the Tu-160 had landed! 
  The first to congratulate the fliers on their success was 
Long-Range Aviation [DA] Chief Navigator Major-General V. 
Yegorov. Here is what he had to say about the event: "Russia 
needs not only means of defense that inspire respect, but also 
means of effective deterrence. They include the greatest 
achievement of domestic aviation thought--the Tu-160 aircraft 
system. The significance of a practical launch of a long-range 
cruise missile, made from the Tu-160 aircraft for the first time 
in the Russian Air Forces, is difficult to overestimate. The 
results of the intensive work to assimilate this most modern 
aircraft system have come to their result." 
  A day later Lieutenant-Colonel A. Malyshev and Major V. 
Adamov brought back an excellent grade from a flight for weapons 
delivery. Lieutenant-Colonels Zhikharev and Gavrilov were 
instructors this time. 
  The practical launches of low-altitude, long-range cruise 
missiles from the Tu-160, as was justly noted by the chief 
navigator of DA, crowned the intensive labor of the flight 
personnel and ground specialists. The course of combat training 
of the strategic flight crews was under the steadfast attention 
of the commander-in-chief of the Russian Air Forces for several 
months. They awaited information from each flight shift that 
took place here as paramount at the headquarters of long-range 
aviation. And here is why. It was namely at this airfield that 
the question was being resolved of whether the aviators of the 
Russian Air Forces would be able to master the most powerful 
modern-day aircraft system in the world--the Tu-160--in a short 
period of time. 
  The Tu-160 fourth-generation aircraft is a heavy, 
multimode and multipurpose missile-carrying bomber with a 
variable-geometry wing. It embodies the merits of the best 
domestic heavy aircraft. Modern aerodynamics, a high 
thrust-to-weight ratio and the ability to carry various types of 
weaponry have made it a weighty element in the aviation 
component of the domestic nuclear triad. The aggregate striking 
power of a single Tu-160 is commensurate with the striking power 
of two Tu-95MS aircraft or two squadrons of Tu-22M3 aircraft. A 
strike group of three or four such aircraft is able to make any 
aggressor nation listen to reason. 
  The list of measures and quantity of manpower and equipment 
to prepare the Tu-160 for a weapons-delivery sortie could be 
compared to the launch of a spacecraft. Imagine for a moment 
that the specialists at Plesetsk or Baykonur were to leave their 
prepared launch sites, select a new and unprepared location and 
launch a spacecraft from it in a month or two. Impossible? Well, 
the Russian aviators that had to master the Tu-160 were in 
roughly that same situation. And they came through with honor. 
  But how did that become possible all the same? Why did the 
Russian fliers have to master a most complex aircraft system in 
a crash course? 
  The first Tu-160 aircraft, which were an answer to the 
American B-1, began coming to the Air Forces for experimental 
operation as early as in 1987. The training of flight personnel 
for their planned assimilation began at the same time. By 
January of 1992 there was a fully combat-ready unit of these 
aircraft at Priluki in Ukraine. This was the Guards 
Poltava-Berlin Order of Lenin, Red Banner Air Regiment, which 
was the foundation of the striking power of Soviet strategic 
aviation. A breach soon appeared, however, in our overall 
"defensive shield." All of the latest aircraft were unilaterally 
declared to be the property of Ukraine. The personnel were 
"democratically" offered the chance to take the oath and remain 
at Priluki or to return to the Russian Air Forces. Many chose 
Russia. 
  What did Ukraine get as the result of this division? 
Nothing. 
Because all of the "privatized" Tu-160 aircraft were laid up 
immediately. There were none of the special fuels or spare 
parts. All of the plants that supplied constituent items 
remained outside of "independent country." No one ended up the 
winner from the resultant situation. Assertions were then heard 
in some places that Russia had been deprived of the Tu-160s, and 
would not soon be able to make up the loss. 
  The Russian aviators to whom it fell to prove the reverse 
had 
to overcome many difficulties. All of the ground-preparation 
physical plant of the bomber regiment--the simulators, missile 
preparation positions, specially equipped facilities--had been 
left at Priluki. There were not enough specialists. The 
technical crews were brought up to strength using personnel from 
the local regiment. It was not enough to retrain those 
people--their professional psychology had to be altered. Almost 
all of them, after all, had been servicing tanker aircraft, and 
could not conceive of the specific nature of service in a 
regiment of long-range bombers. 
  The flight personnel had their own concerns. When new 
aircraft were delivered from the plant, when the system of 
ground support was deployed and the engineering and technical 
personnel were trained on them, an intolerable interruption in 
flying occurred among the pilots and navigators. They had to 
resurrect their skills. And that was all once again in a brief 
period of time. 
  But all of these are military difficulties. But add to them 
the social and domestic ones as well. The families of many of 
the fliers had remained in Ukraine, and they still have to 
travel there on leave. The apartments in the new garrison are 
still, as they say, only "a gleam." That is how they live. And 
all of that for the sake of resurrecting strategic aviation. For 
the sake of Russia. 
  The intensive process of assimilating the strategic 
supersonic missile aircraft is behind them today. The answer has 
been given--the Tu-160 is part of the Russian Air Forces! 
  And now we give the floor to those who were involved in this 
event, a truly historic one for the Russian Air Forces. 
  Lieutenant-Colonel V. Karpov, inspector-navigator of 
long-range aviation: "I was at that airfield along with 
senior inspector-pilot Lieutenant-Colonel A. Medvedev for three 
months. Everything took place before our eyes. First we made 
check flights in the new aircraft. Then we flew as instructors 
to "resurrect" the command personnel of the regiment. We studied 
special techniques on the ground with the pilots and navigators. 
The program to prepare for the practical launches was fulfilled 
entirely as a result. The flight personnel tried very hard, 
since the Tu-160 is the favorite aircraft of all. The piloting 
and navigational system has no analogue in our aviation. No 
aircraft can compare in thrust-to-weight ratio or aerodynamic 
properties. It was also highly regarded in the West. Our hero 
was named the Blackjack there--you won't encounter one better, 
they say. 
  "It is noteworthy that this powerful craft is in the sure 
hands of Russian fliers." 
  Lieutenant-Colonel S. Toporkov, senior engineer of the 
formation for missile weaponry: "I came here along with 
those who did not stay at Priluki. We had to get used to an 
airfield all over again, one that was not adapted for the 
operation of the Tu-160. Every technical crew at Priluki, by the 
way, had a shed on the hardstand. Here it was just an open 
field. All of that had to be built. There were not enough 
facilities to service the aircraft, or individual protective 
gear--respirators, special gloves, footgear. But people must be 
given their due: they tried without sparing themselves. Major A. 
Smyzhin made the first flight of the Tu-160 at this airfield. 
This was, so to speak, his second debut. He had been the first 
at Priluki. I would also like to note among the technical crews 
Captain G. Farkhutdinov, senior lieutenants V. Sapsay, K. 
Korepanov, N. Ivnitskiy, S. Stepanchenko and lieutenants A. 
Nikolayev, A. Ibrayev and O. Solyanik. They are by and large 
young fellows, but skilled and diligent." 
  V. Ryazanov, supervisor of the scientific crew of the 
airborne command and telemetry station: "The KIP aircraft 
is a scientific subunit of the Flight Test Institute imeni M.M. 
Gromov. We were brought in as part of the scientific support for 
the practical launches of the cruise missiles. The special gear 
installed on the Il-76 aircraft makes possible the comprehensive 
analysis of the operations of the strike system and the 
monitoring of the independent flight of the cruise missile for 
all the principal parameters. The KIP can issue a command to 
self-destruct the missile in the event it strays off course. But 
we did not have to issue that command during the practical 
launches from the Tu-160. The missiles followed their routings 
precisely, and hit the training targets. I would like to make 
note of the work of our specialists--test pilot G. Stadnik, 
navigator A. Kurmangleyev and lead engineers for flight testing 
N. Yefremov, F. Khaziyev, V. Ozeritskiy and V. Usik..." 
  In place of an afterword: One of the many 
newspaper features on the Tu-160 reported that "Series output 
could be curtailed." "If that happens," wrote the journalist, 
"then the priceless experience gained in the process of creating 
the heavy bomber would be lost, and a breach that will be 
difficult to close will appear in the aerial strategic shield of 
our Homeland..." 
  What can be added to that? It only remains to share 
this anxiety. Would a decision that would lead to unilateral 
disarmament, to the loss of defensive scientific and technical 
potential, really be sensible? It would set us back 10--15 years 
in a technological regard. The answer would seem to be obvious. 
Russia needs strong wings--such as those of the Tu-160 
aircraft. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61015 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     More Intelligent Thrust to Accident Prevention Proposed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004B Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 8-9 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel-General Ye. Rusanov, chief of the </F>
Aviation Flight Safety Service [SBP] of the Armed Forces of the 
Russian Federation, under the rubric "Flight Safety: Experience, 
Analysis, Problems": "Thousands of Dangerous Situations..."] 
  [Text] ...those being the thousands of dangerous 
situations that arise owing to omissions and oversights by many 
officials that are compensated for every year by military 
pilots, risking their health and sometimes their lives. 
  The conditions for maintaining the level of flight safety 
that had been attained (not to mention further improvements in 
it) have changed for the worse in recent years. The extent of 
the hazardousness of factors affecting the failure-free 
operation of all components of the 
"pilot--aircraft--environment" system has increased first and 
foremost, and flying time has decreased in general and for each 
pilot or crew in particular. The lack of the necessary quantity 
of fuels and lubricants and training ordnance, along with the 
difficulties of infrastructure and amenities for the personnel 
of aviation and supporting units caused by the cutbacks and 
relocations of the troops, is having an acute impact. All of 
this is having a negative impact on morale and the psychological 
state of the fliers, and is reducing the motivation to continue 
both flight work and military service as a result. 
  It is nonetheless namely in this difficult climate that it 
is 
essential not only to pursue, but even to intensify the work to 
prevent flight accidents, since each of them causes great harm 
to our aviation and the army as a whole. 
  It would obviously not be sensible, given the realities of 
the current moment--where instances of failure to observe the 
requirements not only of official documents, but even 
fundamental ones (decrees, edicts, resolutions), are becoming 
far from isolated--to be limited just to the customary directive 
and disciplinary methods for ensuring flight safety. 
  Yes, the aviation documents are strict. One difficulty of 
the 
current period is the fact that most of the basic manuals and 
guides regulating flight work, whose unconditional fulfillment 
by every aviation specialist--first and foremost the pilot 
himself--is required, unfortunately assume his complete 
provision with everything that could have an impact on flight 
safety. That is far from always possible everywhere or for 
everyone today, however. And closing our eyes to these gaps 
between, figuratively speaking, yesterday's and today's flight 
organization is not the best method of action for aviation 
commanders of all ranks or for the officials of the SBP. Under 
these conditions, it would be expedient, while preserving the 
established principle of ensuring flight safety "from the top 
down" (High Command--larger formations and units--air 
unit--pilot), also to take into account the degree of motivation 
to prevent accidents "the other way"--"from the bottom up" (that 
is, to start right with the pilot). 
  The pilot was considered to be the object of 
exhortation, monitoring and, of course, sanctions under the 
command-administrative system for his failure to observe a host 
of flight-safety requirements from officials at all levels when 
preventive measures were organized to avoid accidents. It came 
to pass that he, while personally risking, at a minimum, his 
flight and service career and, frequently, the state of his 
health and sometimes even his life in a flight accident, 
seemingly had considerably less of a vested interest in the 
safety of his flights than a host of superior officers! 
  When preventive work is optimized relying on the predominant 
role of the personality of the pilot, for whom all 
the higher structures should be working, we obtain a powerful 
supplement in the form of the organizational energy of thousands 
of pilots (or members of flight crews) to the efforts of dozens 
of SBP specialists. It is no secret that it is namely the pilots 
who in practice prevent thousands of dangerous situations 
arising from the omissions and oversights of officials in 
various fields every year. But there are reserves here as well, 
since almost every one of the crashes and accidents that occurs 
over the course of a year could have been prevented or, at 
least, had a less grave outcome with timely and correct actions 
(after the dangerous situation arose) by the crew. The 
unsatisfactory level of training of the flight personnel in 
practical prevention of the accidents that are most typical of 
their branch of aviation and type of airframe, however, leads to 
the systematic repetition of one and the same accident and crash 
situations arising out of objective or subjective unfavorable 
factors that are exhaustively studied by the SBP specialists, 
but prove each time to be new and unexpected for the next crew 
to get into the difficult situation. 
  That is just what happened when an Mi-8 helicopter hit a 
mountain slope hidden by cloud cover and crashed while 
transporting refugees from the Transcaucasus in July of last 
year. The air-traffic control bodies had not satisfactorily 
analyzed the conditions for flying over this mountain pass, 
while the crew, going up into mountains with cloud cover, was 
not able to assess the danger of that factor under the concrete 
conditions of the flight. Three crew members and ten passengers 
were killed as a result. 
  Another crash, even more grave in its consequences, occurred 
a month later in the same area when the same mission was being 
carried out. The crew of an An-12 cut short their takeoff run 
virtually without separating. The aircraft rolled over the end 
of the runway, hit some obstacles, was smashed and burned. 
Thirty-six people died. Doubts of the successful outcome of the 
flight had arisen among the pilots owing to the high air 
temperature, the maximum loading of the aircraft and the 
specific features of the shape of the runway. All of these 
dangerous factors had not been taken into account by either the 
crew or the airfield dispatcher. 
  Could the crews have averted just these outcomes in these 
specific situations? Investigation indisputably demonstrated 
that such a possibility was virtually guaranteed--the crews were 
entirely able to avoid creating a situation fatal for each of 
them and then, when it had arisen all the same, could have 
countered its unfavorable development and ended the flight 
safely even though it had begun to be aggravated. It is namely 
in these two directions--not creating dangerous 
situations, and if they arise anyway, preventing their 
aggravation and reducing the gravity of the outcome by the most 
effective means--that should guide the training of flight 
personnel. 
  The seeming simplicity of such a concept for practical 
preventive work, however, requires sound analytical and 
methodological work in each branch of military aviation to 
select and quantify the typical (repeating) special situations, 
to practice techniques for averting them, and then to localize 
each of them and ultimately devise and maintain the skills for 
the whole range of techniques developed. It can be accomplished 
most effectively at the centers for the combat application of 
aviation, in close interaction with the specialists of the 
Combat Training Directorate and the Flight Safety Service. 
  In the realization of the proposed model for preventive 
work, 
each pilot or crew will be able to select, regardless of 
directives from above, the most expedient positions from among 
the set of techniques for repetition namely those elements of 
the flight mission, in the fulfillment of which he senses the 
predominant danger, and to practice them in class, on a 
simulator or on a computer when preparing for a specific flight. 
  The activity to ensure flight safety by the higher commands 
and inspectorates will undoubtedly require optimization under 
contemporary conditions. Each of them should strive to create 
for their subordinate levels (or interacting levels) the most 
favorable working conditions to maintain the required level of 
flight safety in a contemporary setting. This is already being 
realized through the cutbacks in the previously widespread host 
of inspectorates and checks, performance ratings and other 
measures of an administrative type, and the redistribution of 
efforts in the direction of performing methodological measures 
and assisting in each area. The basic principle of the 
structures controlling the activity of the air regiment should 
be to provide its command personnel with the most favorable 
climate for planning, organizing and conducting flights. 
  The urgent task of all the services participating in flight 
training should be considered to be the elimination of dangerous 
factors under their control that a the cause of the appearance 
and aggravation of dangerous situations. Thus, for example, the 
investigation of the most severe flight accident of last 
year--the crash of a transport aircraft landing with passengers 
on board at night in minimal weather conditions at a back-up 
airfield that had not been assimilated before--first placed the 
focus on crew error in the performance of the pre-landing 
maneuver. Detailed study of the circumstances of this tragedy, 
however, showed that the actions of the crew only crowned a 
situation that had been conditioned by violations, omissions and 
blunders by a whole series of officials who had given the 
assignment and prepared the crew, made the decisions for takeoff 
and rerouting, were responsible for the lighting and electronic 
equipment of the airfield, analyzed the weather etc. If any one 
of these had made the correct decision and carried it out, the 
crash situation may not have arisen. 
  As for scientific developments in flight safety, it would be 
expedient to concentrate efforts today on the "applied" 
questions--maintaining the level of proficiency of pilots under 
conditions of irregular flights, and substantiating measures to 
avert the most serious flight accidents. 
  It is essential to emphasize in conclusion the importance of 
uniting the efforts of specialists from all agencies in the 
performance of everyday work to prevent accidents in aviation 
under contemporary conditions. The expensive experience that has 
been acquired in the investigation of flight accidents should be 
utilized with the maximum possible promptness and completeness 
in the aviation of the armed forces of the Russian Federation. A 
closed-doors mentality is impermissible here, since it only 
reinforces the method of trial and error (such as the fact, for 
example, that analogous accidents happened after the crash of 
the An-12 on civil aircraft in Vladivostok and Tbilisi). This 
pertains entirely to the intelligent utilization of foreign 
experience in flight safety. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61016 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     New Engine Diagnostics System Uses 'Black Box' to Track 
Parameters </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004C Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 10-11 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004C </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences </F>
Lieutenant-Colonel G. German, Captain V. Velenteyenko, chief of 
a routine TECh [technical-maintenance unit] operations group of 
an air regiment, and Candidate of Technical Sciences Colonel 
(Reserve) A. Kaulis under the rubric "For IAS Specialists": "BUR 
in the Service of Diagnostics"] 
  [Text] The design of modern aircraft engines (AD) is 
improved every year, and the amount of work to service them and 
the testing and check-out gear (KPA) employed grow more complex 
as well. But the number of specialists taking part in performing 
that work, as in the IAS [aviation engineering service] as a 
whole, is decreasing. How can the efficiency of monitoring the 
reliability of aircraft engines be increased under those 
conditions? 
  A group of staff members at the ERAT NII 
[Scientific-Research 
Institute] of the Air Forces took up the solution of the 
problem. It is well known that improvements in operational 
monitoring of the parameters of aircraft engines occur in 
competition between two directions in their development--the 
creation of on-board (BASK) and ground (NASK) automated systems. 
Each of these has its own advantages and disadvantages. The 
advantages of BASK include high mobility, autonomous operation 
and promptness in application. Being located on the aircraft, 
however, these systems are limited in the amount of information 
they can monitor (both in the range of parameters and in the 
frequency of checking them) and have a quite rigid operating 
program that does not, as a rule keep pace with changes in the 
equipment of constantly upgraded aircraft. 
  NASK are by and large devoid of these shortcomings, but 
appreciably reduce the mobility of the maintenance equipment and 
its autonomy, as well as requiring more--and more highly 
skilled--servicing personnel. Moreover, by duplicating a number 
of on-board systems they markedly increase the cost of the 
aviation system. 
  Taking this into account, the attention of specialists 
turned 
to the well-known "black box"--an on-board recording device 
(BUR) that is used in contemporary aircraft and helicopters to 
record the parameters of the flight and the principal aircraft 
systems (including the engines). It is highly reliable, and has 
the ability to preserve information on several hours of aircraft 
systems operation that is acceptable for diagnostics through the 
measurement of deviations in the parameters. This information is 
used even today in the interests of determining the operability 
of the aircraft engines when preparing it for a repeat sortie. 
The use of BURs as a means of ground monitoring of the ADs, 
however, is hindered for two reasons. The first is that a BUR, 
as a consequence of its principal purpose, has a strictly 
limited range of engine parameters it monitors--the engines get 
from 7 to 15 percent of the information recording volume. The 
second reason is caused by its discrete nature; the values of 
each parameter are recorded at strictly defined time intervals 
that are typified by the frequency of polling, that is, the 
quantity of values recorded per unit time (per second, for 
example). The polling frequency of aircraft engine parameters 
used in series-produced BURs does not make it possible to obtain 
reliable information on the most diagnostically informative 
modes of its operation--transitional modes (for instance, the 
pickup or shedding of RPM) that last for only a few seconds in 
all. 
  The efforts of the NII specialists V. Dolgopolov, K. 
Suponko, 
A. Poluektov, V. Semenin and L. Yevlakhov were aimed at solving 
just these problems. The key here was the fact that during the 
process of ground check-out of the engine parameters, most of 
the remaining aircraft systems--information on which is fed to 
the BUR--are not being monitored and, consequently, the 
recording channels for their parameters are temporarily not in 
use. This in fact determined the later actions of the 
innovators--to create a relatively simple and small piece of 
ground equipment that would make it possible to switch over the 
"idle" channels to the engine. The amount of information 
received from it increased by 10--12 times, thanks to the 
increased polling frequency of the standard parameters and the 
opportunity to monitor other parameters of the ADs through the 
installation of additional sensors on board the aircraft. 
  The gear, in interaction with the BUR units and the AL-31F 
aircraft engine electrical regulator, constitutes the system of 
ground monitoring of aircraft and engine parameters (SNK-SD). A 
diagram is presented in Fig. 1. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-05A>           Fig. 1. Diagram of the SNK-SD ground monitoring system </FIG>





    The on-board part of the system consists of a unit for 
formulating and coding the information of the BUR (1), the BUR 
information storage (2) and the AD electronic regulator (3). It 
is intended for the receipt of primary information on the 
parameters that are usually recorded by the on-board equipment 
and the parameters--new in relation to them--of the electronic 
engine regulator, electrical feed of the SNK-SD from on-board 
sources, conversion of analog information to digital and storage 
of all of the data obtained with the aid of the SNK-SD in the 
BUR storage unit. 
  The ground portion of the system includes a switching unit 
(4), a control panel (5), and an arm with additional sensors (6) 
intended for the formation of high-polling (frequency of 12--16 
Hz) channels for the recording of parameters, varying their 
selection and monitoring their progression to the BUR storage 
unit in real time and the receipt of primary information on the 
engine parameters being measured by the additional sensors. 
  The locations for connecting the SNK-SD on the aircraft are: 
the BUR--the input of the standard monitored parameters to the 
unit for the formulation and coding of the information (pos. A); 
the electronic AD regulator--the control plugs of the regulator 
used in servicing to hook up the KPA (pos. B); and, the control 
points for the measurement of additional parameters of the 
engine via the installation of sensors at them from the SNK-SD 
kit (pos. C). 
  The information from the on-board sensors, electronic engine 
regulator and the sensors from the SNK-SD kit goes to the 
switching unit, where it is distributed in accordance with the 
settings of the switches on the control panel among the channels 
with a high polling frequency and transmitted to the input of 
the BUR formulation and coding unit, where the analog signals 
are converted to digital. The information is copied from the 
storage unit to standard media (BK-2 magnetic-tape cassettes) 
after the engine is disconnected, for subsequent processing in 
Luch or Mayak type ground processing devices (NUO) using 
specially developed control programs. An external view of the 
ground units of the system and the places to connect them to the 
aircraft is shown in Fig. 2. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-05B>           Fig. 2. Composition of the SNK-SD system </FIG>





    The SNK-SD combines the advantages of both directions in the 
development of engine monitoring equipment, and makes it 
possible to avoid the appearance of cumbersome and expensive KPA 
in servicing that requires an increase in the number of organic 
service personnel and increases labor expenditures for 
operation. It has a high degree of standardization, since one 
and the same ground unit of this system, differing only in the 
soldering of the electrical connections, is needed to monitor 
different aircraft that have the same type of BUR. The SNK-SD, 
utilizing standard ground processing devices, also provides for 
a uniform ideology for monitoring the status of the aircraft 
hardware. Since the final information in the BUR buffer is in 
digital form, the use of personal computers to process it in 
real time is possible in the future, thereby eliminating the 
principal inconvenience of the "black box"--the lack of results 
at the time of monitoring, and the need for subsequent 
processing of the data. 
  Experimental check-out of the SNK-SD in several air units 
showed that this system increases the efficiency of monitoring, 
both when it is used in the squadron in the process of making 
flights or in the performance of technical maintenance 
operations requiring the testing of the AD, as well as in TECh 
units in routine maintenance or repair operations. The following 
variations for its utilization were the most expedient: 
  --operational monitoring, when performing flights, to look 
for failures that arose in a prior sortie, as well as to 
evaluate the technical state of the engines under the conditions 
of an air squadron without activating the standard KPA. Only the 
switching unit and control panel are used from the ground 
portion of the SNK-SD therein. The additional sensors are 
installed only if necessary and, as a rule, no more than two. 
The time to install and connect the SNK-SD is less than ten 
minutes; 
  --the deeper monitoring of the technical state of the 
engines 
in the process of performing routine maintenance operations, as 
well as operations to prolong the service life of the engines 
and find and eliminate failures. The sensors from the SNK-SD kit 
are installed during the ground testing. The time expenditures 
to install the SNK-SD on board the aircraft are compensated for 
by the substantial increase in the extent of the monitoring and, 
in a case of finding and eliminating failures in the ADs, by the 
determination of the causes for the disruption in operability 
with precision down to the replaceable part, unit or assembly. 
  The operational check-out of the developed system revealed 
yet another important merit--documentation of the results of the 
monitoring, which none of the ground engine monitoring panels 
traditionally employed as KPA possesses. 
  Here is an example of the use of the SNK-SD. The afterburner 
mode of operation of one of the engines did not come on in 
advanced aerobatic maneuvers by an Su-27 aircraft, as a result 
of which the pilot was forced to curtail the performance of the 
assignment. Check-outs performed on the ground of the stability 
of these modes using the standard KPA brought no clarity--the 
afterburner chamber ignited in all of the ground tests, which 
gave grounds to doubt the reliability of the primary information 
on the failure of the afterburner in flight. Then the SNK-SD 
system was connected to the aircraft in the variation of deeper 
monitoring of the technical state of the engine, with five 
additional sensors installed on board to check the fuel pressure 
in the automatic engine control system (in the area pertaining 
to the feed of fuel to the afterburner chamber). The specialists 
were convinced, after a ten-minute testing of the engine with 
the afterburners turned on four times and decoding of the 
results obtained on a LUCh type NUO, that the fuel pressure in 
one of the assemblies of the afterburner loop that supported the 
ignition of the afterburner chamber was below the stipulated 
limit. This did not lead to engine failure when the afterburners 
were turned on under ground conditions, but under the conditions 
of the evolution of the aircraft when performing advanced 
aerobatic maneuvers it was the reason for the failure of the 
afterburner to come on. The "heart" of the Su-27 operated 
reliably in flight after the replacement of the assembly. 
  The experience in the use of the system shows convincingly 
that the SNK-SD makes it possible, during one period of engine 
testing, to establish the cause of a disruption in its 
operability and make decisions regarding ways of eliminating the 
failure and its further operation. 
  The preparation and production of a series-produced lot of 
these systems for conducting tests in the field is currently 
underway. Techniques are being developed to utilize the SNK-SD 
in order to support the servicing of aircraft engines according 
to their technical state. One would like to believe that all of 
this will help the specialists of the IAS make a worthy 
contribution to increasing the safety of flights and maintaining 
a high level of combat readiness of the aircraft hardware. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61017 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Russian Flight-Testing Procedures, Duration Compared to 
American </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004D Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 16-19 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004D </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Honored Test Pilot of the USSR Major-General of </F>
Aviation (Retired) A. Maucharov and Candidate of Technical 
Sciences A. Lapin under the rubric "The Floor to the Test 
Pilots": "A Good Aircraft Means a Well-Tested One"] 
  [Text] The flight testing of the latest combat aircraft is 
one of the most labor-intensive and crucial stages in the 
overall process of realizing the program of equipping the Air 
Forces and naval aviation of the Russian Federation with them. 
It is namely at that stage, after all, that an objective 
evaluation is made of the new ideas and engineering solutions 
made inherent by the designers in their aircraft, and the fine 
tuning of the whole aircraft system is performed. The 
suitability of a prototype for the performance of the combat 
tasks that define its purpose is evaluated, and recommendations 
on the possibility of putting the aircraft system into service 
and beginning series production are made, only according to the 
results of full-scale ground and flight check-out and testing 
under conditions that approximate operational ones. Flight 
testing itself, including the preparations for it, makes up more 
than half of the amount and duration of the time and financial 
resources allocated for the creation of an aircraft system. 
  A good aircraft means a well-tested one. This exceedingly 
topical subject has already been raised in the article by test 
pilot A. Akimenkov, "What Keeps Our Aircraft From Being Better" 
(AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA No. 7, 1990). The author invited 
interested readers to discuss it. We would thus like to dwell, 
relying on many years of personal experience in participating in 
the testing and refinement of new aircraft systems, on the 
principal shortcomings that are characteristic of the process of 
creating and adopting aircraft hardware in the field, and try to 
determine ways of eliminating them. 
  We would note, first and foremost, that the amount and 
duration of flight testing and its quality and effectiveness 
depend on many factors, some of which are fundamental. We will 
thus begin the process with an analysis of the process of 
formulating the preliminary specifications (TTZ). These are 
traditionally prepared on the basis of the results of scientific 
research and experimental inquiry that are performed at the 
corresponding institutions of the customer and the principal 
executor, a comprehensive and objective analysis of the 
conceptual framework of the combat aircraft from the standpoint 
of its feasibility, the effective utilization of world 
scientific and technical achievements and actual capabilities 
for the creation of the new aircraft system with the assigned 
characteristics within the stipulated time frame. 
  All of the enumerated conditions are unfortunately far from 
fulfilled in domestic practice. And the point is not, as 
Akimenkov asserts, that the lead executor taking part in the 
formulation of the conceptual framework of a combat aircraft 
system supposedly "possesses every reason both to force his 
point of view onto the problem and to defend his own interests 
first and foremost," or even that "by the moment of write-up of 
the TTZ the final decision, as a rule, has been made." These 
assertions do not conform to reality. 
  The chief reason, in our opinion, is the fact that the 
realization of the TTZ in experimental design is not supported 
by the requisite scientific, engineering and production 
potential in industry; the full set of equipment and assemblies 
for the aircraft system reaches flight testing, as a rule, 
without proper autonomous and comprehensive working out owing to 
the restricted operating capabilities of the test-bench and 
modeling bases, means of preliminary assessment of the 
operability of aircraft systems in the course of physical 
testing (using flying laboratories and models and 
flight-modeling systems) and other reasons that are sometimes of 
a purely organizational nature. 
  The results of the fulfillment of the comprehensive program 
of testing of an aircraft system depend, to no small extent, on 
the technology for performing the flight testing that was 
formulated at the stage of preliminary design engineering of the 
new aircraft, the completeness of the implementation of measures 
within the framework of preparing the airfield technical gear of 
the test bases, the test-track equipment and the flight-control 
and target-guidance systems, the degree of simulation of 
hypothetical operation, the quality of the target equipment on 
the test range etc. The arrival of the prototypes for the 
performance of ground and flight testing according to plan is 
also an exceedingly material factor. 
  The resolution of all of these issues is largely conditioned 
by the organizational structure of the testing process--the 
principles for its planning, control and monitoring, the forms 
of interaction between the general customer and the principal 
executor and between military scientific institutions and 
organizations within those agencies, the clear-cut division of 
responsibilities (including financial) for the quality and 
deadlines for support and the performance of concrete types of 
ground and flight operations. 
  We cite as confirmation summary indicators of the flight 
testing (its overall duration, the number of flights within a 
fixed calendar period, the quantity and rate of deliveries of 
prototypes for testing) of the Su-24, MiG-25, MiG-23, MiG-31 
domestic combat aircraft and the analogous American F-111, 
F-15C/D, F-14 and F-16. We will moreover proceed from the fact 
that we, as well as our colleagues across the ocean, adhere to 
the following conceptual model for the performance of flight 
testing: the realization of a comprehensive program should be 
fit into a stipulated time period, with the achievement of more 
complete conformity of the characteristics of the aircraft 
prototype to the requirements of the TTZ, and the expenditures 
should not exceed the amount of financing allocated. 
  The duration of the testing of domestic prototypes of 
aircraft, with virtually the identical number of aircraft (14) 
submitted for flight and ground operations, proved to be almost 
twice that of the foreign ones (6 and 3.5 years respectively). 
This is despite the fact that flight programs in the United 
States exceed our analogous ones by 70--80 percent, since the 
Americans conduct testing across a broader range of conditions 
for the combat application of the aircraft (this pertains to the 
target and jamming environments on the test ranges, and climate 
and other conditions). Their program moreover includes all the 
types of field (operational) testing necessary to resolve the 
the issue of putting the prototype into service. 
  The markedly longer period for the testing of domestic 
aircraft systems compared to the United States is connected with 
the low rate of test flights (350 and 850 a year respectively); 
the average annual flying time of our experimental aircraft is 
thus 2.5 times less than the American ones. 
  Such a large difference in the flight utilization of the 
aircraft being tested is in this case the consequence of a 
number of reasons: 
  --first, the low level of finishing of the individual 
constituent elements that are installed in domestic experimental 
aircraft, and the incompleteness of equipment ready for 
operation in the prototypes being tested; 
  --second, the greater losses of flight time caused, in turn, 
by the necessity of eliminating design and production 
shortcomings and defects that are revealed and the performance 
of finishing and reconditioning work, as well as the imposition 
of a number of restrictions for weather conditions and bans on 
flights; 
  --third, the insufficiently broad scope of the concurrent 
testing and refinement of experimental prototypes of 
scientific-research and experimental work on test benches, 
modeling systems and flying laboratories; 
  --fourth, the poor incorporation into flight-test practice 
of 
automated systems for the processing and analysis of flight 
information in real time, as well as the control of the flight 
experiment from a joint command post. 
  More than 70 percent of the calendar year here, all in all, 
is not spent for conducting test flights. Roughly half of them 
(by and large in the initial stages) moreover do not work 
through their flight assignments fully for various reasons (poor 
reliability of the physical equipment, prevailing test 
conditions etc.). This naturally requires that they be repeated, 
leading to a significant increase in the time and material 
expenditures relegated for the realization of the whole program. 
  The rate of delivery of aircraft prototypes is an extremely 
important factor affecting the duration of aircraft testing. A 
procedure has been established in the United States, for 
example, under which all prototypes arrive for testing by and 
large within the first two years of its start. A broad range of 
work to finish up and refine constituent elements and the 
aircraft system as a whole is thus ensured thereby. The 
principal delivery of aircraft here, on the contrary, is made 
during the second half of the testing period, which leads to the 
inefficient utilization of the inventory and, as a result, to 
poor results in the realization of the overall program. 
  The average statistical data cited pertain chiefly to 
fourth-generation fighters whose testing was conducted in the 
1970s. Let us now compare the testing of the latest F-15E and 
Su-27 fighters. 
  The characteristic features of the F-15E that represent a 
profound modification of the F-15C/D aircraft are the efficient 
utilization of organic systems of on-board equipment and 
weaponry that have acquitted themselves well; their modification 
and modernization in accordance with the high requirements posed 
for tactical and combat performance characteristics of the 
aircraft system, reliability and operational service life; and, 
the limited incorporation of fundamentally new engineering that 
nonetheless ensures the fulfillment of the requirements posed 
for the aircraft prototype as a whole in the TTZ. 
  The program of creating a new combat fighter and equipping 
it 
for the Air Force, in accordance with the practice that has 
taken shape in the United States over the last decade, was 
entrusted to a supervisor who possessed broad authority and the 
corresponding staff apparatus, including a joint testing team. 
The composition of that team included representatives of the 
testing and operational subunits of the Air Force and the 
developer firms. 
  The testing was conducted according to uniform plans, 
programs and techniques for flight and ground operations with 
overall technical and economic support. The course of the 
operations and the results of testing were moreover under the 
constant observation and monitoring of the customer from the 
very start. 
  The composite schedule for the flight testing of the F-15E 
envisaged gradually bringing its individual constituent 
elements, and the aircraft as a whole, to the assigned 
parameters. The comprehensive plan encompassed an eight-year 
period, the first half of which (from 1983 through 1986) was 
devoted to conducting ground and flight operations before the 
experimental prototypes arrived for flight testing. The power 
plant, external fuel tanks, on-board radar set, digital flight 
control system etc. were all finished up during that time. 
  The whole program, proceeding from dedicated tasks, was 
subdivided into stages. Responsibility was divided in clear-cut 
fashion between the customer and the principal developer firm in 
each of the stages (depending on the content of the operations, 
the tasks that faced the testing team and specific 
organizational and departmental features), both on questions of 
both logistical and metrological support and in the performance 
of concrete experimental research. Questions of a financial and 
economic nature were comprehensively discussed therein. 
  The dedicated planning of operations was furthermore 
oriented 
first and foremost toward the widespread utilization of 
supermodern computers, providing for the processing and analysis 
of information in real time; toward modeling and the active 
management of the flight experiment in conjunction with the 
testing, which made it possible to obtain more complete data 
promptly; and, toward reducing risks when making the test 
flights. The program envisaged, aside form this, the separate 
finishing up and comprehensive check-out of the functionality of 
various systems of the aircraft system depending on the degree 
of their completion. It must be noted that the start of the next 
stage of the operations did not depend on the completion times 
of the prior one. Most of the types of testing were conducted in 
parallel, with a regard for the planned delivery of experimental 
aircraft and their constituent elements. This procedure made it 
possible to augment the quality of the constituent systems and 
the aircraft as a whole as early as during the course of the 
testing itself, in essence realizing the principle of "separate 
start--simultaneous finish." 
  The first experimental F-15E was officially turned over to 
the Air Force Flight Center for further testing just two months 
after making its first flight (it was required by the developer 
to clarify the allowable flight modes). The preliminary 
refinement testing of the principal constituent parts of the 
aircraft system was started at once at the flight center in 
accordance with the procedure stipulated by the U.S. Department 
of Defense. The autonomous and comprehensive verification of the 
functionality of the on-board electronics equipment, 
navigational and flight-control gear and weapons systems was 
accomplished chiefly using flying laboratories and specialized 
land bases. The effectiveness of the new combat aircraft as a 
whole was subsequently evaluated. 
  Field testing was conducted, in parallel with the pursuit of 
this set of measures, by the corresponding subunits of the Air 
Force under a so-called accelerated program--the combat 
qualities and operational suitability of the aircraft were 
comprehensively evaluated, overall guidelines for raising them 
were devised and the retraining of flight, engineering and 
technical personnel was conducted. The initial combat flight of 
the F-15E was thus provided for, as was planned, in the middle 
of 1990. 
  The performance of testing and refinement of the aircraft in 
such a short time (just four years) was largely facilitated by 
the observance of the optimal schedule for the delivery of 
experimental prototypes (three the first year, two the second 
and one the third) and the high rate of test flights (an average 
of ten per aircraft per month). The latter was achieved thanks 
to the efficient utilization of those airfield means that 
supported the possibility of the safe performance of flights 
virtually around the clock and under any weather conditions, the 
efficient management of the flight experiment from the ground, 
the processing and analysis of flight information in real time, 
the aerial refueling of the aircraft while performing individual 
tasks and a host of other measures, including some of an 
organizational-technical nature. 
  A large proportionate share of new structural and design 
ideas being embodied for the first time in the aerodynamic 
configuration, aircraft and weapons control systems, piloting 
and navigational equipment and on-board defensive systems was 
typical of the Su-27, as opposed to the F-15E. The testing of 
the Su-27 was conducted in accordance with the practices of many 
years that have taken shape here, which are based to a certain 
extent on prevailing statutes on the procedure for creating 
aircraft for military purposes. The fulfillment of the whole 
flight program, according to the results of which the decision 
was made to put the aircraft system into service, required about 
13 (!) years--three times more than the Americans needed to test 
and adopt the F-15E. Such a prolonged period for the testing of 
the Su-27 by today's standards, aside from the other reasons 
indicated, was also connected with the poor flight return on the 
inventory of experimental aircraft (an average of four flights a 
month per aircraft). 
  The following should be kept in mind first and foremost in 
discussing the quality of the latest domestic combat aircraft. 
The look of the "standard" prototype, as well as recommendations 
pertaining to the procedure for putting it into service and 
submitting it for series production, was formulated according to 
the results of state testing--which does not include, as has 
already been emphasized, specific questions of field testing--in 
accordance with prevailing directive documents governing the 
course of testing and the adoption of combat aircraft into 
service. The final decision is made by the government, as 
represented by the Ministry of Defense. State interests, 
connected first and foremost with the plans for equipping the 
Air Forces (or Navy) with a combat aircraft system, the process 
of assimilating new production technologies and the functional 
aging of the aircraft, and conditioned in particular by the 
duration of the period of its creation, are entirely naturally 
taken into account therein. This, and a host of other aspects, 
could have a marked impact on the decision on the fate of a 
prototype even before its field testing, during which experience 
in the operation and combat application of the new aircraft is 
accumulated. The elimination of a number of shortcomings 
revealed in the course of that testing and the making of the 
necessary refinements to individual constituent parts of the 
aircraft system, under the procedure that exists here, are 
accomplished in the stage of series production, which slows the 
process of the entry of the new aircraft into service as a 
result. 
  In order for this not to happen, it is essential, in our 
opinion, to make a fundamental review ahead of time of the basic 
principles for the organization of operations in the creation of 
new combat aircraft with an orientation toward foreign 
experience (and first and foremost the United States). And we 
would like to single out the basic steps aimed at reducing the 
time frames and material expenditures in developing aviation 
hardware, as well as increasing its quality, in this regard. 
  The program for the creation and field adoption of combat 
aircraft, it seems to us, should be formulated and realized by a 
collegial body of the type of a state interagency council, 
headed by a supervisor of the program (named either by the 
general customer or the lead executor) who would exercise 
overall leadership and coordination of the work, answer for its 
performance in the required amount and be given the powers of a 
legal person to conclude contracts, expend financial resources, 
perform monitoring, employ sanctions etc. 
  A comprehensive program containing all the types of 
operations and the measures supporting them that are required 
for the scientific and technical substantiation of the TTZ and 
the performance of experimental design (design engineering, 
manufacture and testing), in an amount necessary for the 
evaluation of the constituent elements and the prototype as a 
whole in accordance with the preliminary specifications and the 
overall technical requirements of the Ministry of Defense, 
should be at the foundation of the activity of the council. 
  A joint testing team, composed of representatives of the 
corresponding organizations of the customer and the executor, 
should be one of the principal structural subdivisions of the 
council. Its direct participation in operations at all stages of 
the creation of an aircraft system--from the formulation of the 
TTZ right through to its adoption in line units--is mandatory 
therein. 
  The testing team should become the principal executor of the 
schedule of flight testing, which envisages a whole set of 
operations to refine the prototype as well as to perform field 
testing, according to a program whose fulfillment would make it 
possible to draw fully substantiated conclusions on the 
expediency of putting the aircraft into service and starting its 
series production. 
  The combat aircraft systems being created should complete 
joint (with the simultaneous participation of the executor and 
the customer) state testing (SGI). SGI, as compared to the 
flight-design or state testing that is currently conducted by 
these agencies independently, has the following advantages: 
  --the overall organization of the planning, management and 
monitoring of the preparation and performance of flight and 
ground operations would undoubtedly lead to a reduction in the 
expenditures of time and material resources, including through 
an increase in the rate and efficacy of test flights; 
  --the implementation of flexible planning would provide an 
opportunity to adjust the course of operations at various stages 
in the creation of an aircraft system, and to make timely 
decisions in that regard; 
  --uniform requirements would finally be devised for 
test-track complexes, target equipment at test ranges, the 
technological support of operations and the techniques for 
evaluating the characteristics of a prototype being tested; 
  --a real opportunity would appear for the clear-cut 
delimitation of functions and responsibility among all of the 
testing participants on questions of coordination, the efficient 
utilization of the testing physical plant, the experimental and 
auxiliary aircraft inventory, airfield and test-range equipment, 
systems of automated information processing and databases for 
the management of flight experiments that are common to all 
parties; 
  --a unification of the efforts of the highly skilled 
engineering and flight personnel of the testers and the military 
specialists in the operational subunits would certainly have an 
effect on raising the scientific and technical level of 
operations and the safety of the test flights, make it possible 
to resolve issues of the refinement of aircraft systems promptly 
and reduce to a minimum the expenditures of time and the 
consumption of material resources during the period of 
assimilation of series production of the new hardware and the 
start of its entry into service with line units; 
  --SGI, as opposed to the program of aircraft testing being 
practiced today in which the principle of its division according 
to departmental traits is inherent, would envisage its 
realization depending on the requirements for the stage-by-stage 
refinement of the constituent elements of the aircraft system; 
  --a separate stage of SGI could be allotted to measures 
(carried out with the aim of issuing findings for the production 
of a limited lot of the aircraft) whose results would make it 
possible to determine the range of fulfillment of work 
operations projected earlier, and to evaluate in comprehensive 
fashion the conditions for its full-scale series production and 
successful assimilation in line units; 
  --special testing could also be performed (as one of the 
stages in the overall program), by decision of the program 
supervisor, to reveal the specific features of the field 
operation of the prototype and further improvements in its 
combat characteristics. 
  The following must also be noted: preliminary (plant) flight 
testing of the aircraft should be conducted--during the process 
of which it would be possible to evaluate the functionality of 
all systems and, if necessary, bring them to a level that 
reliably supports the safe performance of flights under 
SGI--before beginning SGI. 
  We would like to hope that these recommendations will be 
taken into account to a certain extent when the conceptual 
framework for a new statute on the creation of aircraft for 
military purposes is formulated under today's difficult economic 
conditions. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61018 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Zenit Reconnaissance Satellites Described </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004E Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 41-42 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004E </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Mikhaylovich Frumkin under the rubric </F>
"Without the `Secret' Stamp": "The First Reconnaissance 
Satellite"] 
  [Text] Up until recently, only specialists knew that 
some unannounced areas of work were envisaged, aside from the 
officially indicated ones, under the Kosmos program. 
  One of them was the flights of the Zenit reconnaissance 
satellites. The work on those started in 1956, even before the 
launch of the first artificial Earth satellite in the world, 
with design-flight testing in 1962 and standard operations in 
1963. These spacecraft (later modifications of them) served more 
than 20 years. One of their developers, Yuriy Mikhaylovich 
Frumkin, talks about the first Zenit. 
  Zenit is a heavy satellite intended for the performance of 
detailed photographic reconnaissance, equipped with three 
cameras with a lens focal length of F = one meter, one 
topographic camera (F = 0.2 meter) and radio reconnaissance gear. 
  The cameras were able to take pictures in a small series of 
frames and in long paths. The width of the photographed strip in 
satellite flight at an orbital altitude of H = 200 km 
[kilometers] was 180 km. Long-focus apparatus provided a 
resolution of the pictures equal to 10--12 meters, with the film 
supply sufficient for each spacecraft to take 1,500 frames. 
  The duration of the flight of the satellite, as confirmed by 
flight-design testing, was 8--12 days. The data obtained by the 
radio reconnaissance gear and telemetric information on the 
functioning of on-board systems, the power plant and structural 
elements was transmitted to Earth in radio communications 
sessions. The exposed film was returned to Earth together with 
the camera in a descent section (SA). Flight control was 
accomplished from the Control Center, with the participation of 
many ground and floating command and telemetry stations. Special 
ground services and aircraft also provided for the retrieval and 
appropriate delivery of the descent section that had landed. 
  The Zenit consists of two major sections--the instrument 
section (PO) and the SA. They are connected by a host of 
electrical, hydraulic and other types of communications. The 
descent section has a spherical shape with an outer covering of 
heat-protective coating. The strong and airtight metallic 
covering, with thermal protection applied to it, has three large 
hatches. The cover of one of them is jettisoned to open the 
parachutes as it reaches the ground. The other two are 
technological hatches, and provide for the installation of 
apparatus and equipment. The cover of one holds the portholes 
for the camera gear. The PO is made in the form of two conical 
fairings linked by a cylindrical insert. It is destroyed and 
burns up during passage through the atmosphere with the descent 
section returning from orbit. The configuration of the Zenit 
spacecraft and its mass, shape of the SA and basic functional 
systems in descent and landing are very close to those on the 
Vostok spacecraft. Despite their outward similarity (they were 
developed at roughly the same time), however, they have 
substantial differences (Fig. 1). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-11A>           Fig. 1. Specific features of the structural </FIG>





    The specific nature of the tasks performed by the Zenit 
spacecraft presupposed fitting it with equipment based on new 
systems or considerably upgraded from the Vostok spacecraft. A 
new and quite complex project, requiring the resolution of a 
large number of problematical scientific and technical issues, 
was the special apparatus for photographic and radio 
reconnaissance. Apparatus was created with long-focus lenses. 
The specific features of its operation through multiple-pane 
portholes bearing internal pressure, the effects of 
weightlessness and other factors of flight, along with the small 
volume of the SA, were all taken into account therein. It was 
moreover necessary to ensure the high reliability of the 
apparatus, a broad range of adjustment characteristics, high 
resolution of the pictures obtained and precision in referencing 
them to the terrain. 
  Fundamental difficulties arose in the development of the 
system for orienting the spacecraft. It was necessary to have a 
virtually constant, precise three-axis orientation in the 
orbital system of coordinates in order to photograph the Earth's 
surface and obtain high-quality images, with one of those axes 
tracking the direction of the Earth in the orbital movement of 
the craft. The Zenit craft was able to realize this mode during 
flight testing for the first time in space science. The 
orientation system performed "rapid" programmed revolutions 
across a wide range of angles in order to expand the 
opportunities to obtain photographic information from the 
satellite, which made it possible to take pictures of areas 
located at a considerable distance from the flight path of the 
satellite. The orientation of the system was structured on the 
basis of fundamentally new optical and gyroscopic sensors, using 
logic blocks with a complex functional algorithm and 
multiple-nozzle control elements with economical modes for the 
consumption of the working medium (nitrogen). The principal 
units of this system were located in the instrument section, 
while the micromotors, tanks with the reserves of the working 
medium and optical sensors were mounted on its outer surface. 
  The control system for the on-board complex that provided 
the 
logic and electric-power control of all on-board apparatus was 
also qualitatively altered. The necessity of flexibility in the 
operational control of the photographic gear, its adjustment 
depending on the flight altitude, illumination of the Earth's 
surface, location, planned length of the picture track and much 
more required the creation of a complex program-logic device 
with a radiotechnical channel for the on-board program radio 
line. This was an innovation in the radiotechnical systems of 
spacecraft. 
  A number of difficult problems had to be solved by the 
developers of the system to maintain the thermal conditions of 
the satellite. The long-focus camera set the terms, since the 
quality of the pictures and their resolution were directly 
dependent on the range and rate of change of the temperature of 
the lens, the camera as a whole and the porthole. The 
maintenance of the temperature of the gas with a precision of 
about one degree posed a difficult engineering task in the face 
of the marked fluctuations in the values of the internal and 
external thermal fluxes. 
  The Zenit, as a secret device, had to meet special 
requirements, and systems were thus included in it for 
self-destruction in emergency situations (emergency detonation 
of the craft) and radio telemetry for the radio reconnaissance 
gear, as well as a means of protecting the information etc. 
  The design engineering of the Zenit spacecraft was performed 
on the basis of broad cooperation among scientific-research and 
experimental-design enterprises and major centers equipped with 
complex systems and devices for the experimental ground 
run-through of the satellite as a whole and its systems and 
assemblies, in close interaction with the customer, the Ministry 
of Defense, including using test-range services as well as the 
Kuybyshev OKB-1 [Experimental Design Bureau 1], to which all of 
the work on this type of spacecraft was transferred upon 
completion of the program of flight-design testing. The lead 
organization was Experimental-Design Bureau No. 1 (OKB-1), 
headed by S. Korolev. 
  Design research went on for two years (starting in 1956), 
and 
concluded with the selection of a configuration for the 
reconnaissance satellite and its principal flight and 
engineering characteristics, as well as the composition and 
operating principles of its on-board systems. 
  The return of the exposed film from orbit to Earth in a 
special capsule was envisaged therein. It was to have a 
relatively small mass, conical shape and be equipped, aside from 
the film cassettes, with the minimally necessary means to ensure 
the physical preservation of the film in flight in the 
atmosphere and in landing, as well as to find the landing 
location. 
  The second section of the satellite was designed to be 
larger. Its shape varied from cylindrical, with small conical or 
spherical ends, to a combination of complex shapes. This 
configuration was selected because an opportunity appeared, 
while reducing the dimensions and mass of the section to return 
to Earth and the required mass of the satellite as a whole, to 
increase the period of its active existence and the volume and 
quality of the information obtained. This was achieved through 
the installation of more advanced gear, an increase in the film 
supply and the working medium for the orientation system, and 
larger-capacity batteries for the electric-power system. 
  At roughly the same time, starting in 1958, the OKB-1 
launched work on the creation of the Vostok manned spacecraft. 
It was designed in two sections of roughly equal mass--an SA 
that was spherical in shape, and a PO whose outer contours were 
two cones, with articulated bases. The same configuration was 
adopted for the reconnaissance satellite under real "pressure" 
from S. Korolev. 
  This was not a simple solution, since the descent section 
was 
adapted to accommodate a person rather than the equipment of a 
reconnaissance satellite. The insistence of the Chief Designer 
and the inventiveness of the participants in the project 
nonetheless made it possible to solve this problem. 
  The Zenit (Fig. 2) as a result came to consist of an 
instrument section and a descent section with dimensions close 
to those of the Vostok spacecraft. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-12A>           Fig. 2. Zenit-2 spacecraft </FIG>





    The PO accommodated units for the orientation system, the 
control of on-board systems, electric-power supply, thermostatic 
gear, radio systems and radio reconnaissance gear, among others. 
Its external surfaces had a host of antennas for the electronic 
gear, an optical sensor for orientation to the sun--used in one 
of the satellite turning modes before the issue of the braking 
command to descend from orbit--and an infrared vertical 
reference, which could also be used for orientation before 
descent from orbit. There were also rocket motors for 
orientation and tanks with the gas supply. The braking engine 
installation from the design bureau of A. Isayev and the 
radiator of the thermal-regulation system were also located in 
the lower section. 
  The descent section housed, aside from the camera, the 
landing system (a parachute system, automatic devices and 
sensors), means of electric-power supply, control of on-board 
systems, thermal regulation, radio stations to get a bearing on 
the SA, and a system for the autonomous recording of the 
readings of a number of sensors monitoring the process of the 
flight during the descent. A system for the emergency detonation 
of the craft was also installed in the SA (a charge, logic unit 
and sensors), which destroyed the contents of the descent 
section in the event emergency situations arose. 
  The transition to the new configuration, through an 
inconsiderable deviation from the configuration of the 
reconnaissance satellite optimized from a mass standpoint, made 
it possible to reduce the spending for its flight testing, since 
the important stages--deorbiting, descent and landing--had been 
worked out in testing of unmanned satellites and in the first 
manned flights of the Vostok spacecraft. 
  The flight and design testing confirmed the correctness of 
the decision made in 1958. This was one of many examples of the 
intuition and ability of the Chief Designer to evaluate problems 
broadly and comprehensively in the development of complex space 
projects. The results of the design engineering were formulated 
in the middle of 1961. The satellite had already been 
manufactured by this time, had completed a full cycle of ground 
run-through and was at the Baykonur cosmodrome. The flight and 
design testing was completed with the flight of a Zenit launched 
on 19 December 1963 under the name Kosmos-20. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61019 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Interkosmos-25 Satellite Pair Studies Ionosphere, 
Magnetosphere </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004F Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 45-46 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel V. Glebov under the rubric "Under the </F>
'Interkosmos' Program": "A Plasma Experiment"] 
  [Text] The Interkosmos-25 (IK-25) satellite, with orbital 
parameters of apogee 3,083 km [kilometers], perigee 440 km and 
inclination 82.5&deg;, was launched into orbit from Russia's 
Plesetsk cosmodrome using a Tsiklon launch vehicle on 18 
December 1991. The mass of the spacecraft is 1,350 kg 
[kilograms], and the instruments and scientific gear 340 kg. 
  The dampening, orientation and stabilization system provides 
three-axis orientation in an orbital system of coordinates with 
a precision of 25&deg; along the pitch axis and 10&deg; on the 
roll and yaw axes. 
  The goal of the launch is to conduct an active plasma 
experiment (APEKS) for the scientists of various countries, in 
order to continue their basic study of the electrodynamic links 
of the ionosphere and the magnetosphere of Earth within the 
context of the overall Interkosmos program. 
  The magnetic storms and the attendant incursion into the 
planet's atmosphere of powerful flows of active electrons and 
ions leads to the formation of the polar lights, intensive 
bursts of radio noise and other phenomena that affect the 
biosphere and business and economic activity. The mechanism of 
the occurrence, relaxation in the atmosphere and generation of 
wave emissions of such electrons has been largely unclear up to 
now, and it is thus very important to conduct the study and 
model the processes with the injection of electron beams and 
plasma clusters into the ionosphere and magnetosphere of the 
Earth. 
  The possibility of creating a structureless antenna for 
long-range communications using plasma-stream systems of 
generators and emitting systems was verified in practice in the 
course of the scientific experiments. 
  Specialists and organizations from our country, Bulgaria, 
Hungary, Poland, Germany, Rumania, Czechoslovakia and Cuba took 
part in preparing the flight program and developing and 
manufacturing the on-board scientific instruments and ground 
systems. 
  The artificial injection of a beam of electrons and plasma 
from the satellite, with the synchronous measurement of the 
physical parameters of the environment, beam and fields 
generated using two separated spacecraft whose orbits make it 
possible to perform the measurements both at various distances 
(from 0.01 to 1,000--2,000 km) and at various (in relation to 
the areas of excitation of the environment and dissemination of 
the beam) zones of the ionosphere and magnetosphere, was at the 
foundation of the APEKS. The experiment envisaged study of the 
nature of the electrodynamic links of electromagnetic waves in 
the ionosphere and the magnetosphere, determination of the 
radio-emission properties of the modulated particles and plasma 
clusters, research of their dynamics in near-Earth plasma, 
modeling and initiation of the polar lights and radio emissions 
and research on the generation and propagation of waves at 
frequencies of 30 Hz--10 MHz and 0.1 HZ--10 KHz with the 
injection of modulated electron beams and plasma streams into 
the Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere. 
  The scientific gear on the IK-25 includes two sets of 
instruments. The first has the active excitation 
apparatus--accelerators of electrons and plasma--and the second 
has diagnostic apparatus to study the propagation of electron 
energy (ions, flows of charged particles at the satellite), 
parameters of the plasma and low-frequency fluctuations in the 
magnetic field, as well as to measure the temperature of the 
plasma, the electrical and magnetic components of the low- and 
high-frequency electromagnetic emissions, the components of the 
quasi-permanent magnetic and electrical fields and spectral 
analysis of the electrical fields. 
  A subsatellite of 50 kg manufactured in Czechoslovakia was 
released from the IK-25 on 28 December 1991 in accordance with 
the flight program. It moved, without the use of corrective 
means, into an elliptical trajectory on the orbital plane. After 
separation the initial larger axis of the ellipse was about 450 
meters, and the smaller about 220 meters. The distance between 
the satellite and the subsatellite could increase to five 
kilometers in view of the differing friction from the 
atmosphere. There is the possibility of keeping the subsatellite 
at a distance of dozens of meters to a hundred or more 
kilometers for a time sufficient to conduct the experiment using 
the corrective engine installation on the principal craft. 
  The subsatellite is equipped with apparatus that allows it 
to 
measure virtually the same set of physical values as the main 
satellite. The large spectrum of the same types of instruments 
of both satellites is supplemented by a system of technical 
support that includes a radiometer, a decoder of radio commands, 
interactive receivers, an orientation analyzer, a telemetric 
measurements unit and antenna-feeder devices. 
  The results of measurements are recorded on board the 
satellites with the aid of radio-telemetric systems and 
technical support systems. The information from the telemetric 
system is received on Earth by a command and telemetry complex 
on the territory of our country, supported by personnel from the 
space units; from the technical support system the information 
is received by domestic stations at Tarusa, Apatity, Troitsk and 
Medveziye Ozera as well as foreign stations as Panska Ves 
(Czechoslovakia), Neustrelitz (Germany), Havana (Cuba) and Stara 
Zagora (Bulgaria). 
  The flight and the operation of support and scientific 
instruments of the satellite are controlled from the Flight 
Control Center (TsUP) for spacecraft for national-economic and 
scientific purposes (Moscow), while the subsatellite is 
controlled by specialists and technical apparatus from the 
Panska Ves scientific station. The control of both satellites is 
coordinated by the main operations control group at the TsUP. 
  There are three to five communications sessions a day with 
the IK-25 satellite, in the course of which radio monitoring of 
the orbit, the transmission of command programs to the satellite 
and the downloading of telemetric and scientific information are 
accomplished. The on-board scientific apparatus is able to 
function in active and passive modes. The active mode is 
characterized by the injection of electron accelerators and 
plasma against a background of the operation of the remaining 
instruments in conjunction with the radio-telemetric system in 
the information-recording mode. The observations of natural 
geophysical phenomena, in the absence of injections of electron 
beams and plasma streams, is an important part of the program, 
since the spatial and temporal dependencies in 
ionospheric-magnetospheric processes can be researched with the 
aid of the two separated satellites. 
  There is a regular exchange of data among the participants 
in 
the international space program for planning and operational 
control (current ballistic parameters, operating modes of the 
scientific apparatus, readiness for operation of the technical 
gear and reporting on the receipt of telemetric data, among 
others). 
  The APEKS project is being executed successfully. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61020 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Brief Survey of U.S. Imaging Reconnaissance Satellites </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004G Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 46-47 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004G </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences S. Baskov, </F>
Candidate of Technical Sciences A. Dubovoy and A. Kachekan 
(experts from the Association of Practitioners of Space Science) 
under the rubric "Space Science Abroad": "Imaging 
Reconnaissance"] 
  [Text] The start of systematic imaging reconnaissance from 
space was laid down abroad with the launch of the Discoverer-13 
spacecraft by the United States in 1960. It was to perform the 
tasks of detecting Soviet ICBMs, determining their quantities, 
ascertaining their characteristics and degree of vulnerability 
and mapping the territory of the USSR to determine target 
coordinates for American missiles. 
  Spacecraft of this type, depending on the degree of detail 
of 
the information obtained, were divided into survey 
reconnaissance (Samos-P) spacecraft, whose operation continued 
until 1972, and detail reconnaissance (Samos-M) craft, used for 
a longer period (up to 1977). 
  The first reconnaissance satellites were equipped with a 
camera. The exposed film was delivered to Earth in a special 
capsule that was jettisoned from the craft on an assigned 
stretch of its trajectory. A parachute system was actuated at a 
certain altitude, and the capsule descended to the ocean surface 
or was captured in the air by a C-130 aircraft. 
  It should be noted that only 26 of the 38 satellites in the 
Discoverer experimental series were put into orbit, and only 
half the capsules were recovered in the air or found in the 
water. 
  The United States launched the fourth-generation LASP (Low 
Altitude Surveillance Platform) spacecraft in 1971 to replace 
the functions of the Samos-P and Samos-M satellites. The set of 
photographic gear installed on board made it possible to obtain 
pictures of territories and objects with a resolution of 
0.3--0.5 meters at the ground in detail mode and 2.5--3.5 meters 
in survey mode, with the transmission of information by radio 
channel. The satellite, which weighed about 14 tons, had fuel 
reserves that allowed it to change its operating orbital 
altitude from 150 to 230 kilometers, and to adjust it to provide 
for an active existence of six--eight months. The LASPs, like 
the imaging reconnaissance satellites of the prior generations, 
were launched periodically. A Samos-M detail 
photo-reconnaissance satellite was launched, as a rule, in the 
intervals between the end of the functioning of one craft and 
the launch of the next into orbit. There were 20 LASPs launched 
in all. The last launch (in April of 1986) was a failure--the 
launch vehicle blew up in flight. 
  All of the functions for the performance of imaging 
reconnaissance from space have been performed since that time by 
the fifth-generation KH-11 satellites, which were developed on a 
fundamentally new basis. The optical image is formed in them on 
the surface of the light-sensitive element of a CCD 
(charge-coupled device), which transforms light signals of 
varying intensity into electrical ones transmitted in digital 
form through a relay satellite to the ground station at Fort 
Belvoir (Virginia). This information then arrives in real time 
at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in 
Washington, part of the CIA. 
  The KH-11 satellites were launched by Titan-3D and Titan-34D 
launch vehicles into heliosynchronous orbits with parameters of 
inclination 96.2--97.8&deg;, altitude at apogee 500--1,000 km 
and perigee 210--350 km, which allows the satellites to reach 
the areas being monitored at a time that is optimal in the 
lighting conditions of the Earth's surface. 
  The special gear of the KH-11 supports a resolution in the 
visible wavelength spectrum of 0.15--0.18 meters at the ground 
in a photographing strip of 2.8 x 2.8 km, and 0.5--1.7 meters in 
a strip of 90 x 120 km. These resolution values are potential, 
and they can be obtained only under ideal surveillance 
conditions (illumination of the Earth's surface of more than 950 
W/m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  and insignificant effects of atmospheric 
turbulence) and at absolute values of optical contrast. It was 
unsuited, at the same time, for the receipt of photographs at 
night. Cloud cover, which made the surveillance of the territory 
being monitored more difficult, was also an insurmountable 
obstacle for it. 
  One method of overcoming these drawbacks was tried out in 
August 1989, when the Columbia space shuttle placed in orbit a 
spacecraft with gear that functions in the visible and infrared 
bands. 
  This Advanced KH-11 satellite, which was erroneously called 
the KH-12, is able to obtain images in day or at night when 
there are cloud levels of up to four or five. It uses a 
telescope of the Hubble type with a main mirror diameter of 2.5 
meters, light construction with elements of adaptive optics to 
compensate for atmospheric disturbances, a wave front sensor 
(shift interferometer), CCD matrices and the like. 
  The special gear is able to transmit images with a 
resolution 
at the ground in the visible spectrum of 0.08--0.1 meters in a 
strip of 2.8 x 2.8 km or 0.5--1.0 meters in a strip of 90 x 120 
km, and about 0.6--0.8 meters in the infrared band in a strip of 
2.8 x 2.8 km. By operating in the infrared wavelengths, it can 
distinguish cut leaf cover used as camouflage from living 
vegetation and determine the status of objects under 
surveillance. 
  The Advanced KH-11 satellite has the capability to detect 
the 
whole inventory of military hardware and armaments of various 
countries with high probability, and to track their rearming or 
upgrading. 
  A second Advanced KH-11 satellite was placed in orbit in 
February 1990 by the Atlantis spacecraft. It quickly became 
disabled, however. The CIA is planning to bring the number of 
such satellites in orbit to three, which would make it possible 
to accomplish the program of photo reconnaissance of the globe 
to the full extent. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61021 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Articles Not Translated </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  00000000 Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) </F>

<F P=103> 00000000 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  Bon Voyage, Aviatrix! (Colonel (Retired) A. Sinikchiyants) 
C2, 20-21 
  By Call-Up or Calling? (A. Voynov) 2-3 
  The Ka-50: What It Is Like (S. Skrynnikov) 12-15 
  "Hussars of the Heavens" (Lieutenant-Colonel A. Gornov) 
22-25 
  Transoceanic Debut (Captain A. Mizyakovskiy) 26-27 
  Fighters--MiG-23 and Dassault-Breguet Mirage F-1C (M. Levin) 
28-29 
  Aircraft in the Name of the 'Enemy of the People' (V. 
Deberdeyev) 30 
  The "ITU" (Colonel V. Zaretskiy) 30-31 
  Air Aces (P. Bogdanov, A. Shcherbakov) 32-33 
  The Search Continues (N. Yakubovich) 34-35 
  The Wings of Russia (V. Tkachev) 36-38 
  Test Personnel at Baykonur (Major-General V. Menshikov) 
39-40 
  The Flights That Never Happened... (S. Shamsutdinov, I. 
Marinin) 43-44 
  KOSMINFORM 47 
  Eight Hundred and Fifty Combat... (A. Kanevskiy) 48 
  Test Pilot Decorations C3 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61022 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Publication Data </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004I Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004I </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  English title: AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS 
  Russian title: AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA 
  Editor: V.V. Anuchin 
  Publishing house: Voyenizdat 
  Date of publication: March 1993 
  Signed to press: 4 Mar 93 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61023 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Siberian MD: Impact of Incoming Withdrawal Units </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0123A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 15 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0123A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel-General Viktor Andreyevich Kopylov, </F>
commander, Siberian Military District, by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA 
correspondent Aleksandr Veklich: "Siberian MD: Officer 
Companies, Officer Battalions"; date and place not given; first 
paragraph is KRASNAYA ZVEZDA introduction] 
  [Text] In the last 30 months, the Siberian Military 
District has taken in about 100 units and large units formerly 
stationed in distant and neighboring countries. Questions 
relating to problems of providing the necessary level of combat 
readiness and maintaining troop command and control were put by 
our correspondent to Colonel General Viktor Kopylov, commander, 
Siberian Military District. 
  "Our training," said Viktor Andreyevich, "was before and 
remains as the rock-bottom requirement. This, in spite of the 
fact that today it must be organized under conditions of an 
enormous personnel shortage. The table of organization and 
equipment of units and large units is only now being finalized. 
Nevertheless, the district's authorities and the military 
council maintain their viewpoint, even in light of the 
difficulties, that our district, which is far removed from the 
"hot spots," was before and remains as the most favorable 
relative to organizing combat training. As far as the practical 
side of the problem is concerned, I can say that in those units 
in which there are personnel present and combat vehicle crews 
supplied, the people have been especially well-trained in 
accomplishing unexpected missions." 
  [Veklich] Let us make that more definite. Let us assume that 
a motorized rifle regiment receives a combat alert signal. Are 
the regiment's subunits in a position to execute a timely 
departure from their permanent deployment garrisoning location 
with their combat materiel, accomplish a march of let us say 500 
kilometers, and then perform the particular mission assigned? 
  [Kopylov] As far as extreme conditions are concerned, we 
have 
found a way to maintain unit combat capability. We redeploy our 
personnel and equipment so as not to spread too thinly our 
woefully inadequate number of specialists. We reassign some 
specialists to make up for manpower deficits in subunits, so 
that the latter can assume a state of complete readiness to 
undertake any mission. Others are trained to man equipment, in 
the event of an irregular situation, to enable them to move 
combat vehicles out of motor pools before the reserve is 
mobilized. This approach has become associated with the need to 
devote greater attention to individual training of personnel. We 
have come to make more extensive use of fighting vehicle gunnery 
training facilities and simulators. 
  [Veklich] But there is quite a number of units consisting of 
officers only. They sometimes must carry out not only their 
regular duties, but other duties as well, such as guard duty and 
servicing and repair of equipment. 
  [Kopylov] The problem is indeed serious. The conduct of 
company or battalion tactical exercises in reduced-strength 
units produces poor results. Also, an officer who has not worked 
through problems of commander's training and fire control and 
who is lacking personnel to boot simply faces the threat of 
disqualification. With this kind of situation in mind, we in the 
district took the route of creating, on the basis of units, 
reduced-strength officer battalions and companies. This year's 
experience shows that our action has been justified. A young 
school graduate - a platoon leader - who lacks personnel due to 
no fault of ours can in the course of an integrated exercise 
hone his skills both in the role of a BMP [combat infantry 
vehicle] driver-mechanic or sniper, something which will 
undoubtedly be of use to him, and in subunit command and control 
and combat organization. And so it goes up the chain of command, 
to regimental commander. 
  Although we have employed the above procedure as an 
experiment, in the new training year integrated training of 
officers lacking personnel under their command will become a 
part of routine combat training. 
  [Veklich] The Siberian Military District recently 
participated in the operational-strategic command and staff 
exercise "Center." What goals were achieved? 
  [Kopylov] The district was generally rated highly. We 
carried 
out a number of actions on an experimental basis. We drew up 
proposals based on them for submission to the General Staff. 
This included problems that surfaced. For example, uncovered in 
the course of the exercise was a drop in readiness of motor 
vehicles, which in the event of an actual combat situation would 
be supplied to district units. I see the cause as lying in an 
attitude deterioration in the management of motor vehicle 
organizations and of other enterprises that have shifted to the 
market economy for the accomplishment of state tasks. Also, the 
motor vehicle fleet is aging due to a lack of replacement parts. 
It can become completely inoperative. Also leaving something to 
be desired is the professional training possessed by a certain 
number of drivers working for the enterprises. 
  In a word, "Center" made it possible to evaluate the 
district's actual capabilities and set goals to work toward, 
once again based on our capabilities in an environment of 
personnel shortages. 
  [Veklich] Viktor Andreyevich, it is a fact that special 
importance is being attached to troop command and control. What 
are the prospects for providing the district's command and 
control elements with modern automation and communication 
equipment? 
  [Kopylov] We have devised a plan for improving command and 
control facilities; its implementation has already produced 
tangible results. For example, the PVO [air defense] command and 
control facility has been completely automated. We have a 
display system there, and have set up direct communication with 
the PVO strany [country] command and control facility. Thus, we 
were able to reduce district PVO command and control and 
reorganize the cooperation process. By examining the problems of 
air defense, we see solutions in a unified PVO strany system. A 
major role should undoubtedly be played by large units of the 
PVO Voysk [troops] of Russia located in the district's 
territory. We enjoy good communication with them. We also plan 
to undertake certain measures related to reorganizing and 
improving a number of other fixed and field command and control 
facilities. 
  [Veklich] How have those persons who are on duty on the 
basis 
of contract service contributed toward the maintenance of combat 
readiness? 
  [Kopylov] Presently in the district there are about 3,000 
servicemen of that kind. The contract arrangement has enabled us 
to effect a considerable correction in shortages of all 
categories of drivers. Vehicles are now being operated by 
professionals, with the result that the number of district motor 
vehicle accidents has been halved this year. Presently serving 
in a number of military collectives are entire subunits 
consisting of "pros." Even this rather limited experiment shows 
that maximum benefit is derived from service by contractors when 
they are brought together into a company or battalion. This 
makes it possible to provide them with more intensive training. 
  However, I think that there is as yet no firm economic 
backing to bind the contract serviceman to the Armed Forces. In 
my opinion, if a person who has signed a contract to serve for 
three years wishes to receive a discharge after one year, he 
should be made to pay a penalty. 
  [Veklich] Viktor Andreyevich, now for the last question. Is 
it possible that Siberian soldiers may find themselves facing 
the present obviously difficult Siberian winter without heat in 
the barracks, while officers' families may not have a roof over 
their heads? 
  [Kopylov] I take pleasure in saying that this year 
commanders 
of the district's KEU [billing directorate] headed by Colonel 
Grigoriy Kuyan and rear services officers have done much to 
prepare all personnel comfort systems for the long Siberian 
winter. All the district's boiler rooms are in working 
condition, with reserve boilers installed. There is a six-month 
supply of fuel. However, it is true that personnel difficulties 
exist. We are losing qualified rear services specialists to 
places paying half again to twice as much. That is why this 
winter we must continue to resort to assigning conscripts to 
servicing of boiler rooms. 
  Concerning having a roof over one's head, I wish to point 
out 
that we do not have a single case of an officer assigned to a 
withdrawal unit living out in the open. Thus, we made 40 
apartments available to recently arrived aviators. They will be 
assigned another several dozen apartments in the near future. 
That is to say, we act like good hosts to people coming to us 
from beyond the border, even though the number of our people in 
need of an apartment exceeds 3,000. 
  I think that we would be able to resolve the housing problem 
if there were no difficulties with financing. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61024 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   RF Security Council: View From Inside </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0133A Moscow SYN OTECHESTVA in Russian No 49, Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0133A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SYN OTECHESTVA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Valeriy Leonidovich Manilov, Russian </F>
Federation Security Council deputy secretary, by SYN OTECHESTVA 
correspondent; date, place and occasion not specified; under 
rubric "Russia's Vital Interests"; photo of Manilov included] 
  [Text] As is generally known, the Russian Federation 
Security Council was formed a little over a year ago to ensure 
realization of the Russian Federation President's functions in 
governing, shaping domestic, foreign and military policy in the 
security area, preserving Russia's state sovereignty, 
maintaining sociopolitical stability in society, and protecting 
citizen rights and freedoms. Our readers expressed the desire to 
learn more details about the status, functions and powers of 
this constitutional entity established on the basis of the 
Russian Federation Law "On Security." The conversation with 
Security Council Deputy Secretary Valeriy Manilov began with a 
traditional request. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] Valeriy Leonidovich, we would like to 
hear explanations from the horse's mouth, as they say. 
  [Manilov] To put it briefly, the Security Council 
essentially is a collegial, consultative entity which prepares 
the President's decisions in the security area. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] You called the council a collegial 
entity. What is its makeup? 
  [Manilov] The council presently includes 14 of the 
state's top officials. Three are permanent members by position: 
the President, who heads the Security Council; Chairman of the 
Council of Ministers, the Government of Russia; and the Security 
Council secretary. Among the 11 members appointed by the 
President are the ministers of Economy, Defense, Security, 
Internal Affairs, Justice, Ecology and Natural Resources, 
Health, and Finance; Chairman of Goskomfederatsii [State 
Committee of Federation]; and the Director of the Foreign 
Intelligence Service. In jointly deciding vital issues for the 
country under the President's direction, they coordinate and 
unite the efforts of ministries, departments, establishments and 
organizations in developing and implementing policy and strategy 
and ensuring state, economic, social, defense, information, 
ecologic and other kinds of security. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] But Security Council sessions probably 
are preceded by some kind of preparatory work? 
  [Manilov] Of course, an enormous amount. In the 
most general terms we are speaking of a comprehensive systems 
analysis of the development of the domestic and international 
situation and a forecast of its possible changes. A broad range 
of scientific, research and information-analysis structures are 
involved in such an analysis, and the capabilities of 
ministries, departments, and public organizations are used. It 
is on such an integrated basis that--let's put it this 
way--warnings of existing and potential threats to Russia's 
security are developed and proposals for reacting to them and 
recommendations for preventing emergency situations, overcoming 
their consequences, and ensuring stability and law and order in 
the country are formulated. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] Isn't the former Politburo's "hand" 
apparent here? 
  [Manilov] I know that such an analogy, concocted 
by someone for who knows whose need, begins circulating in the 
media from time to time. Despite the seeming significance, it 
is--excuse me for saying so--hollow. Do you know why it is 
absolutely illegitimate to compare the Security Council with the 
Politburo? This seems rudimentary, but unfortunately one has to 
repeat it. The Security Council has a fundamentally different 
mentality, if one can speak about some kind of mentality at all 
as applied to the Politburo. The Security Council is a 
constitutional entity. Its status, functions, and powers are 
clearly and precisely spelled out by law. And like its staff and 
its working entities, the interdepartmental commissions, it 
operates strictly within the framework of the law, on the basis 
of the statute approved by the President and of other 
legislative instruments in the security area. Its decisions are 
formalized by presidential edicts. They are public and open to 
society to the maximum possible extent. Judge for yourself 
whether or not substitution, duplication, let alone usurpation 
of the prerogatives and powers of any authoritative structures 
whatsoever are possible with this. No. I repeat once again: the 
Security Council, in which top officials of our state who are 
personally responsible for organizing its life and activity in 
the most important directions are represented, synthesizes their 
political will, their political wisdom, and their professional 
experience and knowledge into a unified national policy. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] Nevertheless, the Security Council has 
coordinating and monitoring functions? 
  [Manilov] This question touches on a very 
sensitive area, so I would like you to set forth my response to 
it with extreme precision. First. The Security Council does not 
engage in executive-administrative activity. As they say, this 
is the purview of the government, ministries, committees and 
departments. Second. The Security Council has no management 
functions. In accordance with the law, it develops proposals for 
coordinating the work of executive authorities in the process of 
implementing decisions made in the security area. Third. Take 
heed that such coordination is organized not by functions (this 
is the prerogative of the government), but by 
objectives, i.e., not at an executive level, but at a 
political level. And this specifically is what ensures strategic 
coordination of operations and the development and 
implementation of a unified security policy. Fourth. One other 
level of coordination is envisaged by legislative instruments. 
It relates to the development and implementation of federal 
programs for ensuring Russia's security. 
  That is how matters stand with coordination. As for 
monitoring, it is carried out by the Security Council secretary 
and staff with respect to implementation of Security Council 
decisions and presidential edicts in security matters. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] In your opinion, what is the important 
thing in ensuring national security? 
  [Manilov] Generally speaking, there are no 
unimportant, secondary directions and spheres here. I would 
include problems of ensuring economic, defense, ecologic and 
information security and security in the foreign policy area 
among the basic, principal ones. Only their agreed upon, 
coordinated, mutually correlated resolution can be effective. No 
department can cope with them alone. Take ecologic security. The 
state of affairs here is assuming a threatening nature in many 
regions, including Moscow. What kind of air are we breathing? 
What kind of water are we drinking? Will its reserves suffice 
for long? What kind of "habitat" are we leaving for our 
children? Will it be possible to live in it? You can continue 
the list of questions. They must be answered today. Tomorrow 
already may be too late. It is the same with public security, 
for we are speaking essentially about creating conditions for a 
life that is normal and, I would say, free of fear, and about 
forming mechanisms for the functioning of a rule-of-law state 
and a civilian society. And public health protection? Is it 
really possible to underestimate those enormous, fully real, 
tangible threats about which demographic statistics of recent 
time literally shout? Or information security, a concept which 
we did not employ at all until recently. But we are speaking 
about something very serious. Take just one facet of the 
problem--our people's moral and psychological mentality. To what 
values--aesthetic, moral, historical, military-patriotic, 
cultural--is it devoted? Is it permissible to substitute for 
these values, alter them in an offhand way, and break the 
character of the people? For often the information flows which 
bring a cult of violence, spiritual impoverishment and primitive 
sex down on Russians are targeted specifically at this. This is 
national property which must neither be squandered nor crowded 
out by something alien and borrowed. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] Is it possible to say at least a few 
words about defense security? 
  [Manilov] Today new threats to vital interests of 
Russia and its allies have come to replace previous ones, which, 
by the way, still have not been overcome completely. A 
classification of them is given in the "Basic Provisions of 
Russian Military Doctrine" developed by the Security Council and 
adopted in early November. These threats must be parried. 
  And with all the adherence to the priority of peaceful 
means, 
this is impossible to do without the presence of a defense 
potential adequate to Russia's place and role as a great power 
in the modern world. Our Armed Forces are the concentrated, 
realized part of this potential. Their mobility, strength level, 
outfitting, state of supply, and combat readiness are a national 
concern. This concern has two principal points of 
application--material and spiritual. Speaking in a generalized 
way, the former consists of weapons and the latter is the 
readiness to defend the homeland. Together they provide defense 
security. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] Evidently the Security Council staff 
also is structured taking into account the broad spectrum of 
council tasks? 
  [Manilov] You are correct. The structure of the 
Security Council staff has two main units--information analysis 
and coordination. They adjust close, daily interworking with 
federal authorities and management entities and with federation 
components for analyzing and forecasting the situation 
development, developing proposals and recommendations in the 
security area, and preparing and implementing federal programs. 
  One more unit presently is being created--a system of 
interdepartmental commissions. These are basic working entities 
of the Security Council with which the staff operates side by 
side. There are ten. They are called upon to study and prepare 
fundamental proposals on security in appropriate spheres, 
coordinated at the ministerial and departmental level. 
  The staff now is being formed. It is a complex stage, for, 
as 
you know, affairs are organized by humans. The main requirements 
placed on those who come here to work are professionalism, 
decency, and dedication to the job of new Russian statehood. 
  The supertask is to establish a harmonious, hard-working 
collective and an atmosphere of comradeship and responsibility. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] The Security Council approved the 
"Basic Provisions of Russian Federation Military Doctrine." 
Today this document is the focus of attention of politicians, 
political scientists, analysts, sociologists and the military 
here in our country and abroad. What could you say about this 
document? 
  [Manilov] First of all, it is a national document. 
Secondly, it is Russian in spirit and content. Thirdly, it is 
realistic. Fourthly, it is timely. Fifthly, it is legal. It 
would be possible to continue, but it would appear the important 
thing lies elsewhere, in the fact that by adopting the "Basic 
Provisions of Military Doctrine" at such a difficult, highly 
dramatic point in its development, Russia clearly and firmly 
declared adherence to principles of democracy, humanism, nonuse 
of force, and nonintervention in affairs of other states; a 
clear vision of prospects for the country's reform; and a firm 
resolve to protect its interests, the interests of Russia. Of 
course, military doctrine is a topic for a separate conversation. 
  [SYN OTECHESTVA] We hope it will take place. You 
mentioned Russia's interests. We spoke somehow timidly and 
diffidently about this previously. 
  [Manilov] True. Even worse, at times we passed 
over it in silence altogether. But the fact is, vital Russian 
interests--above all the country's territorial integrity, 
sovereignty, economic independence, preservation of natural 
resources and all national property, and spiritual 
originality--are on the one hand an objective reality and on the 
other hand an objective need for normal development of the 
individual, society and the state. And in this sense--pardon me 
for the unintended tautology--any system, including a national 
security system, is vital to that extent to which it meets the 
Motherland's vital interests. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61025 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Aviation Command/Control in Combined-Arms Operation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0131A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 8, Aug 93 
(signed to press 16 Jul 93) pp 24-27 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0131A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lt Col V. Sharnauskas: "Aviation Command and </F>
Control in Combined-Arms (Operations)"] 
  [Text] Army Aviation is rightfully considered the most 
mobile arm of the Ground Troops and moreover possesses a high 
fighting strength. In the hands of a skilled commander, it can 
significantly influence the course of combat operations. The 
experience of combat and operational training of troops and 
staffs indicates that due to low effectiveness of command and 
control, in most cases its capabilities are only half realized. 
  By command and control we mean the purposeful activities of 
commanders and staffs to maintain combat readiness of aviation 
units (subunits) of the Ground Troops, preparing them for a 
battle (operation), and leading them when performing assigned 
missions. Its organizational and technical basis is a command 
and control system which today is viewed as a command and 
control subsystem of the Ground Troops. A close analysis makes 
it possible to talk about the existence of serious problems in 
the structural and functional configuration of command and 
control bodies and facilities if Ground Troops aviation does not 
conform their capabilities to modern conditions. 
  For example, in questions of efficiency and quality of 
command and control, requirements today are being satisfied at 
less than two-thirds the optimal level. 
  In our view, this situation is largely explained by the fact 
that at the front-regiment echelon, two independent systems of 
control posts exist to this day: Ground Troops aviation and 
Front Air Army [FAA] aviation. Elements of the first are: In the 
front--front aviation command posts [KP]; in army-level 
formations--army command posts. Each includes tactical control 
groups [TCG], a vectoring and target designation post [VTDP], 
and a forward air controller control post [FAC CP]. It should be 
emphasized that the control posts of Ground Troops 
aviation are a component part of command posts of combined-arms 
formations. Command and control of frontal aviation large 
units and units is accomplished, as before, through the FAA KP 
and the FAA tactical control center [TCC], which today also 
include their own VTDP, TCG, and FAC. 
  Thus, the timeliness of receiving (transmitting) information 
is decreased, and it is more difficult to organize and maintain 
coordination not only between air components but also with 
ground units. What is more, centralized planning of combat 
employment of aviation is disrupted. 
  The second problem I would like to touch upon is equally 
timely and concerns equipping control posts of Ground Troops 
aviation with communications and automation equipment. 
Unfortunately, the existing equipment does not provide the 
necessary efficiency, and the capabilities for processing, 
storing, and transmitting information to interested echelons are 
insufficient. There is virtually no system of information and 
operational-tactical computational tasks. 
  Thus, communications equipment at the army-division echelon 
provides high speed in the telegraph and telecode mode at 50-75 
bits per second, time stability, and information reliability of 
10&lt;sup&gt; -2&lt;/sup&gt; ...10&lt;sup&gt; -3&lt;/sup&gt; . Is it not a paradox that at 
the regiment-battalion level, the forward air controller 
is deprived of equipment for communications with combined-arms 
subunits, precisely in whose interests aviation is 
performing missions! 
  The radio allocated to the forward air control for 
communicating with helicopters (aircraft) has a limited 
operating range and is not resistant to jamming. This fact makes 
it extremely difficult to organize coordination of aviation with 
ground units (subunits) and does not meet the requirements of 
security of joint combat operations. 
  The situation is no better with command and control bodies 
and facilities being equipped with automation equipment. The 
"Manevr" automated command and control system (front-regiment) 
includes only the aviation combat control group MP-23 command 
and staff vehicle; other levels of the Ground Troops command and 
control system do not have them. 
  Unclear differentiation of the functions of command and 
control bodies and facilities of Ground Troops aviation and 
front air army aviation, and incomplete definition of the duties 
of control post officials in organizing combat employment of 
aviation and command and control of it during an operation 
(combat), also have a negative effect on aviation command and 
control. 
  Incidentally, similar problems also had to be solved by U.S. 
Army command authorities in the early 1980's when army aviation 
was made an independent combat arm. Over the course of several 
years, three interrelated levels were created in the U.S. Army 
Aviation command and control system: Command, coordination of 
operations in the airspace, and air traffic control. The Army 
Corps [AC] Combat Operations Control Center [COCC] has army 
aviation squads from the operations office of the corps 
headquarters and an airspace operations coordination team. The 
division COCC includes an airspace operations coordination group 
[AOCG]. Combat support groups (which organize coordination with 
army aviation) and a brigade staff aviation officer, 
coordinating operations in the airspace over the combat 
operations area, are located at the brigade command post. The 
coordination group is formed when the antitank helicopter 
battalion is transferred to the operational subordination of the 
combined-arms brigade. At the battalion's command post are a 
fire support coordination officer and a staff representative of 
the motorized rifle battalion (tank battalion). 
  The composition of the COCC and AOCG includes an air defense 
officer, tactical and army aviation officers, a field artillery 
officer, an electronic warfare [EW] officer, an air traffic 
control officer, and also support personnel, who all together 
participate in organizing and accomplishing coordination. 
  To increase the effectiveness of command and control, army 
aviation created its own ATMAC automated control system (similar 
to the 485L tactical aviation automated control system). 
  In the future it is planned to equip tactical and army 
aviation aircraft and helicopters with a new system for 
determining the location of troops, installations, and 
communications--the PLRS/JTIDS, which will enable airborne 
objects to determine their location with an accuracy of up to 25 
meters and to exchange information in the data transmission mode 
using the automated control system. (There is virtually 
continuous coordination with the control post of the Ground 
Troops and even with individual objects--tanks, self-propelled 
artillery mounts, surface-to-air missile systems, self-propelled 
antiaircraft guns, infantry fighting vehicles, and so forth). 
  It seems that it is also time for our army aviation to 
determine the directions of improving the command and control 
system. These directions are seen as conducting a set of 
measures of a military scientific, technical, and structural 
nature aimed primarily at increasing the functioning 
effectiveness of the aviation control post system of the Ground 
Troops. 
  In the author's opinion, it is necessary to reorganize the 
system of command and control bodies and aviation control posts 
of the Ground Troops. In particular, it makes sense to make 
wider use of the modular principle of building the control 
posts. The primary module in a motorized rifle (tank) regiment 
may be an aviation control team [ACT] made up of 4-5 people (ACT 
chief; coordination officer; officer for collection, processing, 
and analysis of information on the air and ground situation; and 
1-2 guidance and target designation officers). 
  In a division (brigade) it is desirable to create an 
aviation 
control group [ACG] of 18-20 people. Several independent groups 
can be assigned from it, each of which would include a position 
for a tactical control officer [TCO] of the front air army 
operations group. The ACG must be equipped with a radar with an 
operating range of up to 40 km. 
  In a combined-arms formation (army corps, army) it is 
advisable to have an aviation control center [ACC] with 30-36 
people, in which a front air army operations group [OG] also 
works. 
  For increasing the timeliness and quality of aviation 
command 
and control, closer coordination with Ground Troops units, and 
centralized command and control of weapons of the combat arms, 
it is necessary to locate all the above aviation command and 
control bodies together with the control posts of the missile 
troops and artillery, air defense, and electronic combat. It is 
also necessary to form a main Combat Operations Control Center 
[MCOCC] at a front, a Combat Operations Control Center [COCC] at 
a combined-arms (tank) army, a Combat Operations Control Group 
[COCG] at a division (brigade), and a Combat Operations Control 
Team [COCT] at a regiment. A structural model of the proposed 
system of aviation control posts is shown in the diagram. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-002C-06A>           Structural Model of Proposed System of Aviation Control Posts </FIG>

&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  Aviation tactical control complexes [ATCC] can make a 
significant contribution to increasing the effectiveness of 
command and control of aviation in a battle and operation. 
Equipping them with advanced communications and data 
transmission equipment will ensure complete technical 
compatibility of the ATCC with aviation ground control posts of 
the Ground Troops deployed on the base of the "Manevr" automated 
command and control system and its effective use in the 
interests of both organic and supporting aviation. 
  In addition, for vectoring helicopters to ground and 
airborne 
targets, it makes sense to install a special radar on the 
ATCC's, which would provide an information field for command and 
control of combat formations of Ground Troops aviation in the 
zone of operations of the combined-arms formation. Use of the 
ATCC could ensure not only detection of enemy offensive air 
weapons but also reconnaissance of moving ground targets. 
  Practical implementation of the proposals outlined above, in 
the author's opinion, would make it possible to reach a modern 
level of command and control of Ground Troops aviation and would 
ensure maximum realization of the combat capabilities of units 
and subunits. 
  In conclusion, let us emphasize this thought. In our time, 
command and control, including of forces and assets of Ground 
Troops aviation, is becoming perhaps just as important a factor 
of success as the number of troops (forces) and weapons, and the 
correlation of command and control capabilities of the opposing 
sides often decides the outcome of a battle. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 8 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61026 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Current State of Black Sea Fleet Conflict </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0127B Moscow MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI in Russian No 44, 31 
Oct 93 p 7b </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0127B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by military commentator Aleksandr </F>
Zhilin: "Investigation"; "Black Sea Fleet: Actors and 
Prompters"] 
  [Text] The political crisis that has shaken Russia and 
Ukraine has somewhat dampened the dispute over the future of the 
Black Sea Fleet. But as the presidents deal with their 
parliaments, it seems that "third forces" have joined the 
struggle for the Black Sea Fleet. 
  The two presidents' agreements on the Black Sea Fleet have a 
strange quality: It has become clear with time that each side 
has its own understanding of the accord that was reached. After 
the September meeting at Massandra, where "appropriate 
documents" were signed, it was said, Boris Yeltsin hastened to 
declare that Ukraine was turning its part of the Black Sea Fleet 
over to Russia as payment for accumulated debts. However, Leonid 
Kravchuk unexpectedly declared that he had signed no documents 
on the Black Sea Fleet and considered any bargaining to be 
inappropriate altogether. 
  Such clashes on the political stage do not arise by 
accident. 
When the main actors, waving goodbye to the agreed-upon 
scenario, begin to improvise, it is not hard to guess that each 
is trying to please his own "audience." And if the situation 
starts to become awkward, it is best to leave the game for a 
time. 
<H6>  Interests </H6>
  The problems associated with the Black Sea Fleet have now 
been taken up by state delegations. Their mandates and 
responsibilities are unclear, since the presidents never agreed 
on explicit criteria for dividing the Fleet. Nevertheless, 
certain progress has been made in efforts to solve the problem. 
  On 29-30 September in Moscow, the Russian side insisted on 
drafting an agreement under which the entire Black Sea Fleet 
would be used by Russia. At the same time, Russia expects to 
acquire the part of the Fleet that, under the previous accords, 
was supposed to pass to Ukraine. 
  The Ukrainian delegation proposed its own solution: Russia 
would lease individual Fleet installations, pay compensation to 
Ukraine for environmental damages caused by the Black Sea 
Fleet's activities, and foot the bill for developing the social 
and economic infrastructure. In addition, Ukraine would like to 
maintain joint command of the Black Sea Fleet, while Russia 
would bear virtually the entire burden of financing and 
supplying the Fleet. 
  The latest round of talks was held on 13 October in Kiev. 
Russia did not alter its terms. Ukraine made concessions: It 
agreed to set up working groups that would devise an agreement 
under which Russia would use the entire Black Sea Fleet. This 
could be a mere tactical move designed to allow the Ukrainian 
side to gain time. In any case, this is the view of several 
experts, who point out that as the political delegations debate, 
the military and intelligence services are beginning to step up 
their activities. 
<H6>  Behind the Scenes </H6>
  Strictly speaking, the Ukrainian Security Service and 
Ministry of Defense have never been passive observers in the 
debate over the Black Sea Fleet. According to MOSKOVSKIYE 
NOVOSTI's information, the Ukrainian Security Service has 
repeatedly informed Kravchuk of possible "provocations" in 
Sevastopol being organized by Russian intelligence services. In 
response, Lubyanka has been forced to issue a denial to the 
Ukrainian president and to assure him that it is not interfering 
in the Crimean conflict. In order to avoid unnecessary 
complications, the Russian Ministry of Security has even agreed 
that in the Black Sea Fleet military units under Russian 
jurisdiction, the special departments (military 
counterintelligence) could be Ukrainian; in other words, that 
could belong to the other state. This is unprecedented, since 
counterintelligence officers control classified information, 
attend all official conferences, have their own informers in 
subunits, and so forth. 
  Until recently, military counterintelligence in the 
Ukrainian 
Security Service was headed by General Aleksandr Skipalskiy, a 
notorious figure in chekist circles. In 1982-1984, while serving 
as deputy chief of the military counterintelligence department 
of the Pacific Border District, he become so preoccupied with 
"informal activity" that Japanese smugglers began to classify 
him as a "window-bureaucrat"--their name for officials through 
whom they could smuggle contraband. His Moscow patrons were able 
to protect him from major unpleasantries by sending him to serve 
in the Transbaykal region. 
  The exile ended in 1987, and Skipalskiy was "redeployed" to 
Ukraine as deputy chief of the army military counterintelligence 
department. He befriended Vasiliy Durdinets, chairman of the 
Ukrainian Republican Party, and soon became his deputy. When 
Durdinets was elected first deputy chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet, he installed Skipalskiy as chief of the Ukrainian 
Security Service's military counterintelligence division. 
  Working hard to justify his high appointment, Skipalskiy 
actively exposed "subversive activities" by Russian intelligence 
services in Ukraine. In 1992, through Durdinets, Leonid Kravchuk 
received Skipalskiy's first report to the effect that the 
Russian Chief Intelligence Administration was "preparing 
measures to activate intelligence groups in the Black Sea Fleet 
and special reserve intelligence agents and reactivating secret 
caches of weapons and radio equipment in the Crimea for actions 
against Ukraine." Under this pretext, the Ukrainian Security 
Service dispatched sizable forces and equipment to the region 
"to step up counterintelligence." Skipalskiy was soon promoted 
to general. 
<H6>  Documents </H6>
  To assume that Russian intelligence services are as innocent 
as a child would be to question their professionalism. But the 
Ukrainian Security Service wasn't born yesterday either. 
Documents in MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI's possession indicate that 
Ukrainian intelligence is devoting considerable attention to the 
Crimea. 
  A closed collegium meeting was held in the state 
administration building in Sevastopol on 27 July. It was 
attended by Kuntsevskiy, the Ukrainian Security Service's chief 
for the Crimea and Sevastopol; Rear Admiral Obishchenko, chief 
of the military counterintelligence administration; and Cherniy, 
chief of the counterintelligence administration. They approved a 
plan of measures that merits detailed quotation. It calls for: 
  "1. The establishment in the city of Sevastopol of a 
coordinating council for work in pro-Russian structures, to 
include officials of the military and territorial 
counterintelligence administrations. Major-General Cherniy and 
Yermakov (the president's representative) will be charged with 
immediate supervision of the council. The council's activities 
will be overseen by Mr. Marchuk (chief of the Ukrainian Security 
Service--A. Zh.), who will report on the council's work to the 
Ukrainian president. 
  "2. In order to exert active pressure on pro-Russian 
structures in Sevastopol and to encourage the initiative of 
Ukrainian patriotic forces in the Crimea, to hold a general 
plenary meeting of Ukrainian structures by 15 August; to begin 
forming resistance columns. Groups of Ukrainians displaying 
national symbols are to put up resistance to demonstrations by 
the Russian population of Sevastopol, in order to create the 
impression of a struggle against an `occupation regime.' The 
responsible officials are Mr. Obishchenko and Mr. Kuntsevskiy. 
The operation will be overseen by Mr. Cherniy. 
  "3. In carrying out day-to-day efforts to discredit 
Russian structures in Sevastopol and in the Crimea as a whole, 
especially during rallies and demonstrations, fighting groups 
consisting of UNSO-UPA [Ukrainian People's Self-Defense] members 
are to be set up in the resistance columns; their mission will 
be to end a state of calm at such demonstrations and meetings. 
It is especially advisable to carry out actions with respect to 
specific individuals (activists), and to assign responsibility 
for possible consequences on Moscow forces. In order to carry 
out this decision, a group of 150 reliable UNSO-UPA fighters are 
to be sent from Kiev prior to 1 September. Mr. Obishchenko will 
be charged with framing the mission and providing accommodations 
for and working with the UNSO-UPA fighters. 
  "4. To direct the mass media to organize a systematic 
effort to discredit Russian policy in the Crimea and in the 
nearby foreign countries. This work will be organized by 
Yermakov and Generak Cherniy. 
  5. To set up close surveillance of leaders of 
pro-Russian structures and members of the Black Sea Fleet 
Military Council." 
<H6>  Motives </H6>
  Who needs such questionable actions, and why? 
  "Ukraine's political and military leaders know that if they 
unable to obtain a sizable sum for the Black Sea Fleet from 
Russia and at the same time maintain joint command as a formal 
sign of Ukrainian ownership of part of the Fleet, they will have 
to get rid of the latter at any price. The current financial and 
material-technical state of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense 
allows it to maintain, to at least some extent, a maximum of 25 
percent of the republic's total armed forces. Things are so bad 
in our republic that the collapsing Army is simply starting to 
pose a danger to society," an officer of the Ukrainian Ministry 
of Defense central staff told a MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI 
correspondent. 
  In his opinion, if efforts to bargain for as much as 
possible 
from Russia fail, there will be just one alternative: To create 
a situation in the Crimea such that the presence of Russian 
sailors there will become impossible in both political and 
moral-psychological terms. Then the "humiliated and insulted" 
crews of Russian ships, raising the Andreyevskiy flags, will go 
home on their own. 
<H6>  Intrigues </H6>
  The actions of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry fit into this 
scenario quite well. Former Defense Minister Konstantin Morozov 
issued a number of orders aimed at seizing individual units and 
installations of the Black Sea Fleet. As a result, a major 
conflict was provoked when ship commanders raised the 
Andreyevskiy flags and were prepared to issue an ultimatum to 
officials of both countries. 
  After the presidents' Massandra meeting, a new scandal broke 
out in Sevastopol. Rumors swept the city that the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Defense and Navy were planning a provocation aimed 
at "torpedoing the latest agreements on the Black Sea Fleet." 
  According to confidential information from the central staff 
of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry, the plan was as follows. A 
"political-criminal incident" would be provoked in the 
Sevastopol garrison--with casualties, if possible. This would 
create a compelling pretext to impose a state of emergency in 
Sevastopol. The sailors' response would be clear: The 
Andreyevskiy flag would be raised on Black Sea Fleet warships. 
Then Ukraine would accuse Russia of scuttling the accords and 
demand the immediate withdrawal of the "mutinous" ships of a 
foreign power from its territory. 
  Unlike the Security Service's "plan of measures," this 
project was not put down on paper. It exists only in recordings 
of telephone conversations between high-ranking military 
officials. The Ukrainian Ministry of Defense denies these 
reports. However, the facts lead one suspect that rumors of 
impending provocations are not groundless. The attacks on 
Russian units by Ukrainian naval infantrymen, the arrival of 
additional Ukrainian "Berkut" special units in Sevastopol, the 
sending of armored equipment and weapons to the city, including 
flame-throwers, which are designed for combat operations in 
residential quarters, not at sea, and so on--this chain of 
events can hardly be seen as a string of random events. And the 
hasty removal of Defense Ministry Konstantin Morozov and 
Ukrainian Naval Commander Boris Kozhin from their posts and the 
transfer of Ukrainian Security Service counterintelligence chief 
Aleksandr Skipalskiy to a new post tend to support this view. 
  The official explanations for the resignations are 
different, 
needless to say. However, observers think that in reality the 
personnel shuffles stem from the fact that the 
"Morozov-Kozhin-Skipalskiy" triumvirate had tried to play an 
independent role in the Crimean region. In addition, experts 
call attention to General Morozov's desire to establish close 
ties with Ukrainian nationalist forces behind the president's 
back and to assume the role of "savior of the republic's 
sovereignty and national interests." 
<H6>  Outlook </H6>
  The personnel of the Black Sea Fleet are tired of constant 
scandals, provocations, and uncertainty. Speaking at a session 
of the Military Council, the Black Sea Fleet Commander, Admiral 
Eduard Baltin, said bitterly that young officers are leaving 
military service. Twenty-two lieutenants who graduated from 
schools have refused to serve in the Fleet this year alone. 
  According to MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI's information, officers who 
have five or six more years before retirement do not intend to 
leave. But they are also unwilling to remain hostage to 
political ambitions. The question of whether to issue a stern 
ultimatum to Yeltsin and Kravchuk and to force the two 
countries' leaders to finally solve the problem of the Fleet is 
being discussed once more. This is a dangerous symptom, because 
the Black Sea Fleet has enough military power to draw the 
presidents' attention. On the other hand, Yeltsin and Kravchuk 
have utterly exhausted the sailors' confidence, and this is 
greatly fueling aggressive sentiments among the latter. If 
another "ship mutiny" occurs, Eduard Baltin will hardly be able 
to neutralize it the way he did the last time. The commander, 
who has himself become a hostage to the political game, will 
have no more arguments. 
  The protracted Black Sea performance changes genres from one 
act to the next: From a comedy, to a drama--to a tragedy? 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI Dossier: As of October 15, 1993, the 
Black Sea Fleet had received a total of 89,277.7 million 
karbovantsy in credits, including 67,410.7 million karbovantsy 
from the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense (75.5 percent of 
the total), and 21,867.0 million karbovantsy from the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Defense (24.5 percent). 
  The provision of credits to the Fleet by Ukraine has 
declined 
in recent months. The Ukraine's share of Black Sea Fleet 
financing stood at 8.7 percent in August, 6.8 percent in 
September, and 0 in October. 
  The Black Sea Fleet is incurring considerable expenses in 
maintaining Ukrainian military units. In the first nine months 
of this year, 26 Ukrainian military units were given free food 
products valued at 2,668.0 million karbovantsy. The pay for 
compulsory-duty servicemen conscripted from Ukrainian territory 
and serving in the Black Sea Fleet under oath to Ukraine totals 
almost 500.0 million karbovantsy each month. 
  The Black Sea Fleet has appropriated 12,169.7 million 
karbovantsy for construction of housing and social, cultural, 
and consumer-service facilities (including fuel provided to the 
construction administration), while the Ukrainian Navy has 
appropriated 5,965.0 million karbovantsy. 
  The cost of maintaining the Fleet is increased by amounts 
levied by the Ukrainian tax and customs inspectorates. The land 
tax, including an upcoming payment for the second half of the 
year, will amount to almost 13,000.0 million karbovantsy. 
Customs duties on equipment and supplies imported for the Fleet 
amounted to 39,053.6 thousand karbovantsy, including 9,941 
thousand karbovantsy for food, 5,000.0 thousand karbovantsy for 
various supplies, 23,289.3 thousand karbovantsy for fuel, and 
823.3 thousand karbovantsy for motor vehicles. The quarantine 
inspectorate has charged 3,740.0 thousand karbovantsy to inspect 
imported food products. Officers and naval warrant officers 
arriving from Russia are charged 300.0 thousand karbovantsy for 
customs inspection of each container of belongings. 
  The Fleet has paid 13,900.0 thousand karbovantsy in various 
road fees, and 6,300.0 thousand karbovantsy for railroad 
services. 
  The naval engineering service has spent 9,900.0 thousand and 
4,500.0 thousand karbovantsy to maintain Ukrainian motor roads 
and railways, respectively. 
  A $10 fee (or an equivalent sum in karbovantsy at the bank 
exchange rate) is charged for each flight by airplanes from 
Russian territory to the Black Sea Fleet. Five dollars are 
charged for each customs officer who comes to inspect an 
airplane, and that amount is doubled on weekends and holidays. 
  In addition, there are a number of other, smaller duties and 
payments that are impossible to tally. (From a report by the 
chief of the Black Sea Fleet financial service.) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61027 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Crew List from Submarine K-129 (Cont) </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0125B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 11 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0125B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Crew List of Submarine K-129; </F>
Conclusion. Beginning Published in Issues for 13 November and 4 
December 1993"] 
  [Text] 


Crew List of Submarine K-129 

No.    Position          Name and Rank      Year of       Nationality    Place of Induction, Family 
                                            Birth/Year                   and Address (at time of 
                                            Entered                      submarine loss) 
                                            Navy 

41     Engine room       Senior Seaman      1946, 1965    Russian        Borzinsk Rayon Military 
       officer           Yuriy Ivanovich                                 Commissariat [RVK], Chita 
                         Telnov                                          Oblast; mother Matrena 
                                                                         Ivanovna Kulobukhova and 
                                                                         brother; Zabaykalsk 
                                                                         Station, Chita Oblast 

42     Engine-room       Petty Officer 2d   1946/1965     Russian        Blagoveshchensk RVK, Amur 
       officer           Class Petr                                      Oblast; stepfather Yakov 
                         Ivanovich Googe                                 Dmitriyevich Bibe, mother 
                                                                         Yekaterina Petrovna; 
                                                                         Khabarovskiy Kray, Rayon 
                                                                         imeni Lazo, Siga 
                                                                         Settlement, Ussuriyskaya 
                                                                         Ulitsa, 2. 

43     Engine-room       Petty Officer 2d   1945/1964     Russian        Solikamsk RVK, Perm Oblast; 
       officer           Class Viktor                                    wife Yelizaveta 
                         Dmitriyevich                                    Aleksandrova Plyuspina, 
                         Plyuspin                                        father Dmitriy Pavlovich 
                                                                         Plyuspin, stepmother Mariya 
                                                                         Ivanovna Bogdanova, 
                                                                         brother; Perm Oblast, 
                                                                         Krasnovishchersk Rayon, 
                                                                         Ust-Uzh 

44     Senior leading    Senior Seaman      1945/1964     Russian        Aleksandrovsk RVK, Perm 
       stoker            Mikhail                                         Oblast; mother Nadezhda 
                         Vladimirovich                                   Yakovlevna Zvereva; Perm 
                         Zverev                                          Oblast, Yayva, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Energetikov, 60 

45     Engine-room       Petty Officer      1945/1964     Russian        Bakhcharsk RVK, Tomsk 
       officer           1st Class                                       Oblast; mother Lidiya 
                         Gennadiy                                        Moiseyevna Shpak; Tuapse, 
                         Mikhaylovich                                    Ulitsa Pushkina, 6, Apt 1 
                         Shpak 

46     Senior leading    Seaman Yuriy       1946/1965     Russian        Nakhodka RVK, Primorskiy 
       stoker            Vasilyevich                                     Kray; sister Galina 
                         Shishkin                                        Vasilyevna Dulchenko; 
                                                                         Nakhodka, Ulitsa 44, 
                                                                         District 8, Apt 17 

47     Machinist         Seaman Aleksandr   1944/1966     Russian        Skovorodino RVK, Amur 
                         Sergeyevich                                     Oblast; mother Klavdiya 
                         Vasilyev                                        Kuzminichna Vasilyeva; 
                                                                         Skovorodino, Nagornaya, 22 

48     Machinist         Seaman Sergey      1947/1966     Russian        Traktorozavodskiy RVK, 
                         Vladimirovich                                   Chelyabinsk; mother 
                         Osipov                                          Klavdiya Georgiyevna 
                                                                         Osipova, sister; 
                                                                         Chelyabinsk, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Kultury, 106, Apt 7 

49     Machinist         Seaman Gennadiy    1947/1966     Russian        Kirov RVK, Novosibirsk 
                         Ivanovich                                       Oblast; father Ivan 
                         Kravtsov                                        Pavlovich Kravtsov, mother 
                                                                         Mariya Vasilyevna 
                                                                         Kravtsova, two sisters; 
                                                                         Novosibirsk Oblast, Chulym 
                                                                         Rayon, Kokoshino Station 

50     Machinist         Seaman Nikolay     1948/1967     Russian        Pervomayskiy RVK, 
                         Andreyevich                                     Vladivostok; father Andrey 
                         Redkosheyev                                     Mikhaylovich Redkosheyev, 
                                                                         mother Mariya Demyanovna, 
                                                                         brother, two sisters; 
                                                                         Chelyabinsk, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Gertseva, 16, Apt 16 

51     Machinist         Seaman Anatoliy    1948/1967     Russian        Zaigrayevo RVK, Buryat 
                         Semenovich                                      ASSR; father Semen 
                         Kabakov                                         Guryanovich Kabakov, mother 
                                                                         Zinaida Fedoseyevna 
                                                                         Kabakova, brother; 
                                                                         Unegetey, Zpigrayev Rayon, 
                                                                         Buryat ASSR 

52     Machinist         Seaman Ivan        1947/1966     Russian        Yenisey RVK, Krasnoyarskiy 
                         Ivanovich                                       Kray; father Ivan 
                         Odintsev                                        Yefimovich Odintsev, mother 
                                                                         Zinaida Pavlovna; 
                                                                         Lebedevka, Yenisey Rayon, 
                                                                         Krasnoyarsky Kray 

53     Machinist         Seaman Vladimir    1948/1967     Russian        Aleksandrovsk RVK, Sakhalin 
                         Valentinovich                                   Oblast; father Valentin 
                         Kolbin                                          Demyanovich Kolbin, mother 
                                                                         Yekaterina Dmitriyevna, 
                                                                         brother; Sakhalin Oblast, 
                                                                         Mgachi, Lessad, 16 

54     Machinist         Seaman Anatoliy    1948/1967     Russian        Shkotovo RVK, Primorskiy 
                         Ivanovich Rudnik                                Kray; father Ivan 
                                                                         Yakovlevich Rudnik, mother 
                                                                         Mariya Ivanovna, sister, 
                                                                         three brothers; Primorskiy 
                                                                         Kray, Kirov Rayon, 
                                                                         Podgornoye 

55     Electrician's     Warrant Officer    1939/1959     Russian        Taganrog RVK, Rostov 
       mate              (extended                                       Oblast; wife Alda 
                         service) Ivan                                   Nikolayevna Kotova; 
                         Tikhonovich                                     Taganrog, Northern 
                         Kotov                                           Settlement, Second Line, 
                                                                         177 

56     Electrical room   Petty Officer 2d   1945/1964     Udmurt         Glazov RVK, Udmurt ASSR; 
       officer           Class Nikolay                                   father Nikolay Nikitovich 
                         Nikolayevich                                    Bazhenov, mother Agrippina 
                         Bazhenov                                        Ivanovna Bazhenova, three 
                                                                         sisters, brother; Udmurt 
                                                                         ASSR, Glazov Rayon, 
                                                                         Badzymshur 

57     Electrical room   Chief Petty        1945/1964     Russian        Nevskiy RVK, Leningrad; 
       officer           Officer                                         mother Vera Aleksandrovna 
                         (extended                                       Abramova; Leningrad, Ulitsa 
                         service) Nikolay                                Baumana, Bldg 9, Apt 7 
                         Dmitriyevich 
                         Abramov 

58     Electrical room   Senior Seaman      1946/1965     Russian        Dzerzhinskiy RVK, Perm; 
       officer           Vladimir                                        father Grigoriy 
                         Grigoryevich                                    Alekseyevich Oshepkov, 
                         Oshepkov                                        mother Mariya Alekseyevna; 
                                                                         Perm Rayon, N. Ilinsk 

59     Chief             Seaman Vladimir    1946/1965     Russian        Ordzhonikidze RVK, 
       electrician       Alekseyev                                       Sverdlovsk Oblast; father 
                         Pogodayev                                       Aleksey Ivanovich 
                                                                         Pogodayev, mother Anna 
                                                                         Ivanovna Pogodayeva; 
                                                                         Sverdlovsk, Ulitsa Krasnykh 
                                                                         Kommunarov, 80, Apt 1 

60     Chief electrian   Seaman Leonid      1945/1964     Russian        Kargat RVK, Novosibirsk 
                         Konstantinovich                                 Oblast; father Konstantin 
                         Bozhenko                                        Antonovich Bozhenko, mother 
                                                                         Vera Vasilyevna Bozhenko, 
                                                                         brother; Novosibirsk 
                                                                         Oblast, Kargat, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Sovetskaya, 3, Apt 3 

61     Chief             Seaman Ivan        1947/1966     Russian        Chany RVK, Novosibirsk 
       electrician       Aleksandrovich                                  Oblast; mother Anna 
                         Dasko                                           Grigoryevna, stepfather 
                                                                         Andrey Aleksandrovich 
                                                                         Dering, sister, two 
                                                                         brothers; Novosibirsk 
                                                                         Oblast, Bolotnoye Rayon, 
                                                                         Kornilovo 

62     Electrician       Seaman Aleksandr   1947/1966     Russian        Oktyabrskiy RVK, Omsk; 
                         Nikiforovich                                    father Nikifor Pavlovich 
                         Ozhima                                          Ozhima, mother Anna 
                                                                         Fedorovna Ozhima, brother, 
                                                                         two sisters; Omsk, Ulitsa 
                                                                         8-aya Rabochaya, 20 

63     Electrician       Seaman Vladimir    1946/1966     Russian        Chany RVK, Novosibirsk 
                         Matveyevich                                     Oblast; mother Yefrosinya 
                         Gostev                                          Leontyeva Gosteva, sister, 
                                                                         two brothers; Novosibirsk 
                                                                         Oblast, Chany Rayon, 
                                                                         Chanovskiy Sovkhoz, Bldg 3 

64     Electrician       Seaman Boris       1948/1967     Russian        Satka RVK, Chelyabinsk 
                         Petrovich                                       Oblast; mother Duklida 
                         Torsunov                                        Stepanovna Torsunova, 
                                                                         brother; Chelyabinsk 
                                                                         Oblast, Satka, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Professionalnaya, 70 

65     Electrician       Seaman Aleksandr   1947/1966     Russian        Perm RVK, Perm Oblast; 
                         Nikolayevich                                    father Nikolay Tikhonovich 
                         Toshchevikov                                    Toshchevikov, mother Vera 
                                                                         Ivanovna Toshchevikova; 
                                                                         Yugo-Kamskiy Settlement, 
                                                                         Perm Oblast 

66     Electrician       Seaman Anatoliy    1947/1966     Russian        Krasnoarmeysk RVK, 
                         Afanasyevich                                    Chelyabinsk Oblast; 
                         Dyagtyarev                                      stepfather Anatoliy 
                                                                         Ivanovich Demidov, mother 
                                                                         Mariya Pavlovna Demidova, 
                                                                         brother, three sisters; 
                                                                         Shabaltakh, Krasnoarmeysk 
                                                                         Rayon, Chelyabinsk Oblast 

67     Electrician       Seaman Vladimir    1947/1966     Russian        N-Turinsk RVK, Sverdlovsk 
                         Vasilyevich                                     Oblast; father Vasiliy 
                         Sokolov                                         Pavlovich Sokolov, mother 
                                                                         Yevdokiya Yakovlevich 
                                                                         Sokolova, brother; 
                                                                         Valeryanovsk, Sverdlovsk 
                                                                         Oblast, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Pervomayskaya, 23 

68     Engine-room       Chief Petty        1944/1963     Russian        Oktyabrskiy RVK, 
       petty officer     Officer                                         Novosibirsk; mother 
                         (extended                                       Anastasiya Yegorovna 
                         service)                                        Ivanova; Novosibirsk, 
                         Valentin                                        Ulitsa Dekabristov, 4, Apt 
                         Pavlovich Ivanov                                9 


69     Engine-room       Petty Officer 2d   1946/1965     Russian        Kamensk-Uralskiy City 
       officer           Class Aleksandr                                 Military Commissariat 
                         Dmitriyevich                                    [GVK], Sverdlovsk Oblast; 
                         Polyanskiy                                      mother Aksinya Yefimovna 
                                                                         Polyanskaya, sister; 
                                                                         Kamensk-Uralskiy, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Karla Marksa, 54, Apt 38 

70     Engine-room       Petty Officer 2d   1945/1964     Russian        Tavda RVK, Sverdlovsk 
       officer           Class Mikhail                                   Oblast; mother Agrafena 
                         Seliverstovich                                  Nikolayevna Myaskova; Chem 
                         Savitskiy                                       Settlement, Tavda Rayon, 
                                                                         Sverdlovsk Oblast 

71     Senior            Senior Seaman      1947/1966     Russian        Slyudyanka RVK, Irkutsk 
       engine-room man   Gennadiy                                        Oblast; mother Matrena 
                         Innokentyevich                                  Arkhipovna Kobeleva, three 
                         Kobelev                                         brothers, two sisters; 
                                                                         Akhalik, Tunkinskiy Rayon, 
                                                                         BASSR 

72     Senior            Senior Seaman      1945/1964     Russian        Kemerovo Oblast, Myski RVK; 
       engine-room man   Vladimir                                        mother Yekaterina Antonovna 
                         Mikhaylovich                                    Benener, stepfather Yefim 
                         Sorokin                                         Petrovich Lauman; Myski, 
                                                                         Pritomskiy Quarter, 3, Apt 
                                                                         5 

73     Senior            Seaman Yevgeniy    1947/1966     Russian        Kotelnich RVK, Kirov 
       engine-room man   Konstantinovich                                 Oblast; father Konstantin 
                         Peskov                                          Gavrilovich Peskov, mother, 
                                                                         sister; Biysk, Urzhum 
                                                                         Rayon, Kirov Oblast 

74     Engine-room man   Seaman Aleksandr   1945/1964     Russian        N-Turinsk RVK, Sverdlovsk 
                         Ivanovich                                       Oblast; father Ivan 
                         Yarygin                                         Ivanovich Yarygin, mother 
                                                                         Aleksandra Dmitriyevna 
                                                                         Yargina; Turinsk, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Sovetskaya, 63 

75     Engine-room man   Seaman Aleksandr   1947/1966     Russian        Bodaybo RVK, Irkutsk 
                         Stepanovich                                     Oblast; father Stepan 
                         Kryuchkov                                       Yegorovich Kryuchkov, 
                                                                         mother Iraida Grigoryevna 
                                                                         Kryuchkova, three brothers, 
                                                                         sister; Bodaybo, Aprelskiy 
                                                                         Pereulok 

76     Engine-room man   Seaman Vladimir    1948/1967     Russian        Shalya RVK, Sverdlovsk 
                         Nikolayevich                                    Oblast; father Nikolay 
                         Polyakov                                        Kuzmich Polyakov, mother 
                                                                         Yekaterina Ivanovna 
                                                                         Polyakova; Shamary, Shalya 
                                                                         Rayon, Ulitsa Kalinina, 34 

77     Radiotechnical    Warrant Officer    1934/1953     Russian        Wife Zinaida Mikhaylovna 
       crew officer      (extended                                       Sprishevskaya; 
                         service)                                        Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, 
                         Vladimir                                        Rybachiy, Ulitsa Nakhimova, 
                         Yulianovich                                     41, Apt 5 
                         Sprishevskiy 

78     Sonar officer     Senior Seaman      1947/1966     Russian        Golyshmanovo RVK, Tyumen 
                         Aleksandr                                       Oblast; mother Tatyana 
                         Petrovich                                       Fedorovna Kulikova; 
                         Kulikov                                         Sorochkhan, Tyumen Oblast 

79     Senior sonarman   Seaman Viktor      1947/1966     Russian        Cheremkhovo RVK, Irkutsk 
                         Aleksandrovich                                  Oblast; father Aleksandr 
                         Lokhov                                          Trofimovich Lokhov, mother 
                                                                         Marta Lokhova, brother, 
                                                                         three sisters; Yelan, 
                                                                         Belskiy Rural Soviet, 
                                                                         Cheremkhovo Rayon 

80     Senior sonarman   Seaman Aleksandr   1968/1967     Russian        Nizhne-Ingashskiy RVK, 
                         Aleksandrovich                                  Krasnoyarskiy Kray; father 
                         Pichurin                                        Aleksandr Ivanovich 
                                                                         Pichurin, brother, sister; 
                                                                         Tinskaya, Nizhne-Ingashskiy 
                                                                         Rayon, Krasnoyarskiy Kray 

81     Radiometer        Senior Seaman      1947/1966     Russian        Votkinsk RVK, Udmurt ASSR; 
       Officer           Anatoliy                                        father Sergey Fedorovich 
                         Sergeyevich                                     Naymushin, mother Faina 
                         Naymushin                                       Nikiforovna Naymushina; 
                                                                         Votkinsk, Ulitsa Gorkogo, 
                                                                         65 

82     Senior            Seaman Nikolay     1947/1966     Russian        Votkinsk RVK, Udmurt ASSR; 
       Radiometer        Dmitriyevich                                    father Dmitriy Pavlovich 
       operator          Koshkarev                                       Koshkarev, mother Mariya 
                                                                         Nikolayevna, two brothers, 
                                                                         two sisters; Votkinsk, 
                                                                         Ulitsz Azina, 23 

83     Radiometer        Seaman Oleg        1947/1966     Russian        Oktyabrskiy RVK, 
       operator          Vladimirovich                                   Krasnoyarsk; father 
                         Zubarev                                         Vladimir Mikhaylovich 
                                                                         Zubarev, mother Mariya 
                                                                         Ivanovich, sister; Kansk, 
                                                                         Ulitsa 40 let Oktyabrya, 
                                                                         64, Apt 9 

84     CW orderly        Petty Officer 2d   1946/1965     Russian        Uzhur RVK, Krasnoyarskiy 
                         Class Valeriy                                   Kray; father Mikhail 
                         Mikhaylovich                                    Petrovich Bakhirev, mother 
                         Bakhirev                                        Vera Andreyevna, two 
                                                                         brothers; Uzhur, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Prosveshcheniya, 3 

85     Chief cook        Chief Petty        1941/1960     Russian        Sovetkiy RVK, Krasnoyarskiy 
       instructor        Officer                                         Kray; mother Lyubov 
                         (extended                                       Alekseyevna Labzina; Gorkiy 
                         service) Viktor                                 Oblast, Arzamas Rayon, 
                         Mikhaylovich                                    Knyazevka 
                         Labzin 

86     Chief cook        Senior Seaman      1946/1965     Russian        Kirovo-Chepetsk RVK, Kirov 
                         Leonid                                          Oblast; father Vladimir 
                         Vladimirovich                                   Dmitriyevich Matantsev, 
                         Matantsev                                       stepmother Yuliya 
                                                                         Vasilyevna Matantseva, two 
                                                                         brothers, two sisters; 
                                                                         Kirov Oblast, N-Veshok, 
                                                                         Ulitsa Khalturina, 12 

87     Chief cook        Seaman Gennadiy    1946/1965     Russian        Central RVK, Novokuznetsk; 
                         Viktorovich                                     father Viktor Grigoryevich 
                         Chernitsa                                       Chernitsa, mother Natalya 
                                                                         Spiridonovna Chernitsa, 
                                                                         sister; Abagur, Zemnukhova, 
                                                                         28, Apt 5 

88     Radiometer        Petty Officer 2d   1946/1965     Belorusian     Dzhezkazgan RVK, Karaganda 
       operator          Class Aleksandr                                 Oblast; father Ivan 
       instructor        Ivanovich                                       Aleksandrovich Kuchinskiy, 
                         Kuchinskiy                                      mother Anna Ivanovna 
                                                                         Kuchinskaya, two brothers, 
                                                                         sister; Gomel Oblast, 
                                                                         Petrikov Rayon, Belyy 
                                                                         Pereyezd 

89     Radio telegraph   Petty Officer      1945/1964     Russian        Vladimir GVK, Vladimir 
       officer           1st Class                                       Oblast; father Vladimir 
                         Aleksandr                                       Aleksandrovich Khvatov, 
                         Vladimirovich                                   mother Klavdiya Ivanovna 
                         Khvatov                                         Khvatova; Vladimir, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Frunze, 1-a, Apt 26 

90     Radio telegraph   Petty Officer 2d   1946/1965     Russian        Tambov RVK, Tambov Oblast; 
       officer           Class Anatoliy                                  father Semen Yemelyanovich 
                         Semenovich                                      Chichkanov, mother Tatyana 
                         Chichkanov                                      Pavlovna, two brothers, 
                                                                         five sisters; Tambov 
                                                                         Oblast, Tambov Rayon, 
                                                                         Donskoye 

91     Radio             Seaman Vladimir    1947/1966     Russian        Kholmsk RVK, Sakhalin 
       telegraphist      Vasilyevich                                     Oblast; father Vasiliy 
                         Kozin                                           Ivanovich Kozin; Sakhalin 
                                                                         Oblast, Kholmsk Rayon, 
                                                                         Pushkino, Kolkhoznaya, 62 

92     Radio             Seaman Oleg        1947/1966     Russian        Motovilikhinskiy RVK, Perm; 
       telegraphist      Leonidovich                                     father Leonid Andreyevich 
                         Kruchinin                                       Kruchinin, mother Sofya 
                                                                         Nikolayevna Kruchinina; 
                                                                         Perm, 15, District 23, Apt 
                                                                         7 

93     Apprentice        Seaman Vladimir    1947/1967     Russian        Azov RVK, Rostov Oblast; 
       radio             Mikhaylovich                                    father Mikhail Grigoryevich 
       telegraphist      Plaksa                                          Plaksa; Azov, Ulitsa 
                                                                         Sportivnaya, 28, Apt 4 

94     Navigation        Senior Seaman      1947/1966     Buryat         Angarsk GVK, Irkutsk 
       electrical        Timur                                           Oblast; father Tarkhay 
       officer           Tarkhayevich                                    Tarasovich Mikhaylov, 
                         Mikhaylov                                       mother Ulyana Lavrentyevna 
                                                                         Gavrilova, two brothers, 
                                                                         sister; Irkutsk Oblast, 
                                                                         Angarsk Rayon, Ualar-Khuan 

95     Sonar officer     Senior Seaman      1947/1966     Russian        Cheremkhovo GVK, Irkutsk 
                         Aleksey                                         Oblast; father Vasiliy 
                         Vasilyevich                                     Ivanovich Andreyev, mother 
                         Andreyev                                        Nina Viktorovna Andreyeva; 
                                                                         Cheremkhovo, Pereulok 
                                                                         Ugolnyy, 12 

96     Torpedoman        Seaman Aleksandr   1947/1966     Russian        Central RVK, Khabarovsk; 
                         Vladimirovich                                   father Vladimir 
                         Kozlenko                                        Timofeyevich Kozlenko, 
                                                                         mother Lidiya Ivanovna 
                                                                         Kozlenko; Primorskiy Kray, 
                                                                         Artem, Ulitsa Kolkhoznaya, 
                                                                         75 

97     Senior SPS        Chief Petty        1946/1966     Russian        Tulun RVK, Irkutsk Oblast; 
       specialist        Officer Gennadiy                                wife Vera Gushchina, father 
                         Fedorovich                                      Fedor Fedorovich Gushchin, 
                         Gushchin                                        mother Anna Vanifatyevna; 
                                                                         Tulun, Ulitsa Dachnaya, 4, 
                                                                         Apt 2 

98     Engine-room man   Seaman Georgiy     1947/1966     Russian        Sarapul RVK, Udmurt ASSR; 
                         Ivanovich                                       mother Raisa Ivanovna 
                         Bashkov                                         Moiseyeva; Karkalay 
                                                                         Station, Udmurt ASSR 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61028 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Deputy Chief of GlavKEU on Military Housing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0122A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 15 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0122A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel Nikolay Filippenko, GlavKEU deputy </F>
chief, Russian Federation, by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA correspondent 
Yuriy Viktorov: "Apartment Exchange: A Headache for the 
Military"; date and place not given] 
  [Text] Colonel Nikolay Filippenko, deputy chief of the 
GlavKEU [Main Billeting and Maintenance Directorate], Russian 
Federation Ministry of Defense, answers questions put to him by 
KRASNAYA ZVEZDA correspondent. 
  [Viktorov] Nikolay Nikolayevich, if you do not mind, may we 
start our discussion by considering a real-life situation, one 
in which reader Nataliya Ivanovna Shustova finds herself. "A 
disease of the spinal cord has reduced me to group 2 
disability," she writes. "It is difficult for me to move around. 
There even is no way for me to catch a breath of fresh air, 
since my apartment is located on the first floor, and, this 
being the case, there is no balcony. My husband, who is in 
military service, has submitted a request for exchanging our 
apartment for a similar one, but with a balcony. The housing 
commission turned down the request. I find it most unpleasant to 
face another winter of taking my walks at the window." 
  What kind of advice to give our reader? Her situation is 
indeed unusual. 
  [Filippenko] Following the letter of the law, based on what 
she writes, there are really no grounds for an exchange, since 
Nataliya Ivanovna's family is indeed provided with housing. 
However, in this case we do not wish to act like formalists. 
Therefore, in my view, the garrison's military authorities 
should start looking for some kind of other housing for the 
Shustovs. This is the humanitarian thing to do. 
  [Viktorov] It is not my place to tell you that there is 
quite 
a number of situations similar to the one above throughout the 
Armed Forces. It may be a case of someone's being transferred to 
a new duty station, or a matter of a person's health not 
permitting him to reside in a particular area. And the number of 
housing exchange problems caused by withdrawal of our troops 
from neighboring countries! What do you think about the 
resulting situation? 
  [Filippenko] The exchange situation is extremely difficult. 
The primary cause is that the Ministry of Defense lacks (and 
never did have) an agency charged with the mission of exchanging 
housing for servicemen. This holds true for the CIS, Russia, and 
even the capital garrison. As a rule, all servicemen effect an 
exchange independently, via local offices; in Moscow, for 
example, they turn to Moszhilservis. 
  Nonetheless, reality steps into the picture to force 
involvement of GlavKEU, especially in the event there is a need 
for the Russian side to effect a resolution with a neighboring 
country in this kind of matter. In this case, we communicate our 
concurrence to the deputy commander or to the chief of the KEU 
[billeting and maintenance directorate] of the particular 
military district. Please do not consider this to be something 
ostentatious on our part; it is simply a case of people's 
interests transcending everything else. We try to do our part, 
regardless of how difficult a situation may be. 
  [Viktorov] Nikolay Nikolayevich, is there a legal basis for 
exchanging servicemen's apartments within the framework of the 
former USSR? 
  [Filippenko] Yes. In accordance with an agreement reached in 
February of last year in Minsk, exchange within the framework of 
the CIS is guided by the same rules in effect prior to the 
dissolution of the Union. 
  [Viktorov] How does this pertain to persons who have 
remained 
in the Baltics? 
  [Filippenko] A special provision covers that. In essence, 
the 
Baltics are to be considered distant countries, with whom 
housing exchange will be generally impossible after the 
interstate agreements are completed. There actually is no such 
exchange at present, even though many servicemen and pensioners 
wish to return to Russia. On the other hand, there are virtually 
no persons wishing to settle in the Baltic countries. Take the 
case of Latvia. Even persons of native birth arriving from 
Russia to take up residence there are not being granted 
citizenship. Who wants to be a second-class person? That is why 
no one is settling there. 
  [Viktorov] If exchange of housing is impossible, could there 
be some other arrangement, such as selling? 
  [Filippov] The last round of negotiations held with the 
Latvian side on 15-17 October produced a preliminary agreement 
whereby military pensioners would be granted the right to either 
sell their housing at auction or receive a guarantee of 
compensation for their housing. However, information I have in 
my possession indicates that, for some reason, doubt has been 
cast over this agreement. We will attempt to clear up this issue 
in negotiations. 
  The situation is about the same in Estonia. 
  Much simpler is the situation in Lithuania. There it is 
permitted to privatize housing, and many servicemen in units 
being withdrawn from the area have taken advantage of the 
opportunity by privatizing their apartments and then selling 
them. Some military retirees have acted in the same manner. 
  [Viktorov] Nikolay Nikolayevich, what about the "hot spots"? 
  [Filippov] Let us start with Tajikistan. In essence, we have 
the 201st Motorized Rifle Division left there. An order issued 
by the Ministry of Defense has rendered the division's officers 
and warrant officers eligible for housing in Russian cities. 
  As far as members of the Group of Russian Forces in the 
Transcaucasus is concerned, construction and acquisition of 
housing for them and for members of the SKVO [North Caucasus 
Military District] and other areas of Russia has already been 
initiated. In 1992 and 1993, 976 apartments for the GRVZ [Group 
of Russian Forces in the Transcaucasus] were acquired on Russian 
soil. Plans call for acquiring 150 additional apartments by the 
end of this year. 
  [Viktorov] That pertains to service personnel. There are 
quite a few Ministry of Defense retirees, former SA [Soviet 
Army] laborers and white collar personnel in those "hot spots." 
What about them? 
  [Filippov] Believe me, we take the problems of that category 
of person to heart as well. It is difficult to expect a rapid 
solution to those problems, of course, due to the lean military 
budget. Nonetheless, we are not running away from a search for 
solutions to this most difficult situation. 
  [Viktorov] Nikolay Nikolayevich, the mail received by the 
editors suggests another question we put to you -- that of the 
so-called closed military installations. What is to happen to 
those people who have completed their service and have lost 
contact with the Ministry of Defense but who would like to leave 
those bases? 
  [Filippov] An order issued way back by the Union government 
called for their resettlement in housing to be made available by 
local organs of authority. The process is under way, after a 
fashion, at a pace that is extremely unsatisfactory. It is 
sufficient to say that with last year's requirement for 52,700 
apartments, local soviets provided the Ministry of Defense with 
only 144. The figures for this year are, respectively, 59,057 
and 332. 
  There is a proposal for permitting exchange of this kind of 
housing. This is generally not a good solution, since who would 
wish to take the place vacated by a retiree in a closed military 
installation? 
  It happens that additional "punishment" is heaped upon 
persons residing on the above installations, in that an 
installation is not really closed, but merely enjoying such 
status by declaration of the base's military authorities. This 
kind of act on the part of commanders may be easily explained: 
They fear that new persons will be sent in to occupy the vacated 
housing. Nonetheless, it should be understood that there is no 
excuse for violating the law, even though intentions may be 
good. We maintain a list of closed installations approved for 
the districts. In the event we receive a complaint regarding 
illegal acts on the part of officials, such as hindrance of 
apartment privatization, that is when we step in. 
  Action can be taken at the local level by appealing to the 
district deputy commander for construction and troop billeting. 
In the event a serviceman is not satisfied, he can take the case 
to court. 
  [Viktorov] Do you see a major solution? 
  [Filippov] The problem of housing in closed military 
installations must be resolved in a fundamentally new manner. 
Being worked out presently is an in-service, the "regimental," 
approach. For example, assume that a unit's table of 
organization is such that 500 apartments are required. They are 
built, and they belong to the unit and to none other. Further 
assume that a man completes his active duty and is to depart. To 
go where? To his own apartment, one a lieutenant starts to build 
beginning with his first day of duty. To work toward this end, a 
certain amount of money is deducted from his pay during all the 
years of his active duty and placed into a bank account. The 
necessary amount of money is accumulated in 20 to 25 years, with 
bank interest added. 
  Two or 3 years before leaving the service, the serviceman 
designates the city in which he wishes to settle. The bank 
transmits to that city the particular sum of money for 
application to the housing construction. The military quarters 
thus vacated now become available for a new person joining the 
unit. 
  For this purpose, we wish to organize a special bank, with a 
military insurance company involved. The arrangement is being 
worked out with the apparatus of First Deputy Minister A. 
Kokoshin, the Combined Committee of Apartment-Seeking Servicemen 
of the Moscow Garrison, and the Military Insurance Company. 
  It will require time, of course, to effect a fundamental 
change, to dispense forever with the housing distribution 
system; that is, to do the same as the rest of the civilized 
world. It should be understood that the plan can be possible 
only in the presence of economic and political stability in 
society. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61029 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Military Trade Union Work Supporting Servicemen's Rights </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0124B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 15 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0124B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant Colonel Ivan Ivanyuk: "Wage Agreement </F>
in Army Conditions: Still More Problems Than Solutions"] 
  [Text] This year has been important in a special way for 
the army trade unions. For the first time, all their work has 
been based on the branch wage agreement of the Federation of 
Trade Unions of Armed Forces Workers and Office Employees, the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Defense, and the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Labor, which was announced by the defense 
minister in Order No. 197 in 1993. How has it been carried out, 
and what has it done for Army and Navy civilian personnel? Let 
us attempt to tally some of the results at the end of the year, 
a year that has been difficult from an economic standpoint, 
especially for workers paid from the budget. 
  For the sake of objectivity, it must be said that the 
agreement has worked well even in these difficult conditions. 
Despite the financial difficulties, the Ministry of Defense 
found ways to improve labor remuneration and material 
incentives. Repeated appeals to the government made it possible 
to increase the wage rates up to 50 percent and to earmark up to 
half of the annual wage fund for bonuses. Benefits were 
introduced for education, health, and cultural workers living in 
rural areas; pay was introduced for civilian specialists on 
alert duty; regional wage regulation was improved, and 
supplementary bonuses for uninterrupted service were increased. 
And after these decisions were adopted at the government level, 
the documents did not spend months circulating in ministry 
corridors, as used to be the case, but were quickly sent to the 
units by telegram. It should come as little surprise that they 
were received rather enthusiastically by labor collectives, 
especially Order No. 129 and Order No. 130, which the defense 
minister issued in the first quarter. 
  But closer to the end of the first six months, it became 
clear that efforts to keep up with price increases were not 
succeeding. And Russian presidential Edict No. 842 of 3 June, 
"On Certain Measures to Curb Inflation," essentially blocked 
section three of the branch wage agreement. The issues dealt 
with in that paragraph (payment of leave entitlements, 
insurance, exemption of Defense Ministry organizations from the 
added-value tax, and other measures that significantly improve 
the workers' material, social, and consumer-service situation) 
were submitted to the Russian Federation government for 
consideration and resolution. In July 1993 prices, these 
measures required almost 2 billion rubles. The treasury didn't 
have the money for these things, and it still doesn't today. 
  Meanwhile, the situation is critical. And if Army and Navy 
workers and office employees have not held mass strikes like the 
miners, this is due solely to their high degree of 
conscientiousness and to their special legal situation, which 
does not allow such actions. Veterans remember how even during 
the war years, financing was provided monthly. But today, money 
is distributed only as it becomes available. Funds might be 
distributed several times in one week, but more often there is 
nothing to distribute. And how can you ask a person whose wages 
haven't reached the subsistence minimum lately and, moreover, 
haven't been paid on time, to give his work everything he's got? 
But this has to be done during this of time personnel shortages 
in order to somehow maintain the forces' vital activities. 
  Throughout this period, the Federation of Trade Unions of 
Armed Forces Workers and Office Employees did not sit around 
doing nothing. "We tried to call the attention of the national 
leadership and the Ministry of Defense to the emerging 
situation," said Federation Deputy Chairman Vladimir Volkov. "In 
addition, we took part in setting norms, exercising our right of 
legislative initiative. Very many difficulties, unfortunately, 
stem from the uncertain legal status of civilian personnel in 
the Armed Forces." 
  Of course, the most difficult situation obtains in the near 
foreign countries, where financial problems are many times more 
acute and the status of civilians working in military units is 
altogether unclear. When a Russian citizen went to work, for 
example, in the Western Group of Forces, he knew every last term 
of his contract. But what about in the near foreign countries? 
What are the rights of citizens of republics that do not belong 
to the CIS but in which Russian military units are stationed, if 
they work in these units? To start, we should at least clarify 
the social and legal status of Russian Federation citizens in 
Russia, since they are pursuing careers with the Armed Forces 
voluntarily and under contract. 
  By analogy with the Law "On the Status of Servicemen," the 
executive committee of the Federation of Trade Unions made such 
attempts with the support of the Defense Ministry. But a kind of 
impasse has arisen here too. To expect that the Federal 
Assembly, after its election, will be able to consider such a 
law in the foreseeable future is simply unrealistic, for it will 
inherit many other urgent matters--as well as hundreds of other 
laws that have already undergone various kinds of preliminary 
study--from the Supreme Soviet, and all these things will have 
to be considered. The only realistic option is to change the 
corresponding paragraph in the branch agreement and to ask the 
government to confirm the Statute on Benefits for Civilian 
Personnel of the Russian Federation Armed Forces, in accordance 
with the Law "On Defense." The Federation of Trade Unions, in 
conjunction with the Defense Ministry, is currently studying 
this question. 
  This step is of fundamental importance in and of itself, 
since the civil rights of Army and Navy workers and office 
employees are restricted, albeit less so than those of military 
personnel. And so it is necessary to offset this with certain 
benefits and advantages. Many readers who bring such complaints 
to the newspaper emphasize that what bothers them is not that 
they aren't getting something, but the fact that, in principle, 
they are deprived of the right to establish a claim to anything. 
For example, defense minister Order No. 285, which has regulated 
housing issues in the Army and Navy ever since 1975, states 
explicitly that workers and office employees are to be provided 
with apartments at their place of residence. In other words, 
they do not appear to have the right to even dream of getting 
housing at their place of service. 
  In the new conditions, such a relationship between a worker 
and his employer, in the form of the Defense Ministry, is hardly 
justified -- especially considering the fact that the Defense 
Ministry has one million civilian employees today, and they have 
a very strong influence on the state of affairs in the forces. 
With the cutbacks in the Armed Forces, in accordance with 
defense minister Order No. 295, which took effect this year, 
they are permitted to substitute in the forces for 40 officer 
positions and for more than 200 positions normally held by 
warrant Army and Navy warrant officers, extended-duty 
servicemen, senior sergeants, soldiers, and seamen, and to hold 
such important positions as leading research associates, test 
engineers, designers, chief designers, chiefs of 
apartment-operation services, chiefs of aircraft maintenance 
services, and others. 
  According to some estimates, the number of workers and 
office 
employees could grow by 15 percent in the next few years, and 
they will play an increasingly important role in strengthening 
the country's defense capability. This means that we must work 
to solve their problems too -- to come up with funds, to improve 
the legal foundation, and to observe mutual agreements more 
strictly. This was the subject of a recent meeting of a 
trilateral commission that discussed progress in implementing 
the wage agreement. A decision was taken to extend the agreement 
to 1994. The deadline for assembling and reaching agreement on 
amendments and changes in the document based on the past year's 
experience and on all outstanding problems expired today. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  Note: Major-General Viktor Rudik, chief of the labor and 
wages administration for Russian Armed Forces civilian 
personnel, reports that by decision of the Russian Federation 
Council of Ministers of 7 December 1993, No. 1268, the monthly 
wage rate for category-one of the uniform wage rate for 
budget-sphere workers was set at 16,000 rubles as of 1 December. 
  Based on this, the wages of Defense Ministry workers and 
office employees, in accordance with Russian Defense Minister 
Order No. 130 of March 8, 1993, is being doubled. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61030 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Status, Future Needs of Military Air Transport </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0121A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 16 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0121A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Aleksandr Manushkin: "Will the Ruslan </F>
Stay Up in the Sky? Russia Needs a Program To Develop Military 
Air Transport"] 
  [Text] It was the third day of flying. The An-124 Ruslan 
airship, which took off from Melbourne, Australia, crossed over 
the South Pole, refueled in Brazil and Morocco; then crossed the 
North Pole, refueled once again at one of Russia's Far Eastern 
military airfields; and by the end of the third day closed the 
ring around the globe. I was lucky to participate in this 
flight. Piloted by two crews headed by test pilots Lieutenant 
General of Aviation L. Kozlov and Colonel Yu. Resnitskiy, in 3 
days of flying the Ruslan set seven world and 10 all-Russian 
records. Three years have passed since then, but no one has yet 
been able to either surpass or repeat these accomplishments by 
Russian pilots. The fact that in three days of truly nonstop 
flight the airship never underwent technical maintenance (brief 
landings were made only for refueling) also says something about 
the high operating reliability of the Ruslan. This is the sort 
of aviation equipment Russian military air transport possesses. 
  Military air transport. VTA [military air 
transport] is presently equipped with medium An-12 and Il-76 
airplanes and heavy An-22 Antey and An-124 Ruslan airplanes. All 
of them are outfitted with reliable sighting and navigation 
systems and inter-aircraft navigation systems. This makes it 
possible to airlift troops and equipment, and land airborne 
forces day and night in adverse weather and navigating 
conditions, and in the presence of air defense countermeasures. 
  The An-12 was the first specialized military 
transport airplane built in the Soviet Union. It is capable of 
parachute landing on two platforms weighing a total of 16 tonnes 
or 90 paratroopers, and of taking off from ill-prepared landing 
strips, including dirt strips of limited dimensions. It has 
shown itself to be simple to operate, and to be highly reliable 
in the most diverse geographic and climatic conditions. 
  The An-22 Antey was the world's first heavy 
military air transport airplane. It was introduced two years 
before the similar American C-5 (1969). The dimensions of its 
cargo cabin (length without ramp 26.4 m, width and height 4.4 m 
each) permitted airlifting of almost all combat equipment of the 
ground forces and the equipment of other armed services, which 
practically solved the problem of airlift capability of combat 
equipment in those days. The demand for airplanes capable of 
carrying oversized cargo remains very high even today. 
  The Il-76 (Il-76M, Il-76MD) has been the main 
airplane in VTA since 1974. Its different modifications have a 
maximum lifting capacity of from 28 to 43 tons. Airliner 
turbojet engines allow a cruising speed that is 1.5 times 
greater than that of the An-12. The dimensions of the cargo 
cabin (length 20.0 m, width 3.45 m, height 3.4 m) permit 
parachute landing of three or four platforms with a total weight 
of 42 tons, and make up to 75 percent of the combat equipment of 
the different armed services airliftable. 
  The Ruslan An-124 is the world's largest military 
transport airplane. Its maximum operating take-off weight is 392 
tonnes. The unique dimensions of the cargo cabin (36.5 x 6.4 x 
4.4 m) permit transport of practically all combat equipment of 
the armed services. Possessing a lifting capacity and range that 
are two to three times greater than those of the An-22 and 
Il-76, it consumes 1.5-2 times less fuel per ton of airlifted 
cargo. 
  I have managed to fly aboard all types of VTA airplanes in 
the line of duty. I know first-hand about the missions and 
problems of these air garrisons. There is good reason why 
aviators in miliary air transport are referred to as "laborers 
of the sky." Practically all crews in military air transport 
have experienced runs lasting many days to the most remote 
corners of the country, and to neighboring and distant 
countries. This, when due to the absence of travel money they 
had to eat and sleep aboard the airplane, when a fuel truck or 
an airfield engine starting unit had to be begged or 
"commandeered" from "alien" airports, and other such "life's 
tribulations." And despite the fact that these toilers get 
little in return for their nomadic way of life, they 
conscientiously fulfill their duty, sometimes at the limit of 
human endurance. Together with paratroopers, VTA crews were the 
first to arrive in Afghanistan and the last to leave. They were 
also the first to reach Armenia after the earthquake. In 20 days 
of December 1988 360 VTA airplanes flew over 1,200 sorties. They 
carried 380 truck-mounted cranes, 180 tractors, bulldozers and 
excavators, more than 10,000 tents and yurts, and over 37,000 
tons of other equipment and cargo needed in the rescue efforts. 
  I have been to the air force TsKP (central command post). 
Who 
in the air force flies on days off and even on holidays? Only 
VTA crews. They fly from 50 to 100 sorties daily. Despite the 
shortage of aviation fuel, spare parts and other expendables 
(this topic needs special discussion), the intensity of flying 
in VTA is high. I selected 1 December of this year at random, 
and asked: What routes were the crews flying that day? On this 
day VTA carried out 49 special assignments. (On other days this 
figure can double.) The planned assignments included: 
  a) in the Transcaucasus--10 An-22 and Il-76 airplanes. 
Delivery of food, and transport of military dependents and 
refugees on the return leg; 
  b) in the Western Group of Forces (Germany)--9 An-22 and 
Il-76 airplanes. Planned troop withdrawal; 
  c) in Dushanbe--2 Il-76 airplanes. Delivery of food and 
medicine, and transport of military dependents and soldiers 
discharged into the reserves on the return leg. 
  Five runs to Tiksy, Anadyr, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy and 
Vladivostok to carry food and goods to garrisons in the Far 
North and Far East were planned in the interests of the Central 
Trade Administration. In addition, five VTA regiments flew 
planned training flights on this day. 
  In short, reports tossed out by some mass media suggesting 
that air force airplanes are laid up, that VTA just about 
disintegrated after the USSR collapsed, do not correspond to 
reality, to put it mildly. 


Basic Specifications of Russian Military Transport Airplanes 

Airplane     Year        Cruising     Maximum      Range       Maximum 
type         adopted     speed        cargo        with        ferrying 
                                      capacity     maximum     distance 
                                                   payload 

An-12        1958        480 km/hr    20 tonnes    2,000 km    5,800 km 

An-22        1967        560 km/hr    60 tonnes    5,000 km    11,000 km 
Antey 

Il-76MD      1974        750 km/hr    43 tonnes    4,000 km    7,500 km 

An-124       1988        800 km/hr    120 tonnes   5,000 km    16,000 km 
Ruslan 




Basic Specifications of U.S. Military Transport Airplanes 

Airplane      Year         Cruising      Maximum       Range with   Range with 
type          adopted      speed         cargo         maximum      minimum 
                                         capacity      payload      load 

              From late    520 km/hr     25 tonnes     3,750 km     6,800 km 
              1950s 

              1980         800 km/hr     42.8 tonnes   5,000 km     6,600 km 


              1959         820 km/hr     93 tonnes     6,050 km     9,300 km 

              1983         900 km/hr     111 tonnes    5,200 km     9,550 km 


  Naturally, Russian military air transport suffered 
considerable losses as a result of division of the Army among 
former union republics. Over 200 VTA airplanes remained beyond 
Russia's borders. Moreover, most of them were the latest 
modifications of the Il-76MD, and their flying time was still 
low. However, Russian VTA has basically been reorganized by now. 
Relocated air units are adapting themselves to their new places 
with difficulty, with considerable problems. And of course, VTA 
never stopped combat training for a single day. The Russian 
president, who recently visited Tula and saw the aviators at 
work, had high praise for the skill of air force personnel in 
general and VTA personnel in particular. 
  Of course, as is true with the entire Army, maintenance of 
VTA is an expensive proposition for the state. Each airplane 
costs billions of rubles (for example a new Il-76 costs R6 
billion), and each tonne of aviation fuel costs around R170,000. 
Given the present political and economic turmoil in the country, 
it is difficult, and almost impossible, to preserve and multiply 
the combat potential of VTA. But this is something that has to 
be done. No matter what competent specialists I spoke with, they 
were all unanimous in their opinion: In view of its economic and 
geographic position and political importance in the world arena, 
Russia needs military air transport like it needs air. Our 
country is one of the few states in the world in which there are 
large cities and there are places where entire peoples live and 
which can be reached, as that song goes, only by airplane. Their 
life support requires a huge air and ground transportation 
fleet. Furthermore, Russian territory is significantly greater 
in area for example than the United States. Given the reductions 
in the Army, we can no longer maintain identically strong 
groupings of ground and other forces in different regions. 
Consequently, their mobility is now acquiring very great 
significance. And only military air transport is able to support 
this mobility, to transfer forces quickly as reinforcements into 
a particular region. 
  For example, the USA is also reducing its Army. But it is 
not 
reducing its military air transport--on the contrary it is 
increasing it. 
  The forces and resources of military air transport and 
refueling aviation in the United States are under the Military 
Airlift Command--MAC. (Our refueling airplanes belong to 
strategic aviation.) The United States has one refueling air 
army and two military airlift armies under MAC. Each army 
consists of three strategic airlift wings (C-141 Starlifter, 
C-5A and C-5B Galaxy airplanes) and two tactical airlift wings 
(C-130 Hercules airplanes). According to data available to me 
there are 390 strategic and 640 tactical military transport 
airplanes in MAC today. In a time of full mobilization, the 
United States can bring in over 700 airplanes for strategic 
forces and cargo (this is not counting tactical military air 
transport). This is achieved by using reserves and dual-purpose 
civilian airliners. We, however, cannot use civilian airplanes 
when the need arises. 
  The following examples say something about the high mobility 
of American forces. During the operations of United Nations 
multinational forces in Somalia (Operation Restore Hope), 
transport airplanes of the U.S. Air Force and civilian airplanes 
recruited for these purposes flew over 700 trips and transferred 
over 27,000 personnel and over 15,000 tonnes of cargo. During 
Operation Desert Storm 10,000 sorties were flown, and around 
3,000 persons and over 270,000 tonnes of cargo were carried into 
the Persian Gulf zone from August 1990 to March 1991. 
  In short, mobility of any forces would be unimaginable 
without military air transport. And the Americans, who know how 
to make every dollar count, invest sizable resources into it. 
For example, the forces will soon be receiving the new C-17 
military transporter. Its experimental models have already been 
flying since 1987. Possessing economical engines and equipped 
with an air-to-air refueling system (by the way, all strategic 
military transporters of the USA have such a system), the C-17 
can transport and land all types of organic weapons, forces and 
combat equipment. It is capable of operating from poorly 
prepared and dirt airfields with a short landing strip. 
  So what about us? I am far from the notion that today's 
Russia should compete with the Americans in development of 
military air transport. It would be sufficient to say that the 
fleet of these aircraft is significantly smaller in our country 
than in the USA. Moreover, the missions of Russian VTA differ in 
many ways from the American organization. But as long as we have 
sufficiently powerful air transport (which is also useful to the 
national economy), and if we are thinking about not only 
preserving but also reinforcing VTA for the sake of the entire 
Army's mobility, then we need to consider the future. 
  In my opinion, the future of VTA is uncertain today. All of 
the problems stem from insufficient financing. Had the Soviet 
Union not collapsed, and had the Russian treasury not been 
depleted, VTA would have begun receiving a new military 
transport airplane produced by S. Ilyushin's firm, which is not 
inferior to the American C-17, by as early as the current 
decade. But because of the absence of money, work on this 
aircraft is barely alive, and none of the plans for its 
commissioning are being met. The huge output capacities of 
aviation plants producing the Il-76MD and the An-124 Ruslan are 
currently standing idle, while the air force is unable to place 
orders for them because it has nothing with which to pay for 
them. It would be sufficient to say that in the last 3 years not 
a single airliner has been added to VTA. And in the meantime the 
existing fleet of airplanes is aging, their life is being used 
up. Two Antey aircraft have already served their full useful 
life, and have been written off and dismantled for spare parts. 
Airplanes are standing idle because of a shortage of storage 
batteries and tires (wheels), and because the engines have 
served their useful life. The engines are being repaired at 
plants, but there's no money with which to get them out of hock. 
If money isn't found by 1 January 1994, a third of the Ruslans 
and 12 percent of the Il-76 fleet will have to be laid up. 
  But the airplanes aren't the worst of the problem. People 
have nowhere to live! As of today 5,240 families of servicemen 
just in VTA do not have living quarters. This includes around 
2,000 pilots. This year 564 families received apartments. But 
this is just a drop in the bucket. At this rate, the earliest 
many of the people on today's waiting lists will acquire their 
own roof over their heads will be 9 years from now. The VTA 
commander is keeping a constant finger on the apartment problem. 
He has toured all of "his" garrisons with this problem in mind. 
For example, he reached an agreement with the local 
administration in Taganrog to immediately allocate 20 apartments 
ready for occupancy. A contract was drawn up, but there is money 
to pay for it. The amount--R470 million. Where is this money to 
be had? And in Orenburg, for example, he was able to reach 
agreement with the administration, and people (officers and 
their families) began moving in without making the prepayments. 
But such obliging people are rare today. As a rule they are 
operating according to the principle of the heroes Ilf and 
Petrov: Money in the morning, chairs in the evening. You can't 
sign for anything--such are market relations. 
  Many new VTA garrisons do not even offer conditions for 
normal operation of airplanes. Assume for example that a 
regiment has been relocated to an airfield used previously by 
fighters, which are significantly smaller in size than VTA 
airplanes. The appropriate parking pads are needed, but there 
aren't any. Significantly larger containers for fuel, space for 
technical maintenance units and many, many other things are 
needed. But in the meantime maintenance must be carried on in 
bitter cold, at an airfield exposed to all four winds. People 
sometimes work in inhuman conditions, while receiving their pay 
2-3 months late. Some are unable to endure, the fill out 
discharge applications, and sometimes you can't blame them. But 
the bulk, the core of the military collectives are staying 
together, and continuing to toil. Moreover they are working 
conscientiously. What is keeping them going? It's no longer 
fashionable today to speak in flowery phrases, but I can't find 
any epithets for these people other than "duty," "honor" and 
"conscience." In short, VTA lived in the past, is living now, 
and I think it will go on living in the future. Were the 
country's leadership to find the resources to support it, people 
capable of improving and strengthening military air transport 
are already in place. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61031 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> INTERREGIONAL MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russian-Latvian Talks Stuck on Withdrawal From Skrunda </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0125A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 11 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0125A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Gromak: "Russian Radar at Skrunda Is the </F>
Stumbling Block"] 
  [Text] The regularly scheduled round of Russian-Latvian 
talks has concluded. During the three days, the draft treaty on 
radar in the city of Skrunda was the topic of discussion. During 
the talks, the parties did not reach any fundamental agreement 
on the terms for keeping the Russian radar in Latvia temporarily. 
  The head of the Latvian delegation, Martins Virsis, declined 
to comment on this round of talks. The head of the Soviet 
delegation, Ambassador Sergey Zotov, emphasized in a talk with 
journalists that the "delay in discussing an agreement on the 
radar is postponing the signing of the closely related troop 
withdrawal treaty." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61032 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Budget Shortfalls Lead to Commercialization of Military </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0127A Moscow MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI in Russian No 45, 7 Nov 
93 p 3a </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0127A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Zhilin: "Army: Businessmen </F>
Command Aviation"] 
  [Text] The grave economic crisis in 
Ukraine is dealing a tough blow to the Army. It seems that the 
republic is unable to maintain its armed forces at full strength. 
  National-state ambitions do not allow cutbacks in the armed 
forces. As a result, certain military-commercial hybrids have 
appeared in the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense. For example, 
military-transport aviation, equipped with IL-76 airplanes, is 
being turned over to the control of commercial structures! 
MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI has learned that the 37th Military 
Aviation-Transport Regiment (military unit No. 54918, commanded 
by Colonel Bayev), stationed in the city of Artsiz, is at the 
service of the commercial firms "Atlanta" [Atlanta] and "Yuzhnyy 
bereg Kryma" [Crimean South Shore]. They are financing the 
planes' maintenance, buying aircraft engines and fuel, and 
organizing the retraining of crews for international flights. 
After that, the military pilots will carry out orders from the 
businessmen, hauling cargo. 
  As is commonly known, army airplanes cannot fly certain 
international air routes. In order to avoid complications, the 
Ukrainian entrepreneurs are repainting the military airplanes to 
resemble "civilian airliners." However, this does not alter the 
essential state of affairs. It turns out that the crews of 
military-transport airplanes, whose chief mission is to drop 
assault forces on enemy territory, have begun overflying the 
airfields of foreign countries. In international practice, this 
is nonsense. 
  A noteworthy detail: A deputy commander of the Ukrainian Air 
Force, seeking to justify the commercialization of 
military-transport aviation, said: "The international flight 
experience being gained by our crews could come in very handy 
for us in the event of war, since the pilots will master 
international OVD [joint military operations] and test the 
technical facilities of many foreign airfields. In addition, we 
will be able to invigorate the branch of military intelligence 
associated with air traffic." 
  The Ukrainian military aviation chief is not bluffing. 
Indeed, few military crews get a chance to overfly the airfields 
of a "likely adversary." And special equipment installed on the 
pseudocommercial airliners will make it possible to obtain 
unique intelligence data. 
  We should point out that a similar air regiment stationed in 
Krivoy Rog has already begun making "commercial-intelligence" 
international flights. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61033 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Radetskyy on Ukrainian Contribution to CIS Defense </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2212122393 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 1147 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2212122393 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS special correspondent Vladimir Gondusov] </F>
  [Text] Ashgabat December 22 TASS -- "Ukraine will 
contribute most actively to the work of the Council of Defense 
Ministers of the Commonwealth of Independent States and plans to 
have permanent representatives on the Headuqarters of the CIS 
joint armed forces," Ukrainian Defense Minister General Vitaliy 
Radetskyy told a meeting of the heads of CIS defence ministries 
here today. He noted that the Ukrainian leadership had revised 
its attitude to the CIS military coordinating bodies, from which 
it was previously absent. Today, Ukraine is interested in 
promoting close cooperation with them. 
  Turning to problems of the Black Sea Fleet and nuclear 
armaments, General Radetskyy stressed that his ministry was 
ready to conduct a constructive dialogue with the Russian 
Defense Ministry and other states, interested in the settlement 
of these issues. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61034 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Radetskiy on Changing Stance Toward CIS Joint Forces </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2212120493 Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 1130 
GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2212120493 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS special correspondent Vladimir Gondusov] </F>
  [Text] Ashgabat, 22 December -- Ukraine will be taking the 
most active part in the work of the CIS Council of Defense 
Ministers, and is pursuing the goal of having its permanent 
representatives at the headquarters of the CIS Joint Armed 
Forces. This was stated today by General of the Army Vitaliy 
Radetskiy, the Ukrainian Defense Minister, at a session of the 
heads of military departments of the Commonwealth countries in 
Ashgabat. He noted that the republic's leadership has 
reconsidered its attitude toward the CIS coordinating military 
bodies in which it was not participating earlier. Ukraine is 
interested in cooperation with these military bodies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61035 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> BALTIC STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Latvia's Zemessargi Short of Weapons, Munitions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0124A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 16 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0124A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Gromak: "Upset Because There's Just One </F>
Grenade for Three--Latvia's Zemessargi Don't Want To Give Up 
Weapons Even When Off Duty"] 
  [Text] Riga--The ranks of the 
Zemessargi, the Latvian Republic's popular militia, are growing, 
said republic President Guntis Ulmanis at the second Zemessargi 
conference. But what about its problems? In the view of the 
Zemessargi, they are virtually nonexistent. Just 30 weapons were 
lost this year. If you add the 20 in 1992, the result is 
insignificant--only one weapon has been lost for every 340 
volunteers. 
  The problems lie elsewhere. For example, the personnel of 
the 
18th Zemessargi Battalion were upset that there is just one 
grenade for every three volunteers and that they are forced to 
buy bullets at their own expense. In order to avoid weapons 
losses, it was proposed to improve the way they are kept: 
According to one volunteer, Modris Zermanis, a medical academy 
student, students should be allowed to keep weapons in their 
dormitories. 
  A member of the 23rd Battalion took an even simpler approach 
to this question. He proposed that volunteers be authorized to 
carry weapons not only when in uniform and on duty, but also 
when off duty. The danger of this proposal is obvious: Fifty 
people have died at the hands of these valorous "guardians of 
order" in the republic in 1993. But this clearly doesn't bother 
the Zemessargi. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61036 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Activities of Armenian Military Preparatory School </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0439C Yerevan HAYASTANI HANRAPETUTYUN in Armenian 15 Oct 
93 p 4 </F>

<F P=103> 944K0439C </F>
<F P=104>  Yerevan HAYASTANI HANRAPETUTYUN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Two years ago the special republican boarding school 
named after Field Marshal Hamazasp Babajanian [Babadzhanyan], a 
former Commander of the Armored and Tank Troops, was converted 
into a boarding school for military training by the decision of 
the Armenian Government. On October 18 the school will hold a 
ceremony whereby 100 students who have passed their examinations 
will take their oath to serve their homeland selflessly. Vrezh 
Hovhannisian, the commandant of the [school] battalion, told the 
correspondent of NOYYAN TAPAN: "The students at the school have 
their own special military uniform. They specialize in military 
science and physical education. The young men are trained in 
judo, hand-to-hand combat, mountain climbing, swimming, light 
athletics and skiing. The specialization subjects are taught by 
officers and athletics instructors. Special attention is paid to 
the teaching of English and Russian. In the future it is planned 
to teach the languages of countries neighboring Armenia. 
  The school admits those 14 to 16-year-old young men who 
possess the appropriate physical and mental capabilities." The 
director of the school has visited a U.S. military base where he 
observed first-hand the methods of training American 
professional soldiers. According to the Commandant, some of the 
school's graduates have entered the school of the Karabakh 
liberation struggle and participated in numerous tough battles. 
The school has also signed agreements with Russian military 
training institutions, whereby the graduates of the school are 
able to continue their education at those institutions. The 
Armenian Ministry of Defense will pay for the expenses of such 
continued training. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61037 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Andreasian Replaces Armenian Chief of General Staff </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0439A Yerevan AZG in Armenian 23 Oct 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0439A </F>
<F P=104>  Yerevan AZG </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Yesterday President Levon Ter Petrosian signed a 
decree releasing Norat Ter Grigoriants, first deputy minister of 
defense and chief of the general staff, from his 
responsibilities at his request and appointing Lieutenant 
General Hrach Hmayaki Andreasian to replace him. Circles close 
to the president's staff maintained that this replacement does 
not imply any changes in military policy. The same sources also 
indicated that Norat Ter Grigoriants has not yet been offered a 
new position. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61038 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karabakh Commander on Status of Military Forces </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0440A Yerevan AZG in Armenian 23 Nov 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0440A </F>
<F P=104>  Yerevan AZG </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Samvel Babayan, commander of the Armed </F>
Forces of Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, by correspondent Maksim 
Hovhannisian] 
  [Excerpts] Samvel Babayan was born in Stepanakert in 1965. 
He is a graduate of the local School No. 7. He served in the 
Soviet Army from 1983 through 1985. He has been an active 
participant in the Karabakh movement. He was imprisoned in 1991 
during the Safonov Polyanichko regime. After staying in prison 
for six months he was exchanged with Azerbaijan's deputy chief 
justice who was "kidnaped" by Samvel's comrades headed by his 
brother, Garo. Samvel is one of the organizers of Karabakh's 
first guerrilla squads. During the "Ring" operation his squad 
liberated the Dzamdzor village of the Hadrut region. He then 
participated in the liberation of Khojalu, Kharadakhlu, and 
Shushi. Subsequent military operations were planned and 
implemented under his leadership. He is also a deputy in the 
Supreme Council of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic [NKR]. He is 
married and has two children. Below is an interview with Samvel 
Babayan, commander of the NKR Armed Forces, by Maksim 
Hovhannisian, head of the NKR's information and press 
department. The interview was conducted last week just before 
the regrettable incident at Matakhis [involving an attack on the 
Russian envoy] for which the NKR State Defense Committee 
severely criticized the leadership of the defense forces. 
  [Hovhannisian] Let us begin this interview with the most 
important question: Do we or do we not have an army? 
  [Babayan] We do. Despite all of its flaws, today our 
republic 
has a regular army which is able to defend our borders against 
enemy incursions and ensure that people can work in peace. 
Furthermore, if it becomes necessary to strike at the enemy on 
its own territory to ensure the security of the people, our army 
is capable of accomplishing such tasks. 
  [Hovhannisian] How was the idea of creating a regular army 
born? 
  [Babayan] When we liberated Shushi and opened the Lachin 
corridor, we realized that we needed to create a regular army in 
order to preserve our military gains over the long run. Many 
agreed with that idea but did not take any concrete steps. At 
this point certain mistakes were made. Then the painful period 
of failures began. First we lost Shahumyan, then most of the 
Martakert region. Many people lost faith in our forces. Despair 
became our greatest enemy. 
  In order to overcome this string of failures it was 
necessary 
to launch a decisive counterstrike against the enemy. That could 
only be done by a well-trained regular army, which we did not 
have. 
  At the beginning it was very difficult. Many of the 
guerrilla 
squads refused to obey general orders, and their forces operated 
in a haphazard manner. It was relatively easy to implement our 
plans in the Askeran region and the results were observed 
quickly. 
  The process of creating an army began to move forward in 
August of last year. Of course, it cannot be said that we have 
solved all the problems associated with the creation of an army. 
However, we have established a barracks regime in the army, 
except that a battle proposal by the general command is not 
considered a battle order. Also, orders are carried out in a 
qualified manner, although not always. That is related to the 
training of the army. Mechanisms of army life are being created 
and perfected with each battle. 
  [Hovhannisian] These days there is much talk in the press 
about the offensive operations of the NKR Army. It is said that 
the Army has a vested interest in such operations. 
  [Babayan] Yes, some newspapers have written that everyone 
wants peace except the Army. That is not true. What the Army is 
doing has only two objectives: to ensure the security of the 
population and the inviolability of our state borders and to 
force the enemy to recognize our national rights. All of our 
operations are coordinated with the NKR leadership. Let us take 
the demilitarization of the Kelbajar region. Without that 
operation it would be impossible to return the refugees from 
Martakert to their homes because there was always the danger 
that the enemy could strike from behind. There was a time when 
the panicked residents of Martakert were not only abandoning 
their homes but were also deserting the ranks. Now the situation 
is completely different. Today the borders of that region are 
defended only by the military units of that region. 
  Let us take another example. Why was it necessary to 
demilitarize the city of Agdam? First, it was necessary to stop 
the artillery attacks from Agdam on Askeran and Stepanakert. 
Second, it was necessary to force the enemy to sit at the 
negotiating table. As is known, the first official 
Azeri-Karabakh talks began after the fall of Agdam. However, 
Azerbaijan declined to continue that dialogue at the instigation 
of certain international forces. 
  [Hovhannisian] The world press and international 
organizations hastily condemned the advances of the NKR Army. 
Despite those condemnations, we undertook military operations on 
the southern front. How can that be interpreted? Are we thumbing 
our noses at world opinion? Are we confronting international 
forces? Is not our posture defiant? 
  [Babayan] That is how it appears at first glance, but the 
actual state of affairs tells a completely different story. As 
you know, in 1991 the Azeris occupied 24 villages in Hadrut with 
their "Ring" operation. Second, they were shelling Martuni, 
Hadrut, Edillu and other Armenian population centers as well as 
the Lachin corridor continuously from Fizuli and Kubatlu. Third, 
we made it known to them that things will not end with Agdam and 
that they must reckon with the reality that has been created. It 
is these considerations that prompted the launching of military 
operations on the southwestern front. As a result, there were 
Azeri-Karabakh talks in Moscow sponsored by the Russian 
Federation. It is not a secret for anyone that NKR gained 
international recognition as a party to the conflict only after 
our military successes. People recognize might. I repeat: the 
NKR Army wants peace, and, in my opinion, we must have a strong 
and battleworthy army so that peace will come quickly. 
  The Azeri side requested several times to extend the 
ceasefire. We agreed, although we know very well that they are 
using that time to regroup their forces. We are similarly 
preparing to greet the enemy appropriately. 
  [Hovhannisian] Let us return to the problems associated with 
the creation of an army. 
  [Babayan] The [NKR Army] must be a battleworthy mobile 
entity 
equipped with modern weaponry; it must be ready to strike at the 
enemy at any point in the republic; and it must be able to 
defend our borders on land and in the air. I do not think that 
it is possible for NKR to survive without such an army. 
  [Hovhannisian] That is how it has turned out to be. Perhaps 
one of the peculiarities of the Karabakh movement is that our 
fedayeen [guerrilla] boys have risen to the highest ranks of the 
Army. These boys are patriotic, brave and prepared to defend our 
land, but many of them have no military training. Some of them 
have not even served in the [Soviet] Army. 
  [Babayan] That was the case at the beginning. Today we have 
in our Army hundreds of senior professional officers who have 
received serious training in the Soviet Army. As for the fact 
that many of the commanders are yesterday's fedayeen boys, those 
men have learned the art of war on the battlefield and passed 
muster by hard experience. We have young people who are formally 
trained and who want to serve their homeland in the ranks of the 
NKR Army. They are the real future of our Army. I would like to 
take this opportunity to appeal to all staff officers from 
Karabakh who serve in the armies of Russia and other countries: 
Brothers, return to Karabakh, and let us defend our homeland 
together. 
  [Hovhannisian] What has been the principal accomplishment in 
the creation of the Army? 
  [Babayan] Today every soldier in our Army takes a 
ceremonious 
oath, and the orders of the commanders are being executed 
without objections at all levels. We also managed to end the 
practice of serving in the Army while staying home. Today we are 
strictly maintaining a barracks regime in our military. 
  I also consider an important accomplishment the creation of 
quite normal, technically satisfactory bases for different 
domains of military service. For example, we take pride in our 
tank repair facility where everything has been built on solid 
foundations. 
  Until recently our barracks were housed in buildings 
formerly 
occupied by schools and kindergartens. We have now built, with 
our own resources, barracks with basic facilities, training 
centers for different military units with their own firing 
ranges and other facilities. 
  [Hovhannisian] Doubts have been expressed in the foreign 
press that little Karabakh does not have the economic means to 
acquire such quantities of military equipment and that Armenia 
is helping us. 
  [Babayan] The first part of that statement is true. It is 
true that economically we are not that strong, especially in 
conditions of a blockade, to acquire as many weapons and as much 
ammunition as we have in our hands today. However, they are 
wrong about the sources of such acquisitions. We have captured 
80 percent, if not more, of our military means from the enemy. 
Various anectodes circulate among our soldiers about this 
subject. 
  [Hovhannisian] For example, about one-time-use aircraft and 
tanks provided to us by Ukraine and Turkey through Azerbaijan. 
  [Babayan] As for the question of what is our military 
leadership focusing its attention on at this time, we believe 
that, having been defeated on land, the enemy will try to attack 
by air. Now we are working in that direction, with some success. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61039 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CENTRAL ASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tajik Opposition Leader: Struggle Against Communists to 
Continue </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM2312131593 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 23 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2312131593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Tajikistan Opposition Leader Haji Akbar </F>
Turajonzoda by Arkadiy Dubnov of NOVOYE VREMYA and Dododzhon 
Atovulloyev of CHAROGI RUZ, for IZVESTIYA: date and place not 
stated: "Russian Troops Can Stay in Tajikistan, but on Specific 
Terms, Tajik Opposition Leader Says"] 
  [Text] The former spiritual leader of Tajikistan's Muslims 
is 39 years old. He graduated from the Islamic Institute in 
Tashkent and Jordan University in Amman. He was the qadiqalon 
[Muslim judge who interprets and administers religious law] of 
Tajikistan from 1988 (after the accession to power of the 
People's Front, he was removed from this post and pronounced an 
"enemy of the people.") He was second in command in Central 
Asia's official Islamic hierarchy, a member of the Republic of 
Tajikistan Supreme Soviet Presidium, and he spoke out in favor 
of building a secular state. 
  Our meeting with the former qadi took place in conditions of 
secrecy in the capital of one of the southern republics of the 
CIS. 
  Addressing a press conference in Dushanbe, Turajonzoda once 
said that there are three instances when the qadi is not 
entitled to speak: if he is irritated, if he has not slept 
well, and if he is fasting. When we reminded him of these words 
he smiled and said that, thanks be to Allah, there was nothing 
preventing our work that day. 
  [Dubnov] A year has passed since Imomali Rakhmanov was 
elected chairman of the Tajikistan Supreme Soviet. You were the 
only opposition representative to send a congratulatory telegram 
to Rakhmanov, in which you proclaimed your readiness to promote 
a peaceful settlement to the war among Tajiks. However, you did 
not attend the actual session. Why? 
  [Turajonzoda] I knew Rakhmanov's character. He is a very 
hot-tempered man and a true communist. Despite all that, I 
welcomed his election for the sake of establishing peace and 
tranquillity. 
  But why did I myself fail to take part? I had reliable 
information that there were plans to deal with the opposition at 
the Leninabad session or after its conclusion. "You would be 
better off not going, as I cannot guarantee your safety," 
erstwhile Prime Minister Abdullodzhanov told me. 
  [Dubnov] How do you evaluate the situation in Tajikistan 
today? 
  [Turajonzoda] It was not difficult to predict what is now 
going on in my motherland. A regime which seeks by way of its 
basic task to instill fear in people and not self respect is in 
no state to last long. Absolutely nothing is sacred to these 
people, these authorities. Reviling democracy, and after making 
threats only a year ago to "the entire democratic scum, not only 
in Central Asia, but in Russia too" while swearing fidelity and 
friendship to Russia so as to ask it for aid -- these people 
sing quite a different song in other places. 
  "If we (the government and the opposition) had fought 
against 
Russia together, we would not have the situation we have today, 
and we would not have spent two years fighting one another." 
This is a quotation from an interview given by Abdumadzhid 
Dostiyev [name as transliterated], first deputy chairman of the 
Tajikistan Supreme Soviet, to Iran's KEYHAN. 
  But Imomali Rakhmanov persuaded Afghanistan's President 
Rabbani to help first and foremost the true Tajiks who had come 
to power in Tajikistan (that is, the people of Kulyab) so as to 
prevent Abdullodzhanov's Leninabad clan from "selling the 
republic to Russia and America." I was told about this by 
Borhanoddin Rabbani himself. 
  [Dubnov] And did you try to get in touch with the Russian 
leadership somehow to give it your point of view? 
  [Turajonzoda] I appealed to Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin 
personally on several occasions. To judge from Moscow's policy, 
it can be concluded that Former Security Minister Barannikov and 
Russia's current ambassador in Tajikistan, Mecheslav Senkevich, 
did not present the president with all the information on the 
situation in Tajikistan. 
  However, I am inspired by the Russian president's edict on 
the appointment of a mediator to set up dialogue between the 
government in Dushanbe and the opposition, by Andrey Kozyrev's 
recent statements, and by the meeting between Russian Foreign 
Intelligence Service Chief Yevgeniy Primakov and Said Abdollahi 
Nuri, chairman of the Islamic Movement for the Revival of 
Tajikistan. 
  [Dubnov] The Tajikistan authorities describe you as one of 
the main culprits in the bloodshed. Do you consider yourself 
guilty of anything? 
  [Turajonzoda] Any man who enters the political arena always 
strives for power. I said that I would not seek to achieve any 
kind of state post, and I recognized that I was mistaken when in 
September 1991 I agreed to be nominated as a candidate for the 
Supreme Soviet. But, given that people had pinned enormous 
hopes on me, I simply wanted to help in the acquisition of 
independence, the revival of culture, and the attainment of 
religious freedom. When people say today that we wanted to seize 
power, they are lying. 
  [Dubnov] In the last nigh-on three years you have had 
several chances to become Tajikistan's number one. Do you 
regret not making the most of this? 
  [Turajonzoda] On several occasions I was asked by both 
political organizations and individual territories to run for 
the presidency, but I considered then as now that Tajikistan's 
spiritual leader should not be the leader of the state. We are 
accused of allegedly striving to impose Islamic order in 
Tajikistan. This is impossible. All the more so through force, 
and against the people's will and convictions. This kind of 
regime cannot last. It was impossible to impose from above 
something for which there existed no formulated demand in 
society. Could we, armed with this experience, do something so 
stupid? That would have been criminal. After all, all the 
mistakes I made while in office were ascribed to Islam. 
  [Dubnov] A coalition government was in power for a total of 
six months last year and peace was not brought to the country. 
It is asserted that this happened because the government was 
under your influence. 
  [Turajonzoda] The government comprised 90 percent 
communists, with only Vice Premier Davlat Usmonov [name as 
transliterated] representing us there, with myself in the 
Supreme Soviet Presidium. 
  [Dubnov] Where were you and your family when hostilities 
against the opposition began? 
  [Turajonzoda] At that time 49 of my relatives were killed. 
They were simply slaughtered in their own homes, in their native 
villages. My own home was first pillaged and then burned. The 
very same thing was done to my parents' home and the homes of my 
brothers. They even set light to the mosque next to my house. 
Three of my closest relatives, old men, were decapitated. 
  In February 1993 I managed to travel on foot across 
snow-covered mountain passes to reach the territory of 
Kyrgyzstan, as far as Osh, and then onward to one of 
Kazakhstan's oblasts, and from there I flew to Moscow. 
  We welcomed Rakhmanov's call for mutual disarmament by the 
armed formations. But instead of this, hostilities flared up 
against the opposition, and People's Front detachments occupied 
Dushanbe: the opposition was forced to take cover in the Garmo 
Hills and to retreat to Kofarnikhon. 
  Then we sent a delegation to Rakhmanov and Karimov 
requesting 
that there be no attack on Kofarnikhon and that, with the aid of 
the 201st Russian Division which would be the guarantor of our 
safety, a start might at last be made on mutual disarmament. 
Rakhmanov ordered the delegation's arrest. 
  [Dubnov] It is said that you are the chief of the Tajik 
government in exile. Is this so? 
  [Turajonzoda] There is no Tajik government in exile. Even 
if the current government in Dushanbe stands down, we do not 
intend to take power into our own hands. Let people who have 
not participated in the war come to power. It is necessary with 
the help of Russia and other neighboring countries that we trust 
to disarm both sides and eventually, once the situation in the 
republic is fully stabilized, say in 18 months to two years' 
time, to hold free and democratic elections under the 
supervision of the United Nations, the CSCE, and other 
international organizations. Whoever wins the elections will 
lead the republic. 
  But until then, while the Communists remain, we will 
continue 
the armed struggle against them. We believe that this struggle 
is legitimate. 
  [Dubnov] You do not want to go into talks with official 
Dushanbe until you have set up contact with the Russian 
authorities. At the same time, it is considered in Moscow that 
the establishment of peace in Tajikistan is primarily the 
concern of the Tajiks themselves. If you continue to defend 
these stances, how will you break this vicious circle? 
  [Turajonzoda] Yes, we still want to meet with 
representatives of the Russian Government first, but this does 
not mean that we consider Russia our enemy. We recognize its 
geopolitical interests in the region. Russian troops can remain 
in Tajikistan. We want to see Russia as a mediator. We want to 
explain our point of view -- it is not important whether this is 
done officially or unofficially -- and that is all! And if we 
convince Russia, then we will be prepared to sit around the 
negotiating table with representatives of the current regime in 
Dushanbe, with the exception of those people who were actual 
commanders the People's Front and who are responsible for the 
deaths of tens of thousands of completely innocent people. There 
are upstanding people in the government with whom it is possible 
to talk. 
  The communists and democrats in the republic are incapable 
of 
reaching agreement without mediation and help from countries 
like Russia, Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan. If Russia's 
stance remains unchanged, this will signify a continuation of 
the fratricidal war. 
  [Dubnov] How do you explain attacks by armed opposition 
detachments on border posts on the Tajik-Afghan border, the 
victims of which are the wholly blameless Russian soldiers? 
  [Turajonzoda] We deeply regret the the fact that innocent 
Russian boys are dying. But show us another way of fighting 
against the hated regime in Dushanbe. What else can we do if 
Russian troops continue to defend it? After all, according to 
the agreement, border troops protect the border from foreign 
invasion. But we are citizens of Tajikistan, we want to go home, 
but we are being killed there. The border troops are preventing 
us from returning home with dignity. Our guys, when crossing 
the border, are instructed to bypass the posts and military 
units and not to enter into combat with Russian soldiers, but 
they pursue us onto Tajikistan territory and, you know, we are 
in our own country. I would very much like the Russian readers 
to put themselves in our shoes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61040 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DOCTRINAL ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tactics: Ambush in Modern Conditions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0130A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 8, Aug 93 
(signed to press 16 Jul 93) pp 20-23 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0130A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel N. Utkin, candidate of military </F>
sciences: "Ambushes in Modern Conditions"] 
  [Text] Ambushes have not lost their importance. The 
reduction in the personnel strength of the armed forces and the 
increased demands on their combat effectiveness force them to 
look for the most effective methods of opposing the enemy. The 
article by Col N. Utkin on page 20 talks about how to improve 
the effectiveness of employing ambushes. 
  In recent years, the journal has more than once dealt with 
the issue of organizing ambushes by small subunits of the Ground 
Troops. Authors of articles have talked in detail about ambushes 
of the Great Patriotic War and shared experience acquired in the 
Republic of Afghanistan. As is clear from the articles, ambushes 
have not lost their importance today. On the contrary, the 
reduction in the personnel strength of the armed forces and the 
increased demands on their combat effectiveness force them to 
look for the most effective methods of opposing the enemy. 
  Ambushes were widely used in all types of combat. In an 
offensive they are usually set up on the path of withdrawing 
enemy subunits, on movement routes of enemy reserves and 
reinforcements, on supply routes, on sectors of a possible 
breakout of encirclement by defending groupings, and at sites of 
planned landing of sabotage-reconnaissance groups and airborne 
assault forces. 
  In some cases, the goal of ambushes involves making a 
surprise engagement of the enemy, misleading him as to the true 
intentions of friendly forces, and disrupting command and 
control. In other cases, the goal is to ascertain the 
composition and intentions of units being transferred to the 
forward edge of the battle area and to perform other 
reconnaissance measures. 
  In a meeting engagement, ambushes are created in forward 
units and by reconnaissance bodies on avenues of movement of 
superior enemy forces. The main task here is to determine their 
location, composition, and nationality, and, if possible, reduce 
the pace of reaching a favorable line. 
  In the defense, ambushes acquire special importance in the 
security zone of defending forces and when conducting mobile 
combat operations. Small in makeup, they are situated between 
lines and on the line of withdrawal, in the first and subsequent 
trenches, at the forward position, at battle outposts, on the 
flanks, and in gaps. Ambushes are able to use surprise fire in 
short periods of time to inflict appreciable losses on advancing 
subunits, which front-line soldiers and Afghan veterans proved 
repeatedly. 
  In recent years, when the predominant part of power 
confrontations in the world took on the nature of armed 
conflicts and local wars, the importance of ambush operations 
have increased even more. Almost daily information is received 
about the use of ambushes in one or another region to capture 
weapons, equipment, or hostages, capture or destroy hostile 
groupings, and eliminate command and control bodies, 
politicians, and statesmen. In certain regions of the "near 
abroad," ambushes have become an almost everyday phenomenon. 
  All this indicates that today one must not be limited to 
introducing into combat training practice only experienced 
amassed in the past for organizing and conducting ambushes. This 
experience must be constantly improved, primarily based on 
comprehensive use of modern models of equipment and armament. 
  As is known, ambushes are sufficiently effective when 
well-trained, small subunits are assigned to them. The 
proportion of ambushes in their tactics is steadily increasing. 
Therefore, in my view, there is a need (if only from the 
standpoint of development of theory) to make more precise the 
concept apparatus as it applies to ambush operations and to 
define them by type. 
  For some reason, there is the opinion that ambushes are 
predominantly a sphere of activity of reconnaissance platoons 
and companies. Scouts, they say, are better trained; moreover, 
they have special equipment and gear... It seems, to some 
degree, this is not unfounded, especially if you consider that 
ambushes are examined in quite great detail when training 
reconnaissance bodies. 
  At the same time, there are numerous positive examples of 
operations in ambushes by subunits of other branches of troops 
as well. Ambush garrisons led by a military governor were 
created in Rus back in the 11th-13th centuries. Later, ambush 
regiments existed in the 13th-17th centuries. Surprise and swift 
attacks by small military units often had a decisive influence 
on the overall outcome of a battle. A graphic confirmation of 
this is the effectiveness of employing ambush detachments in the 
Kulikovo Battle, the events 1812, World War I, the Civil War, 
and the Great Patriotic War. 
  In our days, the Military Encyclopedic Dictionary gives 
several interpretations of this concept. The most successful of 
them is the one defining an ambush as a "military (partisan) 
subunit located secretly and in advance for making a surprise 
attack against the approaching enemy." Here, it seems, it is 
necessary finally to arrange all points relative to typing 
ambushes according to composition and missions to be 
accomplished. 
  In my view, according to composition, they may be 
reconnaissance, motorized rifle, tank, antitank, artillery, 
flamethrower, aviation (helicopter, aircraft), antiaircraft, and 
finally special (chemical, engineer, and in the future those 
based on using weapons with new physical principles--combat 
robots, electronic, and so forth). Their basis will become 
individual fire weapons (combat and special), squads (crews), 
platoons, companies (batteries), or groups specially created for 
some period of time. Such formations can easily be reinforced 
with other forces and assets if necessary and made mixed or 
combined. 
  Ambushes can be broken down according to purpose into 
antitank, anti-personnel, anti-air, anti-landing, 
reconnaissance, false, containing, primary, alternate, and 
special ambushes. 
  As is known, the greatest effectiveness of an ambush is 
achieved if surprise is possible. The effect of unexpectedness 
is at work here. Fire from close range and a decisive attack 
inflict especially noticeable damage on the opposing side. For 
example, a tank crew under the command of Lieutenant P. Gudzya 
(later Hero of the Soviet Union and colonel-general) in a 
fast-moving battle near the village of Nefedovo (Moscow Oblast) 
in the fall of 1941 destroyed 10 out of 18 fascist tanks, making 
the rest beat a hasty retreat. 
  Speed of actions is equally important. You see, an enemy 
that 
has a several-fold force superiority to the ambush can cope with 
confusion, and then the situation will take shape not in the 
"hunter's" favor. In other words, subunits must be able to 
execute a quick disengagement and withdrawal. Experience amassed 
also attests to the need to provide (which officers sometimes 
forget, unfortunately) local security of ambushes so as not to 
be subjected to a surprise attack themselves. 
  However, I repeat: In addition to the need to take into 
account in training practice the experience of past years, 
something new must be added to it, based on a more complete use 
of the achievements of military science and the combat 
characteristics of modern equipment and armament. There are 
quite a few capabilities whose realization would have made it 
possible to increase the effectiveness of employing ambushes. I 
would like to call readers' attention to just a few of them. 
  It is no secret that mobile weapons operating, depending on 
the mission received, on a platoon--company scale or 
independently are usually used to set up the ambushes. With 
skilled organization of ambushes, the tanks, infantry combat 
vehicles, self-propelled artillery mounts, self-propelled 
antiaircraft mounts, and other weapons making up the ambushes in 
the vast majority of cases unnoticed by enemy reconnaissance, 
and their surprise fire from close range prove to be deadly for 
its main body. 
  At the same time, the effectiveness of engaging the 
attacking 
forces will increase if artillery and air subunits enter the 
fighting. The fire of the senior commander's forces and assets 
not only will support the operations of those participating in 
the ambush and inflict even more damage on the enemy but also 
will to a considerable extent contribute to the successful 
disengagement and withdrawal of weapons to new positions. 
Therefore, it seems to me that suggestions about including 
artillery observers and air controllers with communications 
assets and means of transport are not unfounded. 
  However, there are a number of problems here. For example, 
questions of coordinating the ambush not only with artillery and 
aviation but also with subunits from which it is assigned remain 
on the agenda. In any event, I dare say that in Afghanistan a 
different trend was seen. Ambushes there sometimes ended up in a 
trap themselves, and in fighting a numerically superior enemy 
could only count on their own forces, since help from the 
outside was late. 
  Based on the specific tactical situation, it is advisable to 
allocate some mobile assets to occupy fire positions on the 
flanks and ahead of the forces defending in the security zone. 
They are to open surprise aimed fire on the enemy when he 
approaches effective fire range. When necessary (depending on 
the importance of the target), artillery and aviation fire is 
called in. It makes sense to use high-precision munitions for 
more reliable engagement of the enemy. After accomplishing the 
mission, combat vehicles withdraw under the cover of the senior 
commander's assets and take up their places in the dispositions 
of the subunit that sent them. Further development of this 
variant of operations involves the participation of other forces 
in destroying the enemy and in transforming ambushes into 
complexes of various weapons. 
  A second direction of their improvement is the use of two 
groups as part of the ambushes: Diversionary and combat groups, 
and in individual cases a prisoner "snatch" group (Figure 1). 
Such ambushes operated actively against the limited contingent 
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan; and unfortunately, not without 
success. Diversionary groups sought in every way possible to 
create the greatest noise effect and delay the movement of our 
subunits with the aid of barriers, manmade landslides (Figure 2 
[not reproduced]), and mixed minefields. 



<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-002C-34A>             Figure 1. Organization of ambush based on experience of combat operations in Afghanistan </FIG>



  A diversionary group usually opened fire when clearing a 
passage in obstacles. The main role in engaging the enemy was 
assigned to the combat group "clearing" the way for the prisoner 
snatch group. After carrying out their mission, the rebels 
swiftly withdrew over pre-planned paths (in the vicinity of 
Feyzabad) or roads (in the vicinity of Ghazni). 
  A further increase in the effectiveness of this method of 
ambush operations is seen in using improved and advanced 
armament; for example, infrared sighting and observation 
devices, combat robots, remote-controlled weapons, and so forth. 
The enemy can be pinned down by using remote minelaying devices, 
helicopter mobile obstacle construction detachments, and 
controlled minefields. Main engagement of the enemy is 
accomplished by using artillery, army aviation, remotely piloted 
vehicles, and others. 
  The third direction assumes creation of specially prepared 
combat assault groups [UBG's]. These groups fought in Vietnam 
and made a good showing. The composition of each of them during 
those years was limited to 3-4 people equipped with automatic 
weapons with silencers, "Mukha" rifle and handheld antitank 
grenade launchers, special mines, and portable radios. 
  Today, in my opinion, it is quite realistic to create up to 
18 UBG's in a motorized rifle company and up to 54 UBG's in a 
motorized rifle battalion. Operating primarily at night on 
enemy-occupied territory (in the security zone after it is 
crossed by the advancing forces), each combat assault group, 
changing the ambush site two or three times a night, is able to 
destroy up to three enemy objects such as a tank, infantry 
combat vehicle, armored personnel carrier, electronic equipment, 
military equipment, command and staff vehicle, launcher, fuel 
supply vehicle, ammunition vehicle, and so forth. Consequently, 
a battalion's UBG's are able to destroy 150-200 pieces of 
armament and equipment in a 24-hour period. 
  Combat assault groups operating independently or in platoons 
could also remain in the enemy's rear area for some time after 
withdrawal of the forward detachment and conduct sabotage 
operations. To increase their survivability, in the planned area 
of operation it is advisable to set up in advance a network of 
bunkers with stores of ammunition, explosives, food, 
communications equipment, medicines, and also to equip rest 
areas. In the future, combat assault groups could be part of 
special subunits intended for conducting ambushes, which, I am 
convinced, bear a specific nature and require special training. 
  In conclusion, I will note that today Russia's armed forces 
have amassed a large amount of experience in organizing and 
conducting ambush operations. Its importance in training troops 
is certainly very great. However, it will produce the most 
return only if new methods of operations are developed on its 
basis, fully corresponding to the modern nature of combined-arms 
combat. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 8 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61041 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Grachev: `Pressing Problems of Force Generation, Training' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0128A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 8, Aug 93 
(Signed to press 16 Jul 93) pp 9-18 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0128A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gen Army P. S. Grachev, Russian Federation </F>
Minister of Defense; reprinted with permission from the editor 
of the journal VOYENNAYA MYSL: "Urgent Problems in the 
Development and Training of Russian Armed Forces Today"] 
  [Text] The end of the Cold War and positive changes in 
Eastern Europe and in the Far and Near East are creating 
fundamentally new conditions promoting a decrease in the level 
of military confrontation between the East and West, a 
transition from confrontation to cooperation, and consequently a 
soon-to-occur reduction in the probability of major wars. 
  At the same time the sources of military danger remain. 
Principal among them are the presence of sociopolitical, 
economic, territorial, religious, national, ethnic and other 
contradictions, and the persisting desire of a number of 
countries to resolve them by military force. All of this, as 
well as the breakdown of the unified defense system and the 
military infrastructure, is having an effect on Russia's 
military development. 
  The long economic crisis is the most important factor 
determining the course of military development. The transition 
to a market economy is gathering momentum today, and the 
production slump has been surmounted. This necessitated major 
review of a number of points in the state's military-technical 
policy, and required the Ministry of Defense to reexamine 
traditional approaches to outfitting and supplying the armed 
forces. 
  Thus, the current international situation and the internal 
political situation in Russia are developing under the influence 
of extremely contradictory factors, which is why the 
geopolitical and geostrategic realities on the planet must be 
accounted for in Russian military development. 
  Military policy is the foundation of military development, 
determining its orientation and content. The military-political 
situation that has evolved in the world arena, as well as in 
adjacent countries and in Russia itself, requires deep analysis 
of all of its aspects. We are striving to make military policy 
scientifically substantiated and realistic. Russia's rejection 
of ideological confrontation is a favorable basis for 
comprehensive cooperation, including military, with all states, 
but chiefly with the USA, European countries, Japan and 
neighbors in the Asia-Pacific region. Pursuing its military 
policy, as with any other state Russia must attach priority to 
its own interests, based on observance of the UN Charter and 
other international agreements. In this case the priority of 
political over military resources in preventing and resolving 
conflicts is being observed, the desire to maintain 
military-political and strategic stability under the conditions 
of the new ratio of forces in the world arena is being 
maintained, and the armed forces and defense matters are under 
civilian control at all levels of government. 
  The essence of the state's policy regarding military 
security 
will be reflected in military doctrine, official adoption of 
which will promote a proper understanding of Russia's defensive 
goals and intentions by all states and the world community. 
Together with other documents it will become the basis for 
developing and training the armed forces and carrying out 
military reform, and defining the main directions for the 
development of military art and military science in general. 
  From my point of view the content of military doctrine must 
be based on new approaches to the issues of war and peace, and 
to supporting the country's defensive capability, with regard 
for the mutual security interests of all states. We have been 
able to surmount the direct threat of world war. However, we 
recognize that there are no guarantees yet that the positive 
changes are irreversible, and that maintaining the country's 
defense capabilities and strengthening its security are among 
the most important objectives of the state and the entire nation. 
  The political foundations of military doctrine will rest 
upon 
the Russian state's peace-loving policy. We do not intend to 
attack anyone or use military force to resolve interstate 
conflicts. The Russian Armed Forces are intended to repel 
aggression and to provide for the security of their people, and 
defend Russia's territorial integrity, sovereignty and other 
vitally important interests. The ways and means of preventing 
war and possible allies in reaching such an important objective 
must be examined in military doctrine in accordance with the 
main goal of the state's policy--ensuring peaceful conditions 
for the country's comprehensive development. Russia does not 
view any state of the world community as its enemy. At the same 
time it would be premature not to consider the realities that 
may generate tension in interstate relations. 
  Given the nature of my duties--the role of the Minister of 
Defense is reducing more and more to fulfilling 
military-political functions--I go abroad rather often, 
including to NATO countries. I should note that as is true of 
the leadership of the Russian Federation, the leadership of the 
North Atlantic alliance is troubled by the problems of 
developing a system of collective European and global security. 
We welcome NATO's departure from a strategy oriented on 
neutralizing the so-called threat from the former USSR and its 
allies. 
  At the same time a desire by some states (coalitions) to 
achieve domination over certain regions and the world as a 
whole, and to incite internal conflicts, which cannot but evoke 
natural anxiety in Russia, can be observed. We are forced to 
consider the probability of change in the political course of 
certain countries, possible attempts at rethinking postwar 
borders, and the maintenance of armed forces by some states that 
exceed the needs of defense. Five hundred thirty divisions, 
42,000 tanks and 12,000 warplanes are concentrated near Russia's 
borders. This impressive instrument of war and how politicians 
will use it in the future is a problem with many unknowns. 
  It is often said today that the situation in the world has 
changed fundamentally, and that the threat of aggression no 
longer exists because differences are disappearing from the 
ideologies of Russia and foreign countries. However, historical 
experience indicates that the ideas of peace and justice are 
often found as working concepts in the doctrines of states that 
are far from peace-loving. Military force is still one of the 
main instruments of the policy of a large number of countries. 
  We are especially alarmed on one hand by the possibility of 
proliferation of nuclear and other types of mass destruction 
weapons, their means of delivery and the latest technologies of 
military production, and attempts by some countries to use them 
to realize their own military-political goals; and on the other 
hand by the increasing threat of international terrorism, 
including with the use of such weapons. Growth of nationalistic 
and separatist tendencies and massive violations of universally 
recognized human rights and freedoms are seriously destabilizing 
the situation in the world. 
  Under these conditions Russia's military doctrine cannot but 
consider at least two contradictory tendencies: The first--the 
desire of nations to create a nonviolent world, to achieve 
civilized mutual relations, to reinforce measures of trust, and 
to exclude wars from the arsenal of the means of resolving 
disputes; the second--the desire of some states to solve 
international problems from a position of strength, to live by 
laws under which military force plays an important role in 
policy, if not the principal one. The latter tendency requires 
elevated attention, and were circumstances to come together in a 
particular way, it could bring on armed conflicts and wars. 
  When it comes to the military principles of doctrine per se, 
it would be suitable to reveal the nature of wars and armed 
conflicts; to determine the kind of aggression, which the state 
and its armed forces must be prepared to repel; to direct the 
development, training and means of combat use of the armed 
forces. 
  In evaluating military conflicts we need to base ourselves 
on 
the fact that the probability of world nuclear or world 
conventional war is significantly reduced under today's 
conditions. At the same time the possibility of armed conflicts, 
of local and regional wars, is not only the same, but it is also 
increasing. In my opinion the most probable thing would be not 
direct armed intervention against Russia but its gradually 
increasing involvement in conflicts started in neighboring 
countries and regions. Given the complex interrelationships and 
interdependencies in the interests of different states and 
peoples, any armed conflict can grow into a major war. 
  Considering the above, the following are the country's main 
objectives in the area of defense. 
  In peacetime: Preventing military conflicts through a 
combination of political, diplomatic and other measures and 
maintenance of the military potential and fighting power of the 
armed forces at a level ensuring reliable defense of the 
country's vitally important interests; guarding state borders; 
cutting off possible provocations and transgressions upon the 
security of citizens and the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Russian Federation. 
  In a period of danger and at the beginning of a war: 
Promptly 
adopting the decision to switch the country and the armed forces 
to a war footing, and practically implementing this decision; 
mobilizing the country's necessary forces and resources to repel 
the aggressor; using the possibilities of the United Nations and 
other international organizations to condemn and isolate the 
aggressor, and to force him to stop the war and restore peace. 
  Despite reduction of strategic defensive arms on the basis 
of 
START-2, it is obvious that nuclear weapons will continue to be 
the principal element of European and global stability today and 
in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we view strategic nuclear 
forces as the most important guarantee of the military security 
of Russia and its allies. 
  As far as the military doctrines of the USA and other 
developed states are concerned, they are experiencing certain 
changes as well. New focuses in evaluating the probability of 
different wars are a positive aspect of changes in doctrine. 
However, the general classification of wars adopted in the USA 
and NATO in the 1980's remains the same. Armed forces have the 
mission of preparing to fight any kind of war--universal 
(global) and limited, using nuclear or just conventional 
weapons, two-sided and coalitional, and of preparing for 
participation in any possible conflicts. 
  According to the principles of the USA's revamped military 
strategy, until the end of the 1990's and in the beginning of 
the next century the outcome of wars employing conventional 
weapons, should they be started, will be resolved in air, land 
and sea operations. Nuclear weapons must remain in the 
background, performing the role of strategic "deterrence." At 
the same time should the situation grow worse in the course of 
conventional wars, the possibility of using nuclear weapons is 
not excluded. 
  Thus in determining the new approaches to ensuring Russia's 
defense and military security, we need to base ourselves 
primarily on a comprehensive assessment of the current 
military-political situation, and of the changes that have 
already occurred and will occur in the world and in our country. 
The nature and tendencies in the development of the 
international situation and the internal situation in Russia and 
in CIS countries are creating exceptionally complex conditions 
for the development of Russian Armed Forces. 
  The main goal of the present stage of development of the 
Russian Federation Armed Forces is to create qualitatively new 
armies and fleets meeting the requirements of the present 
military, political and strategic situation in the world and the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, and reflecting the trends of 
its development and the real degree of military danger. In this 
case the numerical strength and structure of the RF Armed Forces 
must correspond to the missions assigned to them, to the 
economic, demographic and other possibilities of Russia, and to 
agreements on reducing armed forces. 
  As we know, Russia was among the last of the union republics 
of the disintegrated USSR to begin creating its own armed 
forces, but there were reasons for this. There was simply no 
other alternative in the situation that established itself by 
May 1992. The president, the Russian Supreme Soviet and the 
Ministry of Defense had a question to answer: What should the 
Army and Navy be? 
  I feel that considering the geostrategic situation and the 
geopolitical interests of Russia, its armed forces must be 
highly mobile, and outfitted with modern equipment and armament. 
We need to do away with the large, slow-moving, hard-to-control 
armed forces of the former USSR which are now part of the 
Russian Army and Navy, but we also need to make maximum use of 
their potential. Our proposals have been supported by the 
country's leadership. In this case a real possibility has 
appeared for reducing the armed forces and easing the excessive 
burden of military expenditures. 
  Two highly important principles of ensuring military 
security 
are at the basis of the concept approved by the Russian 
president for the development of the Russian Federation's Armed 
Forces: 
  The first--deterring any aggressor from world nuclear and 
conventional war by maintaining the Strategic Nuclear Forces in 
a state allowing them to retaliate with the needed effectiveness 
under any conditions. 
  The second--deterring an aggressor from starting regional 
and 
local wars and armed conflicts by creating general-purpose force 
groupings (covering forces, mobile forces, Supreme High Command 
reserves) guaranteeing repulsion of aggression and ensuring the 
possibility for promptly augmenting the armed forces as the 
scale of military activities increases. 
  As we know, the Russian Armed Forces are being reorganized 
in 
stages. 
  With regard for current conditions, formation of new armed 
forces groupings on Russian territory has been started, planned 
reduction of their numerical strength and force composition is 
proceeding, reorganization of the central administration of the 
Ministry of Defense and of force structures and transition to a 
combined manning principle (through the draft and through 
voluntary enlistment on a contract basis) have been started, the 
principal measures associated with development of the armed 
forces in the immediate future (up to 1995) have been determined 
more specifically, and the directions of their future 
reorganization (to the year 2000) are being developed. As a 
result of the work done thus far, the overall numerical strength 
of the Russian Army and Navy has been decreased by over 260,000 
servicemen. There are plans for maximally decreasing the number 
of large combined units and units of reduced strength. An active 
effort is being made to conclude formation of a new 
military-technical policy having the main goal of 
comprehensively solving the problems of equipping the Army and 
Navy with contemporary models of armament and military equipment 
under the conditions of a significant reduction in 
appropriations, conversion of military industry and new economic 
relations. On the whole, the results of the first stage confirm 
the correctness of the selected course for development and 
reorganization of the Russian Armed Forces. However, the complex 
economic conditions in the country are making this work 
difficult. 
  Formation of the armed forces and the creation of the basis 
for their extensive transformation are foreseen in 1993-1995. 
During this period, creation of force groupings will be 
continued, withdrawal of forces from other countries into Russia 
will be basically completed, and the numerical strength of the 
armed forces will be reduced to 1.5 million persons by 1995, as 
determined by the law "On Defense." We concurrently plan to 
create a military infrastructure capable of supporting stable 
function of force groupings and their command and control in 
peace and in war. And finally, we need to carry out 
comprehensive research with which to substantiate the numerical 
strength, force composition and structure of the armed forces 
that will be required after 1995. 
  Later on (after 1995) we plan to finish establishment of 
qualitatively new armed forces, which means radically 
transforming their structure, switching to a combined manning 
system, forming force groupings, and creating the military 
infrastructure on Russian territory. 
  The planned volume and deadlines for development and 
reorganization of the Russian Armed Forces are naturally not 
written in stone. They will change under the influence of 
external and internal conditions. 
  In addition to the problems of developing the armed forces, 
developing the theory of the art of war is acquiring no less 
important significance. Under today's conditions the role of 
strategy is increasing significantly. It must first of all 
determine the nature and content of possible military conflicts, 
and the conditions under which they arise. It will predetermine 
the nature of tasks directed on one hand at finding effective 
military-political ways of averting war, and on the other hand 
at revealing the laws, principles, forms and means of preparing 
for and conducting armed conflict; at developing specific 
measures by which to prepare the country directly to repel 
aggression promptly and the means of modern strategic 
development of the armed forces and their commitment to war; and 
at providing leadership to them. 
  Developing scientifically substantiated recommendations and 
the military-technical means of averting war should be 
considered to be the central task of the theory of strategy. 
  It stands to reason that world war must be averted chiefly 
by 
political means, and this should be reflected in defensive 
activity. As I see it, a prompt and adequate response to actions 
by an aggressor preparing for an attack may be considered to be 
the essence of deterrence. In peacetime this will force him to 
reject armed attack because of the inevitability of retaliation, 
while in wartime it will restrain him from using nuclear weapons 
and other mass destruction weapons, limit the scale and 
intensity of military actions, and force their termination under 
terms acceptable to us. The solution to this problem depends on 
the readiness to strike a possible adversary at any time with 
losses that would be unacceptable to him. 
  Taking this into account, important significance is attached 
in military art to developing a system of measures to prepare 
the country for the repulsion of possible aggression. The main 
ones are: Developing doctrinal principles and concepts defining 
the actions to be taken by the Russian Armed Forces to repel 
aggression; theoretically studying and practically mastering new 
forms of armed conflict and the most effective means of 
defeating enemy groupings; developing and practically 
implementing a new system of mobilizational deployment, and of 
preparing and committing reserves; improving the system for 
training staffs and forces; preparing effective fortifications 
in the Russian Federation. 
  Changes in the nature of military threats and defense 
objectives require more precise definition of the possible forms 
of strategic actions and combat use of armed forces. From my 
point of view, under today's conditions they may include: 
Strategic deployment of the armed forces (partial for armed 
conflicts and for local and regional wars, and full for 
repulsion of major aggression); use of armed forces in armed 
conflicts and in local and regional wars; use of armed forces in 
major war. 
  Strategic deployment of the armed forces has highly 
important 
significance to organized repulsion of aggression. The main 
requirement on it is that it be based on real military-political 
and operational-strategic conditions of carrying out missions in 
a particular evolving situation. This was rarely done in the 
past. There was often a gap between political and strategic 
considerations and the system of combat and mobilizational 
readiness. Consequently, the means and the organization of 
strategic deployment must develop with regard for the 
possibilities of potential adversaries for carrying out 
aggression in any form. 
  Under the new conditions, special attention should be turned 
to the theory of preparing and conducting strategic operations 
in regions (strategic sectors), which will play the decisive 
role in conventional warfare. Unfortunately, in the postwar 
years the forces were ready either for offensive or for 
defensive forms of combat activities. This was hardly right. We 
cannot ignore the objective principles and laws of armed 
conflict. If an enemy begins aggression, we have the right to 
select and use those types, forms and means of military action 
which would be the most effective under the given situation. 
This could mean both offense and defense. In solving the 
problems of repelling aggression in different regions and 
sectors, we need to take a differentiated approach that accounts 
for the real political, economic and strategic situation. We 
must not give contiguous states the grounds for interpreting our 
actions as provocative, but at the same time we do not have the 
right to fall behind in the development of military affairs. 
  In preparing the armed forces we need to keep in mind that 
in 
the initial period of war, defense must ensure the possibility 
of successful repulsion of enemy aggression in the absence of 
previously fortified lines. They will have to be prepared in the 
course of the developing invasion--that is, simultaneously with 
conducting defensive engagements with forces that are not fully 
deployed. This is precisely the time when commanders of all 
ranks must display initiative in reasonably combining different 
means of conducting defensive operations. We are in favor of 
stubborn defense, but we must also know how to maneuver. This is 
especially important today. The field manuals of 1942 and 1943 
contain special chapters devoted to defensive maneuver, but we 
have forgotten about it. In developing our guidelines we need to 
expand our treatment of this problem. It is now the turn for our 
military scientists working on the problems of operational art 
and tactics to make their contribution. 
  Offensive operations should obviously assume their place in 
the theory of military art as well. At the same time we cannot 
forget the counteroffensive, which was so widely employed during 
the Great Patriotic War. 
  A number of problems are arising in connection with air and 
air defense operations in a strategic area, and with the enemy's 
defeat in ocean and sea regions. 
  Given the present nature of armed conflict, the 
effectiveness 
of all forms of operations and of strategic and operational 
actions will depend to an increasingly greater degree on the 
reliability of troop command and control. The problems of 
raising the combat readiness of command and control units, the 
efficiency of their work, the viability of control posts and 
communication systems, and wide use of automated control 
resources have acquired special acuity. A number of immediate 
steps will have to be taken to raise the effectiveness of the 
principal forms of operational, psychological, technical and 
rear support. 
  All of this must be reflected in the manuals being currently 
written to regulate the use of the armed forces, and it needs to 
be meticulously honed in the course of operational and combat 
training. I feel that under today's conditions we need to lay 
our emphasis mainly on preparing command and control units and 
maintaining them at a level ensuring dependable leadership of 
forces in both peace and war. Russia's complex economic position 
forces us to count every kopeck. This is why there are plans, in 
the immediate future, for training command and control units at 
command-and-staff exercises, which are to be carried out under 
the leadership of senior chiefs, with the wide use of automation 
resources. Of course, the best form of training of staffs and 
forces is major troop exercises. However, circumstances are 
evolving in such a way that we need to devote our main attention 
today to training tactical subunits, to teaching them to work 
together, and to developing firm skills in the personnel in the 
use of military equipment and weapons. 
  Fundamental changes in the military-political situation and 
in the development of the resources of armed conflict are 
raising the role of science, including military science, to an 
unprecedented level. This is explained by the fact that 
fundamentally new directions are opening up in the development 
of military affairs, by the continuing existence of 
posssibilities for the armies of the most highly developed 
states to achieve military-technical superiority as a result of 
the creation of new models of high-precision weapons, as well as 
of weapons based on new physical principles with destructive 
force close to that of nuclear weapons, and by other factors. 
Military science is faced by extremely serious tasks associated 
with theoretical development of the problems of developing and 
using the armed forces, equipping them, and substantiating the 
structure and optimum composition of every armed service, branch 
of troops and special troops. 
  However, it should be noted that the economic difficulties 
the country is experiencing are having a negative effect on the 
solution of many problems. For example, while the models of 
attack resources we have are quite modern, in terms of many 
parameters we are behind in the resources of their information 
support, and in command, control and communication systems. We 
are behind in electronics, and without a highly developed 
microelectronic base, it is difficult to count on generally 
raising the country's industrial, scientific and technical 
potential, and on maintaining Russia's defense capabilities at a 
modern level. In the immediate future we need to consolidate the 
positions we have gained, and then devote special attention to 
technologies which predetermine the industrial might of the 
country and the fighting potential of the armed forces. 
  Nor can we ignore the technology of so-called artificial 
intelligence. In a number of countries (chiefly the United 
States of America) "artificial intelligence" resources, which 
represent the apex of technical progress, have already undergone 
their period of development and have earned the right of 
citizenship. They can be used in developing the armed forces, 
controlling combat activities and weapon systems, training the 
personnel, and so on. We are significantly behind in this area. 
  We also need to consider that shortcomings in modern combat 
systems and resources cannot be compensated by either military 
art or quantity, as was confirmed by the war in the Persian Gulf 
zone. In order to catch up, we need to conduct scientific 
research and experimental design work at a forced pace. In this 
case, the real influence scientific research has upon solving 
the practical problems of developing the armed forces and 
raising their combat readiness must be the main criterion of the 
effectiveness and results of this research. 
  Timely introduction of scientific accomplishments into 
practical activities is acquiring special significance. Solution 
of this problem involves improving the forms and methods of 
operational, mobilizational and combat training of troop command 
and control units. Scientific work in the forces and fleets must 
consist primarily of generalizing the experience of exercises 
and introducing research results into the practice of 
operational and combat training. 
  Research in military history requires revamping. Study of 
the 
experience of local wars is acquiring special significance 
today. Local wars and conflicts (both large and small) directly 
influence stability in the world, global development of policy 
and the disposition of military-political forces, as was 
confirmed by events in the Persian Gulf. 
  However, this does not mean that we should weaken attention 
to the Great Patriotic War--the richest treasure house of combat 
experience. In connection with celebration of the 50th 
anniversary of the war's most important events, we need to 
activate the study of military history with the purpose of 
deeply analyzing operations and extracting practically valuable 
lessons. Declassification of archival documents and materials 
should be considerably helpful. Objective analysis of these 
materials will make it possible to reveal both the sources of 
our victories and the causes of failures. 
  Thus, life itself is requiring us to create new armed forces 
and to eliminate the significant gap between the composition, 
structure and numerical strength of troop groupings inherited 
from the former USSR, and the real needs of Russia's defense, 
between the nature of modern wars and the traditional forms of 
the use of troop groupings. The most unique feature of solving 
these problems is that in addition to ensuring reliable defense 
of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
the fatherland, and of its state interests against external 
threats, new tasks are arising before the armed forces today: 
Closely coordinating with bodies of state government and 
administration, making a transition to a new manning system, 
providing social protections to servicemen and their families, 
and resurrecting the prestige of military service and the system 
of military-patriotic values and ideals. 
  It should be noted, in conclusion, that the time has come to 
initiate broad discussion of all problems in the 
military-theoretical journal VOYENNAYA MYSL and other military 
publications, with the participation of scientists and 
scientific collectives, in order to permit subsequent 
generalization and implementation of the most sensible ideas and 
proposals. 
  We are standing before the need for shaping, reorganizing 
and 
reducing the Russian Armed Forces, and within a short period of 
time at that. The desire to accomplish these tasks in one or two 
years is growing stronger in some circles of our society. 
However, the social, political and economic situation in Russia 
doesn't allow us to do this. Military development is proceeding 
under complex internal and international conditions, and it 
requires meticulous, extremely lengthy work. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 8 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61042 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reform of Turkish Armed Forces </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0099A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 24 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0099A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Viktor Kostenyuk: "Turkey Bids Farewell </F>
to Infantry Brigades"] 
  [Text] In the new international situation Turkey has ended 
up in a zone of prolonged military-political instability, ethnic 
and national tension, border conflicts and aggressive terrorist 
activity. Under these conditions, increasing the Turkish Armed 
Forces' importance in securing NATO's southern flank and 
strengthening their role as a guarantor of their country's 
security required the Turkish leadership to revise a number of 
provisions of military doctrine and fundamentally reorganize its 
Army (see diagram for prospective structure). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-002C-35A>           Flow Chart </FIG>

&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  Turkey presently has the second largest Armed Forces in 
NATO, 
numbering up to 600,000 persons. They are armed with 3,600 
tanks, around 3,000 armored combat vehicles, 5,000 artillery 
systems, 300 army aviation helicopters, 815 combat aircraft, and 
136 ships of the main types. The Turkish command believes that 
this quantity of troops and combat equipment is sufficient to be 
ready to conduct defensive and offensive operations on two 
separate strategic axes, the Balkan and the Caucasian, in 
accordance with NATO requirements. 
  With this they can perform missions of defending national 
territory, holding the strategically important Black Sea 
straits, and conducting military operations to keep enemy troop 
from moving into Central Europe. The Turkish Armed Forces also 
support strategic movements of NATO reaction forces 
(particularly U.S. troops) to areas of armed conflicts in the 
Near and Middle East. 
  The new military doctrine has now made concrete functions of 
the Armed Forces for ensuring the country's territorial 
integrity and suppressing separatist actions, and has broadened 
the concept of defending Turkish interests outside of national 
territory. The possibility of giving military assistance to 
Muslim states of the former USSR and to other countries of the 
region has been incorporated conceptually. Turkish troops also 
can be used to participate in peacekeeping actions. 
  Performance of these and other missions requires bringing 
Turkish troops up to NATO standards and substantially increasing 
their mobility, striking power and firepower. They were inferior 
to leading European armies in many parameters until recently. 
The presence of a considerable number of obsolete arms and an 
acute shortage of modern combat equipment is the weakest point 
of the Turkish Armed Forces. Thus, over 30 percent of these arms 
entered the troops 30-40 years ago and around half of the field 
artillery pieces and naval ships were made in the 1940's. 
  Therefore, the Turkish leadership planned a broad set of 
organizational and military-technical measures for a fundamental 
restructuring of their Armed Forces for the next decade. 
  First of all, the troops' organizational structure is being 
upgraded, which presumes standardization of formation and unit 
table of organization structures, a transition from 
division-regimental to a more flexible brigade-battalion basis, 
and formation primarily of mechanized and armored brigades. The 
increase in the number of formations of these types to 70 
percent of the Army combat force level by the year 2000 will 
increase its striking power and offensive capabilities 
significantly. It is planned to strengthen the troop grouping 
stationed in the eastern part of the country (2nd and 3rd field 
armies) and targeted against the Transcaucasus. 
  The number of airmobile commando brigades with Army aviation 
battalions in their makeup is being increased to ensure a prompt 
reaction to threats that arise suddenly. Formation of 
specialized heavy motor transport regiments for moving one 
centrally subordinate armored brigade and four tank battalions 
(one in each field army) will contribute to a substantial 
increase in troop mobility. In addition, it is planned to 
establish one or two airmobile battalions in each field army as 
assault transport helicopters are delivered to the troops. 
  The military organizational development plan envisages 
reoutfitting all branches of the Armed Forces through arms and 
military equipment deliveries from the United States and Central 
European countries, modernizing obsolete models and producing 
new arms under license. Deliveries to the Army of over 1,100 
tanks, around 2,700 armored combat vehicles, over 500 
self-propelled artillery systems, and 200 combat helicopters 
will be completed before the year 2000. Up to 270 
fighter-bombers, 50 attack aircraft, and 80 medium and light 
military transport aircraft will enter the Air Force inventory 
in this same period. The Navy modernization program envisages 
having up to 40 new ships of basic types in the Navy order of 
battle by the end of the millennium. 
  Reform of the Turkish Armed Forces presumes improved manning 
of formations and units with a reduction in the overall number 
of personnel. The number of servicemen in the Air Force and Navy 
will remain essentially unchanged, while the Army makeup will be 
reduced by almost a third. Terms of service for privates and 
NCO's will be reduced from 15 to 12 months beginning in 1995. 
The proportion of volunteers performing duty on a contractual 
basis will increase along with this. Counting regular officers, 
the overall number of professional servicemen may reach 40 
percent in the Army and over 80 percent in the Air Force and 
Navy in ten years. 
  An improved mobilization system called upon to support 
formation and unit deployment in shorter time periods is being 
introduced within the scope of military reform. Along with the 
fully deployed units, training and cadre units are being 
preserved and will serve as a base for mobilizing a considerable 
number of new formations. The presence of so-called green units 
and subunits will permit establishing territorial self-defense 
forces on their basis in wartime, deploying troops to reinforce 
the Army, and bringing the number of personnel in combat units 
up to wartime strength levels. Armed Forces overall numerical 
strength can be more than doubled in a month with that 
mobilization deployment procedure. 
  Finally, Armed Forces restructuring envisages increased 
effectiveness and stability of command and control by 
reorganizing staffs at all levels, making comprehensive use of 
automated command and control systems, adopting modern 
jam-protected communications equipment, and improving the staff 
operational training system. 
  Western experts believe that full implementation of the plan 
for restructuring and modernizing the Turkish Armed Forces will 
increase their design combat potential by one and one-half to 
two times. But the shortage of funds, constant dependence on 
foreign military aid and weapon deliveries, and poor capacities 
of national military industry may threaten fulfillment of a 
number of very important military-technical programs. The 
planned volume of new arms production and procurements for the 
next decade exceeds $15 billion, while Turkey's real financial 
capabilities are considerably lower. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61043 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma002___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Japan's Reluctance To Join ABM Development Project Eyed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM2511131193 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 25 Nov 93 First 
Edition p 3 </F>

<F P=103> PM2511131193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Agafonov report: "United States Forcing New ABM </F>
System on Japan"] 
  [Text] Tokyo -- America's intention to involve the 
Japanese in the development of a new ABM system to counter 
intermediate-range ballistic missiles in all parameters is 
becoming an obsession as far as Washington is concerned. Tokyo 
has not experienced such pressure in a long time. 
  Let us recall that the topic was broached for the first time 
at expert level at the end of this summer, after which a U.S. 
Deputy Secretary of Defense came to Tokyo to "push" the idea and 
was followed by the Secretary himself. The subject has also 
been explained to the head of the Japanese cabinet, including at 
top-level meetings with the U.S. President. Tokyo is clearly in 
no hurry to give a positive reply but the lack of feedback is 
simply making the Americans even more persistent -- it has come 
to light that the next round of special talks on the missile 
project is scheduled for 15 December in Hawaii, and this haste 
is due to the Americans' insistence. 
  The Americans are pressuring Tokyo by consciously fueling 
passions over North Korea's missile successes. Indeed, it all 
began with those successes. As soon as it became known that the 
DPRK had successfully tested its latest ballistic development 
[razrabotka] with an operational radius of 1,000 km and can now 
potentially "reach" virtually anywhere on Japanese territory, 
the U.S. side began actively exploiting Japan's natural concern. 
The thesis of the North Korean threat was rapidly fostered in 
Japan and many people in the country took fright -- due to 
Pyongyang's reputation for unpredictability and the fact that 
the Japanese have no effective means of protection against such 
weapons. Meanwhile, U.S. sources added new elements to the 
story and fanned those fears. 
  People in Tokyo have begun talking with renewed force about 
Pyongyang's military superiority, contrasting this superiority 
with Japan's defenselessness against North Korea's missiles. 
  The U.S. attempts to involve Japan in the development of the 
new ABM system is based meanwhile not so much on military 
factors as on economic ones -- it will cost at least $12 billion 
which, given the present defense spending cuts, does not exist. 
There is another factor -- technological questions. The U.S. 
side is proposing the Patriot system as the basis of the design 
project, a system which must be properly "upgraded" using a 
number of Japanese technologies which the Americans do not 
possess. Tokyo can easily read between the lines here and see 
all this and is determinedly shying away from the U.S. 
proposals. It is certainly not a question of money or the 
prospect of sharing technological innovations that worry the 
Japanese here. Those who know about these things believe that 
there are two other factors which are proving the main obstacle 
to progress -- first, the implementation of the U.S. proposal 
requires substantial adjustments to Japan's defense policy and 
objectively necessitates a review of a whole range of related 
problems, including the Japanese-U.S. security treaty itself; 
second, the Patriot system does not inspire great hopes as a 
worthy basis for the design -- during the Persian Gulf war its 
effectiveness against Iraq's missiles, whose characteristics are 
close to those of North Korea, was lamentably low. 
  It is noteworthy that recently the Japanese mass media have 
been spreading reports on the inadequacies and deficiencies of 
the Patriot system and on the vagueness of the very concept 
offered by the United States. This counterattack mounted 
against the U.S. obsession is gaining momentum at such an 
admirable rate that the prospect of the forthcoming talks in 
Hawaii is already in doubt -- the Japanese do not intend 
"subscribing" to the Pentagon's venture at the moment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61044 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma001__l94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs The Motorized Rifle (Tank) Platoon in Battle </ABS>

<DATE1>    10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     The Motorized Rifle (Tank) Platoon in Battle </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  92UM1060A Moscow MOTOSTRELKOVYY (TANKOVYY) VZVOD V BOYU in 
Russian 1989 (signed to press 7 Apr 89) pp 2-29--FOR OFFICIAL </F>



<TEXT>
USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 92UM1060A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MOTOSTRELKOVYY (TANKOVYY) VZVOD V BOYU </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Annotation, foreword, and Chapter 1 of the book "The </F>
Motorized Rifle (Tank) Platoon in Battle," by I.M. Andrusenko, 
R.G. Dukov, and Yu.R. Fomin, Voyennoye izdatelstvo, Moscow, 
1989, 70,000 copies, 336 pages, illustrated] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Annotation </H5>
  This book examines the actions of a motorized rifle (tank) 
platoon in various types of battle based on the requirements of 
formal documents containing regulations, advanced experience of 
instruction, and the experience of the Great Patriotic War. It 
uses specific examples to show the work of the platoon commander 
for organizing combat, command and control of the platoon in 
battle, and organizing its all-round support. 
  The book is intended for subunit commanders of the Ground 
Forces and officer candidates at military schools. 
<H5>  Foreword </H5>
  Guided by Lenin's doctrine on protecting the socialist 
fatherland, the Communist Party and Soviet Government are 
tirelessly concerned with increasing in every possible way the 
defensive might of our homeland and further strengthening the 
combat readiness of its armed forces. 
  Our country's successes in development of the economy, 
science, and technology have made it possible to equip all 
services of the armed forces and branches of troops, including 
the Ground Forces and their basis--motorized rifle and tank 
large units, units, and subunits--with the most modern armament 
and combat equipment and thereby sharply raise their combat 
capabilities. 
  Motorized rifle and tank subunits equipped with armored 
fighting vehicles [BMP's], armored transport vehicles [BTR's], 
and tanks are able to carry out the most diverse missions in 
battle, reliably engage enemy personnel, tanks, BMP's, BTR's, 
artillery, and antitank weapons, combat enemy aircraft and 
helicopters, advance swiftly, and defend stubbornly. 
  But it is still not enough to have modern armament to 
achieve 
success in battle. A decisive role here belongs to the 
person--the soldier--who possesses high moral-political, 
fighting, and psychological qualities and has mastered combat 
equipment and weapons and the art of organizing and waging 
battle in complex and diverse situation conditions. 
  A platoon commander must be highly educated in the 
military-technical and tactical respect, know the combat 
capabilities of his subunit, and skillfully and tactically 
competently use them in battle. The basic purpose of this book 
is to help him do this. 
  The book's material corresponds to curricula for training 
officer candidates of higher combined-arms and tank command 
schools in military disciplines. The theoretical heritage of the 
classics of Marxism-Leninism on military issues and the works of 
M.V. Frunze, M.N. Tukhachevskiy, and P.I. Batov were used in 
writing this book. At the basis of this work are the 
requirements of the Field Manual of the Ground Forces and 
regulations and manuals on preparing, organizing, and waging 
modern combined-arms battle by subunits. 
  The authors of the book set as their task to disclose the 
basic questions of preparing, organizing, and waging the basic 
types of battle and to examine the actions of a platoon during 
battle in special conditions. 
  The authors devoted primary attention to the work of the 
platoon commander for organizing battle, command and control of 
subunits in battle, the actions of a platoon in the defense, the 
offensive, on the march, in march security and security at the 
halt, and on reconnaissance. 
  The drawings and tactical diagrams illustrating the 
platoon's 
actions in various types of modern combined-arms battle will 
serve to master this material better. 
  The book is intended for subunit commanders of the Ground 
Forces and officer candidates at military schools. 
<H5>  Chapter 1. Fundamentals of Modern Combined-Arms Battle </H5>
<H5>  1. Essence of Modern Combined-Arms Battle </H5>
  Soviet military art regards battle as the basic form of 
tactical operations of troops, an organized armed clash between 
large units, units, and subunits of the warring sides which is 
strikes, fire, and maneuver coordinated by objective, place, and 
time to destroy (rout) the enemy and carry out other tactical 
missions in a specific area during a short interval of time. 
  Before the appearance of firearms, hand-to-hand fighting of 
soldiers armed with edged weapons was the essence of battle. 
  With the development of firearms, fire became the most 
important significant element of battle. It made possible 
confrontation of the warring sides at a distance without making 
direct contact (but not precluding it) and thus increasing the 
spatial scope of battle, which was also significant for that 
period of development of society and military affairs. 
  Massive equipping of troops with automatic weapons, 
artillery, tanks, and aviation resulted in battlefield success 
being achieved through coordinated efforts of subunits, units, 
and large units of all branches of troops participating in it. 
Battle became combined-arms battle, and its spatial scope 
increased even more. 
  Defeating and routing the enemy can be achieved only by 
powerful strikes by all types of weapons, timely exploitation of 
the results of their strikes, and also by aggressive and 
decisive actions of subunits, units, and large units of all 
branches of troops and special troops. 
  Modern combined-arms battle requires skillful use of all 
weapons and combat and special equipment, a high degree of 
mobility and organization, full intensity of moral and physical 
forces, inflexible will for victory, iron discipline, and combat 
cohesiveness. This is achieved by high combat proficiency; 
conscientious fulfillment of one's military duty; steadfastness, 
bravery, courage, and readiness of personnel in any conditions 
to strive for total victory over the enemy; superiors' knowing 
their subordinates, personal contact with them, attention to 
their daily combat life and needs, and high exactingness towards 
them; instilling in subordinates faith in the rightness of our 
cause and devotion to the socialist homeland and the Soviet 
Government. 
  Modern combined-arms battle can be waged both in conditions 
of using nuclear and other weapons and with using only 
conventional weapons. The presence of nuclear weapons and other 
weapons of mass destruction in the enemy's hands, at a high 
degree of readiness, requires their continuous detection and 
destruction by the troops and, at the same time, accomplishment 
of measures to protect against weapons of mass destruction and 
the ability to wage battle in conditions of their employment. 
<H5>  2. Forces and Assets of Modern Combined-Arms Battle </H5>
  The nature of battle and the methods of waging it depend 
primarily on the material basis, that is, on the armament, 
combat equipment, and people using these means of warfare. 
  Based on an analysis of a large amount of historical 
material, F. Engels concluded: "Nothing depends on economic 
conditions like the army and navy. Armament, personnel, 
organization, tactics, and strategy depend primarily on the 
level of production achieved at a given moment and on means of 
communication. It is not the `free creativity of the mind' of 
genius military leaders that functioned in a revolutionizing 
manner here, but the acquisition of better weapons and the 
change in soldier material; at best, the influence of genius 
military leaders is limited by the fact that they are adapt the 
method of waging battle to the new weapons and to the new 
fighting men."* 
  Means of warfare have the most revolutionizing influence on 
methods of combat operations. "Military tactics," noted V.I. 
Lenin, "depend on the level of military equipment..."** 
  Another component part of the material basis of 
battle--people and their morale--also has a great influence on 
the change in the nature of battle and the methods of waging it. 
Characterizing the role of the morale factor, V.I. Lenin wrote: 
"In any war, victory in the final analysis is determined by the 
morale of the masses who shed their blood on the field of 
battle."*** 
  These words of V.I. Lenin fully retain their importance in 
today's conditions. Despite the tremendous power and 
capabilities of the new weapons, people remain the fundamental 
principle without which any equipment, any weapons will be 
useless and armed conflict is simply inconceivable. 
  The current period of development of military affairs is 
characterized by the appearance and rapid development of 
qualitatively new weapons fundamentally different from those 
which were used during the last war, full motorization of the 
army, intensive mechanization, and also an ever-increasing 
introduction of electronics into the troops. 
  Nuclear weapons are the principal, most powerful weapon of 
the enemy. Skillful use of them makes it possible to destroy 
with a high degree of effectiveness and in short periods of time 
the enemy's weapons of mass destruction, inflict large losses on 
the enemy, destroy structures and other installations, create 
zones of radioactive contamination and areas of destruction, 
debris, fire, and flooding, and also exert heavy psychological 
pressure on the population and armed forces personnel. They are 
used without warning, massively, and in combination with 
conventional weapons. 
  Nuclear weapons include all types of nuclear munitions and 
means of delivering them to targets. Massive, group, and single 
strikes can be delivered by nuclear weapons. Destruction of 
enemy installations by nuclear weapons can be accomplished by 
air, surface, and underground (water surface, underwater) 
nuclear bursts. Various types of missiles and aircraft are the 
primary means of delivering nuclear munitions to the targets. 
  As the primary weapon, nuclear weapons have a decisive 
influence on the nature of battle and give it an exceptional 
decisiveness, dynamic quality, and unprecedented spatial scope. 
  Conventional weapons comprise all fire and strike weapons 
using artillery, antiaircraft, aircraft, small-arms, and 
engineer munitions and burning mixtures. Conventional weapons 
can be used independently or in combination with nuclear weapons 
to destroy enemy manpower and combat equipment and also to 
demolish and destroy various installations. 
  The dialectics of military affairs are such that in addition 
to the decisive importance of nuclear weapons, the role of 
tanks, artillery, aircraft, and other conventional weapons 
remains great. It is especially important to bear in mind that 
under certain conditions, combat operations can be conducted 
using only conventional weapons. Thus, the task is in modern 
battle to learn to how to make skillful use of the increased 
role of motorized rifle subunits, units, and large units, the 
fire and striking power of tanks, and the effectiveness of 
airstrikes and artillery fire. 
  Changes in weapons and combat equipment have had a 
significant influence on the content, nature, and methods of 
waging battle. 
<H5>  3. Characteristics of Modern Combined-Arms Battle </H5>
  By characteristics we mean the important attributes and 
particular features which disclose the nature of battle in one 
or another war. 
  The nature of battle is the sum total of general 
characteristics inherent to this a given battle and determining 
its attributes and particular features. The characteristics of 
battle are not unchanging; improvement of the material basis of 
battle also entails a change in its characteristic traits. The 
comparatively low level of development of weaponry during World 
War I predetermined the exceptional slow rate of development of 
battle, its limited scope, and insufficient decisiveness. 
Conversely, the sharp qualitative improvement in weapons during 
World War II and the increase in their numbers gave battle a new 
content and caused its high maneuverability and dynamic nature. 
  Equipping the troops with various types of nuclear weapons 
and other latest combat equipment and the changes associated 
with this in training personnel created different conditions for 
combat operations and caused profound changes in the nature and 
methods of conducting them. 
  Modern battle is characterized by decisiveness, 
high maneuverability, intensity and fluidity, rapid and abrupt 
changes in the situation and diversity of methods used to wage 
it, development of combat operations on land and in the air over 
a broad front and to a great depth, and conducting them at a 
high tempo. 
  Decisiveness of combat operations is predetermined 
by the decisiveness of political goals, the acute class nature 
of a future war, the use of powerful modern weaponry creating 
all the necessary prerequisites for conducting such operations, 
high moral and fighting qualities of personnel of the Soviet 
Army, and the progressive nature of our military science. 
  Decisiveness is manifested in the goals of battle and the 
methods of achieving them, in the selfless actions of the 
troops, their inflexible desire to carry out the combat mission 
fully in all types of battle and in any situation, operating 
with initiative and maximum persistence and perseverance. Of 
great importance is educating officers in the spirit of 
decisiveness, boldness, persistence, the ability to carry out to 
the end, irrevocably and without hesitation, the decision to 
crush the enemy, willing to assume responsibility for 
demonstrated initiative and to use every opportunity to carry 
out the combat mission. Indecisiveness and passiveness in battle 
lead to defeat. 
  Further qualitative development of weapons and combat 
equipment will increase even more the decisiveness of battle and 
the requirements for training of personnel of subunits, units, 
and large units. 
  High maneuverability of modern battle is the 
result of the use of powerful weaponry and a sharp increase in 
the mobility of combined-arms subunits, units, and large units 
due to their complete motorization, their being equipped with 
highly mobile combat equipment, and also the lack of a 
continuous front in the defense and in an offensive. 
  Modern weapons make it possible to inflict heavy losses on 
the enemy, and the high mobility of troops makes it possible to 
utilize quickly the results of nuclear and fire strikes, attack 
the enemy on the move and advance swiftly into the depth, and 
accomplish maneuver with various goals in short periods of time. 
  In the past, maneuver of troops was usually limited to their 
relocation to occupy a favorable position with respect to the 
enemy to make strikes. Today, maneuver is also used for troops 
to utilize in a timely manner the results of nuclear and fire 
strikes, quickly shift efforts to the depth or to a new axis, 
negotiate zones of radioactive contamination and areas of 
debris, flooding, and fires, withdraw troops from under enemy 
nuclear strikes, and replace units and subunits suffering large 
losses and losing combat effectiveness. 
  Intensity of combat operations is the result of 
the aspiration and ability of potential enemies to conduct 
aggressive combat operations with decisive goals. In these 
conditions, achieving victory in battle will require our troops 
to have high combat proficiency and moral-psychological 
training, skillful actions, and maximum intensity of physical 
and spiritual strengths. 
  Fluidity of battle is caused by the might of 
modern weapons, their speed, and ability in a short period of 
time to inflict a decisive damage on the enemy, attack swiftly 
on the move and complete the rout of the enemy following nuclear 
and fire strikes, and exploit success into the depth at a high 
tempo. 
  In conditions of fluid combat operations, the struggle to 
gain time and the ability of officers to assess the situation 
quickly and assign missions based on good tactical training and 
sound skills in command and control become more important than 
ever before. 
  Rapid and abrupt changes in the situation are a 
new characteristic of modern combined-arms battle. The rapidness 
of the change in the situation is determined by the short time 
during which significant changes take place in the positions, 
condition, and nature of troop operations. It depends on the 
ability of modern weapons to suppress or destroy certain enemy 
targets in a minimum amount of time and also on the speed of 
troop movement. 
  The abruptness of the change in the situation is expressed 
in 
the radical qualitative change in the disposition of friendly 
and enemy troops, the correlation of forces and assets, and the 
radiation and chemical situation, the rapid approach of the 
reserve, the drop of an assault force, the making of powerful 
surprise strikes by combat helicopters, and, as a result, in the 
abrupt change in methods of operations and in the shift from one 
type of battle to another. 
  In the past, when there were continuous fronts and close 
contact between subunits, battle developed evenly from one line 
to another, particularly when breaking through an enemy defense. 
A change in the correlation of forces and assets took 
considerable time. In modern battle, both sides' use of powerful 
weapons, the high mobility of troops, and their great fire and 
hitting power lead to a radical change in the situation not only 
in hours but in minutes, and when nuclear weapons are used--even 
in seconds. 
  The increase in the speed of effect and power of weapons, 
particularly neutron and laser weapons, and also the mobility of 
troops will also increase the importance of this characteristic 
of battle in the future. This makes it necessary to train troops 
to carry out any combat mission under conditions of extremely 
rapid and abrupt changes in the situation and train commanders 
to be able to react quickly and competently to these changes, 
demonstrating decisiveness, initiative, creativity, and 
independence. 
  Diversity of methods used to wage battle is a 
characteristic resulting from the high dynamic and fluid nature, 
diversity of the situation conditions, rapid and abrupt changes 
in the situation, the possibility of shifting from one weapon to 
another, rapid changing in the types of combat operations, and 
also the sharp increase in the combat capabilities of troops and 
the great diversity of their weapons and the missions being 
carried out during battle. 
  The lack or limited effect of the above factors in wars of 
the past resulted in the theoretical elaboration of only a few 
methods of waging battle. In one battle or another, subunits, 
units, and large units chose, as a rule, one of the methods, 
which rarely changed during the course of carrying out the 
mission. 
  For victory over the enemy today, a commander must have the 
skill of using the entire diversity of methods of waging battle. 
  By method of waging battle we mean a variant of employing 
forces and assets to defeat the enemy and achieve the set goals. 
As historical experience shows, methods of waging battle 
continuously change and improve as its material basis develops. 
They also depend on the missions assigned to the troops, the 
conditions of carrying them out, the capabilities of the troops, 
the composition and nature of actions of the enemy, and terrain 
characteristics. The great diversity of missions being carried 
out by subunits, units, and large units and of the weapons they 
use and the diverse nature of enemy actions and of terrain 
conditions result in the fact that methods of modern 
combined-arms battle will be quite diverse. 
  In a defense, the basic methods of waging battle are: 
engaging the main enemy grouping during the process of its 
advance and deployment for an offensive by using surprise 
nuclear strikes, airstrikes, and artillery strikes; repelling 
attacks by enemy tanks, motorized infantry, and airmobile troops 
by using the fire of all ground and air forces and assets in 
front of the forward edge of the battle area; and stubborn 
holding of the most important areas in the depth combined with 
conducting counterattacks. 
  An offensive with the use of nuclear weapons is accomplished 
by inflicting decisive damage on the enemy with nuclear strikes, 
delivery of conventional strikes, and the swift advance of 
subunits, units, and large units following these strikes to 
complete the rout of the enemy and seize vitally important areas 
(installations). 
  In an offensive using conventional weapons, the necessary 
degree of damage to the enemy can be achieved only on a narrow 
sector of the front. Therefore, the following must be at the 
basis of the methods of the offensive in these conditions: 
massed use of weapons and aviation on a narrow front; 
breakthrough of the defenses on this sector by motorized rifle 
and tank subunits; exploitation of success into the depth and 
towards the flanks; encirclement and destruction of the main 
body of the enemy's defending forces in coordination with 
adjacent subunits. 
  Development of combat operations on land and in the air 
over a broad front and to a great depth, and conducting them at 
a high tempo is the result of the increase in combat 
capabilities of troops and the maximum range of weapons. This 
has resulted in a considerable expansion of the spatial 
boundaries of battle and an increase in its tempo. For example, 
before new models of small arms and BMP's (BTR's) entered 
service in the motorized rifle platoon and new models of tanks 
entered service in the tank platoon, a platoon could advance on 
a front up to 200 meters wide and defend a strongpoint up to 300 
meters across the front and up to 200 meters deep. A platoon's 
capabilities increased sharply when they were equipped with new 
weapons and equipment. According to contemporary views, a 
platoon is able to attack a defending enemy successfully on a 
front up to 300 meters wide and defend a strongpoint up to 400 
meters across the front and up to 300 meters deep. 
  In the future, with an increase in the firing range of 
artillery and the development of aviation, the spatial 
boundaries of battle will continue to increase in depth. At the 
same time, a similar development of our potential enemies' means 
of waging battle and an increase in the combat capabilities of 
their troops will not make it possible to increase substantially 
the width of the front of advance and defense of our subunits, 
units, and large units. 
<H5>  4. Basic Principles of Modern Combined-Arms Battle </H5>
  Principles of combined-arms battle--these are the basic 
guiding tenets and the most important recommendations for 
organizing and waging battle as a whole. 
  The principles are the fundamental base for a platoon 
commander's creativity for his making the correct decision. At 
the same time, they are not the decision itself, for in such a 
case they may be turned into a predictable pattern and unsound 
recipes for victory. They must not be examined isolated from one 
another. To achieve success in battle, a platoon commander must 
skillfully use all the principles, taking into account the 
situation at hand. 
  The basic principles of waging modern combined-arms battle 
are: constant high combat readiness of the subunit; a high 
degree of aggressiveness, decisiveness, and continuity of waging 
battle; surprise of actions; maintaining continuous coordination 
in battle; decisive concentration of the main efforts on the 
main axis and at the necessary time; maneuver of forces, assets, 
and fire; consideration and use of the moral-political and 
psychological factors in the interests of carrying out the 
assigned mission; all-round support of battle; maintaining and 
timely restoration of the platoon's combat effectiveness; firm 
and continuous command and control of the platoon; inflexibility 
in achieving the planned goals; carrying out decisions made and 
assigned missions. 
  Constant high combat readiness for carrying out the 
combat mission is achieved through correct understanding of 
one's mission, excellent combat proficiency of all personnel, 
and their readiness for operations in conditions of the enemy 
using weapons of mass destruction; a high political-moral state, 
discipline, and vigilance of personnel; manning and supplying 
the platoon with everything necessary for waging battle; 
constant readiness of weapons and combat equipment for immediate 
use and readiness of personnel for carrying out assigned 
missions; skillful command and control and accomplishment of 
combat support measures. 
  A high degree of aggressiveness, decisiveness, and 
continuity of waging battle involve the constant striving 
for a complete rout of the enemy. The platoon commander's 
decision to crush the enemy must be firm and carried out to the 
end without hesitation. The platoon commander must instill this 
determination in his subordinates and constantly train them for 
successful accomplishment of combat missions. 
  This is achieved by: thorough knowledge of the enemy; 
seizing 
and holding the initiative; boldness, daring, persistence, and 
perseverance of personnel in carrying out combat missions; quick 
utilization of the results of nuclear and conventional 
engagement of the enemy and also the results of fire from the 
platoon's own weapons; skillful crossing or bypassing of 
obstacles, zones of contamination, and areas of destruction, 
fires, and flooding; waging battle in the day, night, and in any 
kind of weather; combat support; timely replenishment of 
expended ammunition, fuel, and other supplies, as well as 
servicing and maintenance of armament and combat equipment. 
  Surprise of actions involves using techniques, 
methods, and weapons the enemy does not expect. It makes it 
possible to catch the enemy unawares, cause panic in his ranks, 
paralyze his will to resist, sharply reduce combat 
effectiveness, disrupt command and control, and thereby create 
conditions for defeating even superior enemy forces. 
  Surprise can be achieved by non-stereotyped use of available 
combat equipment and armament; keeping the scenario of the 
upcoming battle and preparations for it secret; misleading the 
enemy with respect to our intentions; secrecy in bringing the 
subunit to combat readiness and reducing the time period for 
preparing for battle; striking the enemy where he does not 
expect it; beating the enemy to the punch in actions; skillful 
maneuver of fire, forces, and assets; and strict accomplishment 
of camouflage measures and secrecy. 
  Maintaining continuous coordination between squads 
(tanks) in the platoon and attached assets involves coordinating 
their efforts by missions, lines, and time. 
  In organizing coordination, the platoon commander must 
thoroughly know the combat mission of his subunit and the 
methods of carrying it out, the missions of adjacent subunits, 
reference points, and warning, control, and coordinating signals 
established by the senior commander, and have communications in 
the platoon and with adjacent subunits. 
  The platoon commander determines the coordination procedures 
when making the decision and gives instructions on coordination 
after assigning the combat mission. Coordination is organized 
and maintained throughout the battle. 
  Decisive concentration of main efforts on the main axis 
and at the necessary time enables the platoon commander to 
achieve superiority over the enemy or successfully oppose 
numerically superior enemy forces, make most effective use of 
available forces and assets, and place the enemy in an 
unfavorable situation. 
  Maneuver of forces, assets, and fire is an 
important component part of battle. It makes it possible to 
seize and hold the initiative, foil the plans of the enemy, and 
successfully wage battle in a changing situation. 
  Maneuver of forces and assets is accomplished in order to 
occupy a favorable position for firing against the enemy's most 
vulnerable spot or for attacking him in the flank and rear. 
  The types of maneuver of forces and assets are close 
envelopment, wide envelopment, a combination of them, and 
withdrawal (diagram 1). Close envelopment is a type of maneuver 
accomplished to break out to attack the enemy's flank. It is 
done usually in close fire and tactical coordination with 
subunits operating from the front. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-06A>           Diagram 1: Types of Maneuver by Subunits in Battle </FIG>





    Wide envelopment is a deeper maneuver executed to break out 
to attack the enemy from the rear. As a rule, it is accomplished 
only in tactical coordination with subunits operating from the 
front. 
  Withdrawal is primarily a forced type of maneuver used to 
pull friendly troops out from under an enemy attack and occupy a 
more favorable position with respect to the enemy. It is 
conducted only with permission of the senior commander. 
  A maneuver should be simple in concept and be conducted 
quickly, secretly, and suddenly for the enemy. Speed of maneuver 
is achieved by organizing it in a short period of time, high 
speed of movement of subunits, and crossing various barriers and 
obstacles on the move. 
  Maneuvering of fire involves concentrating the platoon's 
fire 
against one important target, timely shifting of fire from one 
target to another, and simultaneous firing by the platoon 
against several targets (Figure 1). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-07A>           Figure 1. Types of Maneuver by Fire [CO--Concentrated Fire; MCO--Motorized Rifle </FIG>





    Consideration and use of the moral-political and 
psychological factors in the interests of carrying out the 
assigned mission are an important condition of achieving success 
in battle. This is achieved by always having a thorough 
knowledge of the political-moral and psychological state of 
platoon personnel, organizing and conducting active political 
work to strengthen it; systematic study of the enemy's 
moral-political qualities; revealing his strong and weak points; 
and actively countering his ideological subversions and 
propaganda. 
  All-round combat support involves organizing and 
accomplishing measures aimed at maintaining the platoon's high 
combat readiness, preserving its combat effectiveness, and 
creating favorable conditions for successful and timely 
accomplishment of assigned missions. 
  All-round support of the platoon includes: combat, 
technical, 
and logistic support. 
  Combat support in the platoon is organized based on the 
commander's decision in all types of battle and also when moving 
and getting into position. It includes reconnaissance, 
protection against weapons of mass destruction, camouflage, 
engineer and chemical support, and security. 
  When organizing technical and logistic support, the platoon 
commander must take timely steps for replenishment of 
ammunition, refueling, performing servicing and maintenance of 
combat vehicles and armament, and providing personnel with 
individual protection and decontamination gear, food, and other 
supplies. 
  Maintaining and timely restoration of the platoon's 
combat effectiveness involve organizing and conducting 
measures to ensure high combat proficiency of subunits, their 
timely manning and supplying them with everything necessary for 
battle, and also the ability to carry out assigned missions. 
  Firm and continuous command and control of the platoon 
and inflexibility in achieving the planned goals and carrying 
out decisions made and assigned missions are achieved 
through constant knowledge of the situation; timely decision 
making and implementation; precise assignment of missions to 
squads (tanks) and attached and supporting assets; initiative 
and personal responsibility of the platoon commander for his 
decision; correct battle employment of his and attached 
subunits; and stable communications with them. 
<H3>  5. Fundamentals of Combat Employment of the Motorized Rifle 
(Tank) Platoon </H3>
  A motorized rifle (tank) platoon, being a tactical subunit, 
carries out an important mission for destroying the enemy in 
battle. Numerous combat examples and the experience of combat 
training of troops show that the platoon, possessing powerful 
armament and combat equipment, in coordination with subunits of 
other branches of troops, special troops, and independently, is 
capable of the following: 
  --in the defense--using organized fire, inflict 
damage on the enemy in front of the forward edge of the battle 
area; repel attacks by enemy tanks and infantry; battle 
low-flying air targets; and stubbornly defend an occupied 
strongpoint; 
  --in the offensive--boldly combining fire and 
movement, swiftly attack the enemy, destroy his personnel, 
tanks, armored fighting vehicles, artillery, antitank and other 
weapons, and offensive nuclear and chemical weapons; combat 
enemy aircraft and helicopters; at a rapid pace develop the 
offensive, repel counterattacks, and pursue a withdrawing enemy; 
make hasty crossings of water obstacles, negotiate obstacles and 
debris, and consolidate captured lines. 
  In addition, the platoon can successfully carry out other 
missions in reconnaissance and security. 
  When carrying out combat missions, a motorized rifle (tank) 
platoon usually operates as part of a company. In 
reconnaissance, security during movement and at the halt, and 
also in an assault group, it can also operate independently. 
  Depending on the nature of the mission being carried out, 
the 
terrain, enemy pressure, and other situation conditions, a 
motorized rifle platoon can carry out missions operating 
dismounted (on skis in the winter), on armored fighting vehicles 
(armored transport vehicles), and as an assault force on tanks. 
Machinegun, grenade-launcher, flame-thrower, and antiaircraft 
squads may be attached to it; a combat-engineer squad and 
chemical reconnaissance scouts can be attached when performing 
independent missions in march, halt, and combat security and in 
reconnaissance. During operations in security and as an assault 
group, tanks may also be attached to a platoon. 
  Motorized rifle, combat-engineer, and flame-thrower squads 
and chemical reconnaissance scouts may be attached to a tank 
platoon in a combat situation (as a rule, when performing 
independent missions). 
  Depending on the situation, a motorized rifle (tank) platoon 
carries out its mission in march, approach march, and combat 
formations. 
  A platoon's march formation is a column. In a column, a 
platoon executes a march, pursues a withdrawing enemy, displaces 
as the battalion reserve, and also can execute a maneuver on the 
battlefield. The march formation should ensure the platoon a 
high speed of movement, economy of forces and assets, and rapid 
deployment into combat formation. 
  During dismounted operations, a motorized rifle platoon may 
also use the approach march formation, which is the alignment of 
the platoon in squad columns dispersed frontally into a line of 
squads abreast (Figure 2). the intervals between squads in this 
case may be up to 100 meters. Reinforcements attached to the 
platoon proceed behind the guiding squad or are located at a 
position indicated by the commander. The approach march 
formation of a motorized rifle platoon is used to reduce the 
time for deployment into combat formation and reduce 
vulnerability to enemy artillery fire and airstrikes. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-08A>           Figure 2. Approach March Formation of a Motorized Rifle Platoon </FIG>





    The platoon takes up a combat formation for waging battle. 
It 
must correspond to the assigned mission and ensure successful 
waging of battle; complete utilization of the combat 
capabilities of the platoon's and attached subunits, the results 
of engagement of the enemy by nuclear and conventional fires, 
and favorable terrain conditions; stability and aggressiveness 
in defense; least vulnerability to enemy fire; and maintaining 
continuous coordination and command and control of subordinates. 
  In defensive fighting, the combat formation of a motorized 
rifle platoon consists of the combat formations of squads 
located at positions, combat vehicles (armored transport 
vehicles), and reinforcements occupying fire positions both at 
the forward edge of the platoon strongpoint and in its depth. 
  The combat formation of a tank platoon in a defense consists 
of tanks and reinforcements located at fire positions at the 
forward edge or in the depth of the strongpoint. 
  The combat formation of a motorized rifle platoon in an 
offensive during operations on BMP's (BTR's) and of a tank 
platoon consists of an extended line of combat vehicles and 
reinforcements (figures 3 and 4). The intervals between vehicles 
in the extended line may be up to 100 meters. The combat 
vehicles of reinforcements may operate in the extended line or 
directly behind it. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-08B>           Figure 3. Combat Formation of a Motorized Rifle Platoon in an Offensive </FIG>






<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-08C>             Figure 4. Combat Formation of a Tank Platoon in an Offensive </FIG>





    During a motorized rifle platoon's operations dismounted, 
its 
combat formation consists of an extended line, armored fighting 
vehicles (armored transport vehicles), and reinforcements. 
  The squad combat formation consists of an extended line and 
the combat vehicle (armored transport vehicle) (Figure 5). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-09A>           Figure 5. Combat Formation of a Motorized Rifle Squad in an Offensive </FIG>





<H5>    6. The Platoon's Combat Equipment and Armament </H5>
  Organizationally, a motorized rifle platoon 
consists of a headquarters element and three motorized rifle 
squads. 
  A motorized rifle platoon's armament consists of armored 
fighting vehicles (Figure 6) or armored transport vehicles 
(figures 7 and 8), machineguns, assault rifles, shoulder-fired 
antitank rocket launchers, a sniper rifle, pistols, and hand 
grenades. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-09B>           Figure 6. Armored Fighting Vehicle </FIG>






<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-09C>             Figure 7. BTR-70 Armored Transport Vehicle </FIG>






<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-09D>             Figure 8. BTR-80 Armored Transport Vehicle </FIG>





    The armored fighting vehicle is designed for waging battle 
by 
a motorized rifle squad. It considerably increases the 
firepower, mobility, and protection of personnel on the 
battlefield and makes it possible to operate successfully in 
various situation conditions. 
  The fighting vehicle has armor capable of defeating 
small-arms fire and designed to protect against shell fragments, 
a system of collective protection from weapons of mass 
destruction, and thermal smoke generating equipment, and has 
high maneuverability. It can cross water obstacles afloat, be 
transported by air, and negotiate sectors of contamination, 
destruction, and various obstacles. 
  The BMP-1 armored fighting vehicle is armed with antitank 
guided missiles (ATGM's), a 73-mm smoothbore semiautomatic 
antitank gun, and a 7.62-mm machinegun (PKT) paired with it. 
  The assault compartment of the BMP is equipped with firing 
ports, which enable personnel to fire their machineguns and 
assault rifles without leaving the vehicle. The BMP can engage 
enemy tanks at a range of up to 3 km and also deliver effective 
fire against his personnel and weapons. Accommodation of platoon 
personnel in armored fighting vehicles is shown in Figure 9. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-10A>           Figure 9. Accommodation of personnel in BMP </FIG>





    Armored transport vehicles, being the platoon's means of 
transport, largely perform the role of armored fighting vehicles 
in battle, supporting squads with machinegun fire in an 
offensive and when they are conducting a defensive battle. 
  The BTR-60PB (BTR-70, -80) armored transport vehicle is a 
fighting, wheeled, armored, amphibious vehicle armed with a 
14.5-mm KPVT heavy machinegun capable of destroying lightly 
armored targets and a 7.62-mm PKT machinegun paired with it. The 
armament is situated in the turret mounting. The armored 
transport vehicles have a high off-road capability and are able 
to make hasty crossings of water obstacles, trenches, and 
vehicle pits. Like the armored fighting vehicle, the armored 
transport vehicle has armor which makes it possible to protect 
personnel reliably against small-arms fire and shell fragments 
and also reduce severalfold the casualty-producing effects of 
nuclear weapons. 
  Accommodation of platoon personnel in armored transport 
vehicles is shown in figures 10 and 11. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-10B>           Figure 10. Accommodation of personnel in BTR-60PB </FIG>






<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-001C-10C>             Figure 11. Accommodation of personnel in BTR-70 </FIG>





    The Kalashnikov assault rifle (AKM) is the basic individual 
weapon of platoon personnel for engaging enemy troops at a 
distance of up to 400 meters. When delivering concentrated fire 
by a squad or platoon, the effective range can reach 800 meters 
against ground targets and 500 meters against air targets. 
  The Kalashnikov light machinegun (RPK) is the automatic 
weapon of a motorized rifle squad. It is designed for destroying 
enemy troops and weapons at a range of up to 800 meters and 
aircraft, helicopters, and paratroopers at a range of up to 500 
meters. 
  Kalashnikov machineguns (PKT) mounted on armored fighting 
vehicles, armored transport vehicles, and tanks can successfully 
destroy enemy troops and weapons as well as air targets at a 
range of up to 1000 meters. 
  The motorized rifle platoon is also armed with a sniper 
rifle, which makes it possible to destroy important individual 
targets (enemy officers, observers, snipers, gun crews, 
low-flying helicopters) at a range of up to 1300 meters. 
  To combat tanks and other enemy armored assets, besides the 
BMP's armament, the platoon also has shoulder-fired antitank 
rocket launchers, capable of reliably destroying targets at a 
range of up to 500 meters, and antitank hand grenades. 
  Organizationally, a tank platoon usually consists 
of three tank crews. It has modern tanks which possess high fire 
characteristics, powerful armored protection, and high 
maneuverability. 
  The tanks have guns with high ballistic characteristics and 
rate of fire, armor-piercing and high-explosive fragmentation 
shells, and gun control equipment. The armament makes it 
possible to engage ground, air, and surface targets by both 
direct and indirect fire. A tank platoon is capable of 
delivering effective concentrated fire against openly disposed 
tanks at a range of up to 3 km, against enemy weapons and troops 
at a range of up to 4 km, and against concentrations of combat 
equipment and troops at a range of up to 6 km. 
  The capabilities of the tanks' armament control system make 
it possible to carry out fire missions successfully by firing on 
the move at a speed of up to 20 km/hr. 
  The armor of a modern tank makes it possible to decrease the 
effect of a blast wave on the crew by a factor of 3-4 and the 
effect of penetrating radiation by a factor of 10, completely 
eliminate the effect of thermal radiation, and successfully 
withstand fire from conventional weapons, including antitank 
weapons. All this ensures, on the one hand, a high degree of 
survivability of tank platoon personnel and, on the other, 
combined with fire, gives it great striking power in battle. 
  A tank's maneuverability is demonstrated in its mobility, 
off-road capability, and its ability to relocate quickly to 
threatened sectors and open fire on the enemy. Thus, a tank 
platoon can move in a column at an average speed of 25-30 km/hr, 
attack the enemy at a speed of 8-12 km/hr, pursue the enemy at a 
speed of 10-15 km/hr, and cross water obstacles up to 5 meters 
deep under water. 
Footnotes 
  *F. Engels, Anti-Duhring, Moscow, 1970, p 167. 
  **V.I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 13, 
p 
374. 
  ***Ibid., Vol 41, p 121. 
  COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1989 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61045 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prospects of Russian National Security in Year 2000 </TI></H3>
<H4>   Post-Economic Boom--Balanced Conservative Image </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0164A Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian No 1, 4 Jan 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0164A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Karaganov, deputy director, Russian </F>
Academy of Sciences IYe, member, Presidential Council: "The 
Russian Concept of Security in the Year 2005"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Prediction </H5>
  People familiar with strategic planning know that 
predictions 
may be made a year, a year and a half, or two or three years 
into the future. Beyond that, science ends and art begins. At 
this moment intuition and imagination should begin to play a 
greater role than a knowledge of facts and trends, and the 
ability to analyze them. 
  This almost axiomatic premise would seem to be more 
applicable to Russia than anywhere else, because in Russia, 
everything is moving, collapsing, growing, and serious political 
scientists are extremely reluctant to make predictions even a 
month into the future. However, it is in the present that we can 
predict the policies of Russia relatively far into the future 
with much greater confidence than has ever been possible in the 
last several decades. Fifteen or so years ago this would have 
been impossible because it was obvious that the system was 
rolling downhill, and things were about to explode. But as for 
how many explosions there would be, and what would follow them, 
this was unclear. Three and even two years ago the old system 
was undergoing decomposition and disintegration, but it was 
still hanging on, and no one was sure when development would 
begin. 
  Many things have become clearer this year, 1993. A 
superimposition of a large number of phenomena and 
events--dramatic expansion of the property-owning class, of the 
stratum of people working in the private sector (they now 
represent over a third of the employed), growth of the "gray," 
unregulated and unaccountable economy, which was nonetheless 
feeding millions, and B. Yeltsin's victory in the spring 
referendum--transformed quantity into quality. There appeared in 
the politically and economically active and competitive part of 
the population a certainty, a latent feeling that Russia "will 
break out," and become a mighty country of prosperous and free 
people. Russia crossed over the mountains dividing its 
totalitarian past from a normal future. The descent into the 
valley of normalcy is perilous. A misstep could still mean 
disaster. But it's even harder to go back. 
  New elites whose interests are predictable and are already 
rather clearly discernible began forming quickly. These were the 
new bourgeoisie, moving from trade, essentially military, to 
production. These were the directors of state enterprises 
undergoing privatization, who were becoming capitalists. These 
were the political elites, coming together with the first two 
and quickly gaining strength. And finally, these were the 
military, whose influence was visibly growing in a time of 
weakness of state power and political instability at the borders. 
  The main vector of the interests of these elites is already 
clear--moderate state nationalism, economic reintegration of a 
significant part of the former USSR while avoiding brutal and 
costly actions of political reintegration, and a desire for 
cooperation, especially economic, with the outside world. In 
this case the failed hopes of aid from the West are visibly 
intensifying neo-isolationist sentiments and self-reliance. A 
course of rapprochement with Europe, with the West, remains a 
priority, but internal and external limits imposed upon this 
rapprochement, as well as the economic ties of regions of 
southern Russia, Siberia and the Far East are partially 
reorienting interests in the direction of Asia and the Far East. 
The need for settling conflicts and preventing their spread is 
generating a habit of relying on military force--albeit at lower 
levels. The main interests are now focused on internal survival, 
on keeping instability at Russia's borders from encroaching. But 
despite the fact that such a focus makes Russia not even a 
continental but just a regional power in terms of its present 
interests, the elite does not perceive Russia to be as such, and 
it is certain that it will once again become a mighty 
continental power. At the same time hardly anyone is ready for 
serious sacrifices in behalf of greatness, and all the more so 
on behalf of Russia's return to the status of a global 
superpower, which had been imposed on it by the vagaries of 
history--the postwar vacuum in Europe, superimposed over 
possession of nuclear weapons and residual communist messianism. 
  This is the group of interests that will determine Russian 
policy over the course of the next decade. The country will go 
through a time of crisis, which will last another year or two. 
Then stabilization will begin, and then an ascent. After 5-6 
years, if political disintegration, which is extremely 
improbable, or a catastrophic social explosion does not occur, 
an economic boom will begin in Russia. 
  By 2005 Russia will more likely be a dominant economic 
center 
and a leading political force in a fraternity of states 
consisting of Belarus, Ukraine (or the states that form on its 
territory if it falls apart as a result of the economic disaster 
that has begun there), Kazakhstan, and possibly Uzbekistan and 
Kyrgyzia. The fate of the Transcaucasian countries is unclear. 
Most likely if they are able to quench the flames of open 
conflicts in the foreseeable future, they will have extremely 
close political and economic relations with Russia as well. 
  But this time Russia will be pursuing a relatively equal 
policy in all directions. However, cultural and spiritual 
traditions, the ongoing instability in Asia, and mighty, and 
possibly already unstable China will prod it toward alliances 
with the West. 
  The strategy of the national security of the newly ascending 
capitalist Russia of the year 2005 will depend to a certain 
degree on what happens in the 12 years separating us from that 
moment. If in this time Russia becomes a part of a 
military-political association or strategic alliance extending 
from Vancouver to Tokyo, if it comes closer to Europe 
politically, if it comes closer to or even enters the European 
free trade zone forming around the expanding European Community, 
and if it is able to achieve real membership in the European 
market, and become an object of massive capital investments, 
Russia's strategy will be European, oriented on maintaining the 
status quo of world development. Imperial impulses, unavoidable 
for such a mighty country that is additionally undergoing an era 
of early capitalism, will be easily contained by the advantages 
of membership in a Euro-Atlantic-Pacific strategic association. 
  Moscow will be forced to pursue another strategy, even in 
terms of Russia's security. But it is becoming a normal country, 
and it will be forced to pursue a normal policy. And this means 
that it will strive to change, which is inconsistent with its 
national interests. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61046 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prospects of Russian National Security in Year 2000 </TI></H3>
<H4>   Strongest Army in Europe by Year 2000 </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0164B Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian No 1, 4 Jan 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0164B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pavel Felgengauer: "Moscow's Ultima Ratio (Final </F>
Argument): Volunteer Peacemakers"] 
<H5>  Fantasy </H5>
  When in the early 1980's the Russian government first had to 
resort to the "final argument of kings", to arms, it suddenly 
became evident that the emperor had no clothes. That is, while 
the country had an obvious excess of weapons, it did not have an 
army capable of quickly and effectively pacifying the country. 
  On 31 October 1992 there were 2.5 million servicemen in the 
Russian Army. There were over 600,000 in the MVD [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs], but when 5,000 paratroopers, motorized 
riflemen and other such men were needed for the operation in 
Ossetia-Ingushetia, the General Staff and the MVD scraped them 
up with tremendous difficulty, company by company and platoon by 
platoon, from Russia's cities and garrisons. Still earlier, by 
the way, in January 1990, partial mobilization had to be carried 
out in the Northern Caucasian Military District for the 
operation in Baku. The former Soviet Army found itself totally 
unsuited to lightning-fast peacemaking operations. 
  The military reform, which was planned to pursue a leisurely 
course until the year 2000, was seen more and more clearly as 
being inconsistent with the requirements of the times. 
Circumstances forced Russia's military leadership to improvise 
as the events unfolded, as one peacemaking operation blended 
into the next. But in general, the plan for reform by the year 
2000 was in a certain sense completed: The Russian Army became a 
mixed army, consisting of both conscripts and professionals. 
Even numerical strength corresponded approximately to what had 
been planned--1.5 million persons. By the way, this is not 
counting the highly expanded forces of the MVD, as well as the 
local national-tribal auxiliary formations in the outlying areas 
(in Central Asia, in the Caucasus, in Ukraine etc.). 
  Professional mobile combat units became the Russian Army's 
main strike force in the year 2000. The first such combined 
units (then still experimental) were formed in 1993-1994 out of 
soldiers serving on a contract basis. But the first complement 
of contract soldiers was generally unsuccessful: Common 
ill-disciplined people, often with a criminal past. Elite combat 
units could be hammered together out of such rabble only through 
merciless disciplinary measures. This required professional, 
highly paid junior officers, but there were none in the Russian 
Army then. 
  However, the army was almost perpetually at is business, and 
these random people were gradually sifted out. In Russia, as we 
know, improvisation often produces better results than planned 
measures. By the year 2000 the army's strike forces consisted of 
five "old" airborne divisions, 20 brigades and 15 separate 
helicopter regiments. By the end of the century the tactics of 
intervention had been fully worked out: Peacetime generals 
managed to gain some experience. The operation to pacify the 
Northern Caucasus is still considered to be one of the best 
examples of a total air-land operation. In it, by the way, the 
Russian Army made its first use of "invisible" ground-attack 
aircraft, built according to "stealth" technology to penetrate 
the air defense system armed with S300 surface-to-air missiles, 
which the Confederation of Nations of the Northern Caucasus had 
purchased from Ukraine earlier. (The first flying prototypes of 
Russian "stealth" aircraft were tested back in the late 1980's, 
but because of insufficient funds the aircraft could not be 
introduced into series production until the mid-1990's, with the 
support of France's Dassault and Israel's military-technical 
assistance. After this, "stealth" technology began spreading 
successfully through the world arms market.) 
  Mobile peacemaking strike forces didn't usually stay in one 
place very long. An effort was made to replace them in regions 
of operations as quickly as possible with "conventional" 
brigades and divisions of ground forces and MVD, consisting 
mostly of conscripts, as well as with volunteer formations made 
up of local proponents of integration of the former USSR into 
the "new" Federation. Thus the General Staff almost always had a 
reserve at its disposal for unforeseen complications. By the 
way, mobile peacemaking forces were used extremely rarely in the 
territory of the Russian Federation itself (with the exception 
of the Northern Caucasus). The unity of the Russian Federation 
was fully ensured by special MVD units by the year 2000. 
  As in 1993-1994, the unemployed, adventurers, vagrants, 
mercenaries who had managed to make war in various hot spots, 
and other unreliable persons sought the opportunity to enlist in 
the prestigious mobile forces. Special units were created for 
this contingent under the principle of the French Foreign 
Legion, which accepted all physically healthy men who were 
citizens of any independent country. The mobile peacemaking 
forces protected the enlistee from prosecution by the law, and 
provided him with "clean" documents. However, during the 
contract period professional junior officers maintained the 
strictest possible discipline in the special units, essentially 
having uncontrolled life and death power over their soldiers. 
Also, a sizeable number of women were serving on a contract 
basis in "conventional" combined units of the mobile forces. 
  By the year 2000, pacification of the former USSR was 
practically complete, and the now-stronger Russian Armed Forces 
had once again become the strongest army in Eurasia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61047 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prospects of Russian National Security in Year 2000 </TI></H3>
<H4>   Isolationism, Local (Nuclear) Conflict </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0164C Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian No 1, 4 Jan 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0164C </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pavel Flegengauer: "Caucasian War at Center of </F>
World Policy in the Year 2000"] 
<H5>  Nightmare </H5>
  In the beginning of the new millennium the Caucasus 
transformed into what it had been throughout the entire 19th 
century, into a region of continual armed conflict between 
Turkey and Russia. In almost all local Caucasian conflicts 
(Ossetia, Chechnya, Abkhazia, Adzharia, Imeretia, Lezgistan, 
Karabakh etc.), Turkey supported one side with money and 
weapons, and Russia the other. 
  In the latter half of the 1990's Iran (the third regional 
great power) was too preoccupied with its war in southern Iraq 
and with support of Shi-ite factions of Islamic mujahadin 
fundamentalists opposing mujahadin Suni-ites in former Soviet 
Central Asia, and it had neither the resources nor the political 
will to participate seriously in the Caucasian wars. In 
addition, Iran still depended on Russia for its supply of modern 
weapons, which forced Iran to direct military-political 
expansion more southward, into the Persian Gulf region, and 
further in the direction of Israel, in order to avoid serious 
collision of interests with Russia. 
  By the year 2000 the peacemaking enthusiasm of the early 
1990's died away in Western Europe and the USA as a result of a 
number of extremely unsuccessful long-distance military 
expeditions. Following the ignominious evacuation from Mogadishu 
and the heavy Anglo-French losses in the appalling cauldron of 
Sarajevo (the new Dien Bien Phu), in 1994 France, Great Britain 
and Germany reduced military expenditures and armed forces even 
more. In accordance with the Maastricht agreements a Unified 
European Army was created, intended for demonstration of 
European unity but totally unsuited to the real war in the 
hostile environment of the Caucasus Mountains. 
  The slump and inflation in the country and foreign policy 
failures (Somali, Bosnia, Ukraine, Estonia, the Caucasus) led to 
the dominance of American society by isolationist sentiments 
almost as deep as those of the 1920's. In 1996, Ross Perot was 
elected U.S. president under the slogan "America First." 
  The time of active intervention of the UN Security Council 
in 
regional conflicts (1990-1994) was over. In the Caucasus, Turkey 
and Russia opposed one another, and there wasn't a third force 
that could serve as a serious referee and somehow stabilize the 
unstable bipolar confrontation. 
  In 1993-1995 the Armenian Army became ever stronger. It kept 
Nagornyy Karabakh and contiguous regions of Azerbaijan under 
dependable control. The government in Baku changed frequently, 
and every government was weaker than the one preceding it. 
  An Armenian-Azeri peace treaty was signed in 1993, and 
demilitarized zones under the supervision of the European 
Community Security Council were established. The peace endured 
through all of 1994 without serious violations. 
  In fall 1994 Lezgistan partisans intensified their combat 
activities on the Azeri-Russian border. Rail communication 
between Azerbaijan and Russia became totally unreliable. The 
weak central government was incapable of safeguarding cargo and 
maintaining at least some kind of order in other regions of 
Azerbaijan. In Georgia, the central government controlled only 
the Tbilisi vicinity. Armenia found itself in a blockade of 
worse proportions than in 1992. In the unexpectedly cold winter 
of 1994-1995 people in Yerevan died not so much from outright 
starvation (international humanitarian aid was delivered via an 
air bridge) as from cold. 
  In spring 1995 tens of thousands of irate demonstrators led 
by activists from the Dashnak Party seized the parliament 
building. The parliament deposed President Ter-Petrosyan in the 
face of assault rifle muzzles, after which it announced its own 
self-dissolution. The victorious opposition formed a new 
government. The Armenian Army began a decisive offensive to 
break the blockade and to establish a friendly regime in Baku, 
with which a peace could be signed. 
  It became clear in Ankara that in a few days Azerbaijan was 
going to become an Armenian-Russian protectorate. Turkey 
demanded immediate cessation of Armenian aggression, but the 
ultimatum was ignored in Yerevan, where it was declared that 
"the combat activities are being pursued not by the Armenian 
Army but by self-defense forces of the independent Karabakh 
Republic." Then occurred the inevitable--the Turkish Army 
intervened directly into the war. At first, subunits of the 
Turkish forces were transferred to the Nakhichevan enclave. And 
then, in May 1995, tanks of the IX Army Corps of the 3d Field 
Army began an offensive from the vicinity of Kars with the 
support of combat aviation. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-004C-04A>           P. Felgengauer's War With Turkey (1995-2000) </FIG>




  Almost immediately Russian motorized rifle and armored 
forces 
located at the Turkish-Armenian border in the vicinity of Gyumri 
entered into combat, but they had almost no air cover, because 
the nearest Russian air bases were hundreds of kilometers away 
in the Northern Caucasus. Turkish aviation dominated the skies 
over the battlefield. Joint defense by the Armenians and 
Russians was hacked to pieces in 48 hours. Russian forces 
withdrew to the north, to the Georgian border, while Turkish 
tanks turned to the south, toward Yerevan. Armenian forces 
offered fierce resistance, but it was clear that the city would 
be taken in a few days. 
  At this time mobile formations of the Russian Army were 
participating in peacemaking operations in Central Asia, in 
northeastern Estonia, in some oblasts of eastern Ukraine, in the 
Crimea, and in the Northern Caucasus. 
  The Russian Army had no reserves to draw from to stop the 
Turkish offensive. But Moscow couldn't cede the Transcaucasus to 
Turkey, because this would have destabilized the Northern 
Caucasus totally. It was believed in Moscow that a victory in 
Armenia would result in further penetration by Turks into 
Turkic-language Central Asia, and that it would fortify the 
positions of extreme nationalists in Ukraine. Moscow felt a 
mortal threat, and decided upon extreme measures. 
  Russian frontal Su-24 Fencer bombers made a number of bomb 
strikes on bases and airfields of the Turkish 3d Army, but they 
suffered losses. Russian strategic bombers flying over the Black 
Sea launched several dozen cruise missiles carrying conventional 
warheads against a number of objectives in the vicinity of 
Bosporus, as well as in Ankara, the capital of Turkey. Eighty 
percent of the missiles struck their targets precisely, but the 
Turkish invasion of Armenia continued. In addition, Turkey 
closed the Strait of Bosporus to Russian merchant vessels. The 
Russian Supreme Military Council announced an ultimatum to 
Turkey: To cease the offensive in 24 hours and begin an 
immediate troop withdrawal, or "Russia would use all means at 
its disposal to stop the aggression." Turkey said that it would 
not yield to nuclear blackmail, obviously figuring that Russia 
would never opt for nuclear weapons against a nonnuclear power 
that was also member of NATO. In the meantime, Turkish tanks had 
encircled Yerevan and were fighting in the southern suburbs. 
  Then President General ***, chairman of the Russian Supreme 
Military Council, decided to make a preemptory demonstrative 
nuclear strike on Turkey. A radar station in the vicinity of 
Kars was targeted. The 100 kiloton air burst, after which there 
was no noticeable radioactive fallout, destroyed the station. 
The civilian population practically didn't suffer. Of course, 
three American servicemen observing the course of the conflict 
were located at the station at the moment of the nuclear strike. 
  However, Washington's reaction was sluggish. No one wanted 
to 
begin a world nuclear war because of some half-destroyed 
villages in the Caucasus Mountains. And especially the weak and 
unpopular Clinton administration. The world community as a whole 
did not react to the war in the Transcaucasus in any serious 
way. That is, there were many midnight emergency meetings in New 
York, Brussels, Washington, Paris and London, but no real 
actions were taken either during the Armenian offensive or 
during the Turkish offensive, or after the first nuclear strike 
since 1945. Only pro-Turkish and anti-Turkish demonstrations in 
Germany led to new outbreaks of violence: Dormitories were 
torched, and stores were looted. The Russian president general 
announced that another, more powerful nuclear strike would be 
made on Turkey in 24 hours. But as a result of many hours of 
negotiations via the "hot line," a joint Russian-American 
settlement was developed that Turkey would have to accept. The 
Armenian forces were once again withdrawn from Azeri territory, 
while Turkish forces drew back from Armenian territory. However, 
Karabakh remained under Armenian control, and Nakhichevan under 
Turkish control. 
  With Russia's help Armenia soon replenished its losses in 
armaments, and continued to build up its military potential, 
gradually transforming into an enclave armed to the teeth--a 
"new Israel," with which the Armenians like to compare their 
tiny war-ready country. Azerbaijan and Georgia disintegrated 
into zones controlled by different local field commanders, some 
of whom were pro-Turkey, while others were pro-Moscow. (By the 
way, most simply plundered everything that others hadn't yet 
managed to take). 
  In Turkey, the "National Unity" government, allied with 
Muslim fundamentalists and extreme nationalists, came into 
power. Turkey drifted ever further away from the West, all the 
more so because its entry into the European Community was 
blocked insurmountably by Greece. Using pro-Turkish field 
commanders in Azerbaijan and Georgia, Ankara supported 
anti-Russian partisan actions by mujahadin in the Islamic 
Mountain Republic in the Northern Caucasus. 
  But by the year 2000 the situation began to change 
fundamentally. Russia and its army were clearly emerging from 
the crisis. Elite mobile brigades and regiments of helicopter 
gunships were transferred to the Caucasus. The last centers of 
organized resistance in Chechnya were suppressed. It was 
becoming increasingly more obvious that the Russian peacemaking 
army was preparing, as in 1921, to conduct a lightning campaign 
in the Transcaucasus, and to annex republics exhausted by a 
10-year war to the "Union"--the Unified Russian Federation. All 
the more so because by this time 80 percent of the territory of 
the former USSR was already pacified, and the Transcaucasus was 
the last major center of instability. 
  In 2000 the main problem absorbing the analysts was whether 
Turkey would be satisfied with the annexation of Nakhichevan, 
and would recognize all of the rest of the former Soviet 
Transcaucasus to be a zone of Russian interests, or decide upon 
a new war the moment mobile forces of the Federation landed in 
Baku. In the meantime, secret negotiations were proceeding 
between Moscow and Ankara. In the year 2000 Russia was clearly 
stronger than in 1995. It was hoped in Moscow that this time 
Turkey would be more sensible. Of course after the humiliation 
of 1995 the national fundamentalist government of Turkey 
embarked upon accelerated creation of its own nuclear weapons, 
but in the year 2000 the Muslim bomb was not yet ready. The 
Caucasian War did prove one thing, by the way: Local wars were 
going to be local nuclear wars more often in the 21st century. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61048 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Volga MD Draft `Proceeding Normally' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM1401101194 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 13 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> PM1401101194 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel-General A. Sergeyev, Commander of </F>
the Volga Military District, by Oleg Bedula, date and place not 
given, under the general heading "The Army and Society" and the 
rubric "Draft 93-94": "If You Haven't Served in the Army You 
Are Not Fit to Get Married" -- first paragraph is introduction] 
  [Text] Over 100,000 young men will be sent to Russian 
Armed Forces military districts and fleets from the Volga and 
Urals region during the present draft. Our correspondent asked 
Colonel-General A. Sergeyev, commander of the Volga Military 
District, to describe how the draft is going. 
  [Bedula] Anatoliy Ipatovich, your speech at the end of the 
year to the scientific and practical conference at the assembly 
of leading Russian Defense Ministry personnel had a great 
impact. Specifically, the statement that Volga Military District 
commissariats in conjunction with Internal Affairs Ministry and 
Prosecutor's Office structural subdivisions are taking 
additional measures to ensure that all deserters, "draft 
dodgers," and "refuseniks" are brought into line. Is the draft 
situation really worse than six months ago? 
  [Sergeyev] That is a realistic assessment of the actual 
situation at a specific moment. I am convinced that draft 
problems can be resolved more effectively if the local 
authorities and law and order bodies work in constant and close 
cooperation with the military commissariats. It is precisely in 
those republics and oblasts where the internal affairs organs 
and prosecutor's office have been paying less attention to the 
draft that there is a "shortfall." Specifically, I am talking 
about Tatarstan, the Komi Republic, and Samara and Kirov Oblasts. 
  [Bedula] I recall how two years ago you invited leaders of 
the representative and executive bodies in all the Volga and 
Urals region republics and oblasts to an enlarged Military 
Council. Judging by the officials' speeches, close cooperation 
and collaboration were established at that time on all questions 
affecting day-to-day Army activity in the territories. 
  [Sergeyev] It is not all straightforward here. The majority 
of leaders have kept their word, we have established good 
working contacts with them, and we have mutual understanding and 
mutual assistance. It is a different matter that in some 
republics public movements which take a negative view of 
military service as a whole have gained in strength. When these 
anti-Army feelings are expressed in legal form by local 
authority decision, you have the beginnings of overt or covert 
resistance to federal laws. For example, the Tatarstan 
parliament recently "amended" a Russian presidential edict by 
adopting a decree "On the Performance of Military Service by 
Citizens of the Republic of Tatarstan." According to this 
document young men studying in daytime study departments of 
elementary and secondary general education institutions and 
students who have not completed their studies cannot be drafted 
into military service. Likewise, young men whose immediate 
relatives have died or been disabled during military service are 
also exempt from military service. As a result, we cannot call 
up close to 9,000 potential draftees. It seems to bother no one 
in the republic that the parliament's decree contravenes not 
only a separate provision of the Constitution and the laws of 
Tatarstan itself but also the federal law which says that 
defense questions are delegated by the republics to the center. 
  [Bedula] Incidentally, neighboring Bashkortostan, whose 
population is close to that of Tatarstan in ethnic composition, 
outlook, and way of life, takes a completely different view of 
military service. Why is that? 
  [Sergeyev] Yes, Bashkortostan has virtually always fulfilled 
the General Staff's order 100 percent. But the whole point, it 
seems, is that on the state, social, and family levels Army 
service is regarded there as a form of schooling which a 
physically fit young man has no moral right to shirk. 
Furthermore, in the countryside a girl's parents still question 
whether they should let their daughter marry someone who has not 
done military service. 
  The current draft is also proceeding well in Bashkortostan. 
The republic's government has allocated the necessary money -- 
500 million rubles [R]. All the relevant questions are being 
resolved promptly and without undue drama. It has been decided 
that students at technical colleges and vocational and technical 
schools can complete their studies, take their diplomas, and in 
January-February we will draft them. 
  We are being actively helped by the Bashkortostan committee 
for the social protection of servicemen and their families. The 
committee staged the second congress of parents of soldiers and 
sailors in an interesting way. The Orthodox cathedral and the 
main mosque in Ufa held ceremonial services to bless the 
fatherland's defenders and honor the memory of those who have 
died discharging their military duty. District representatives 
and military lawyers answered questions from servicemen, their 
parents, and the public. The work of the congress was widely 
covered by the mass media. 
  The committee members' principled approach is shown by the 
fact that out of 3,214 requests for draft deferral, 451 were 
rejected as unjustified. Nevertheless, there are "draft 
dodgers" in Bashkortostan: A total of 389 people failed to 
attend the draft centers. That number would have been 
considerably smaller if the Prosecutor's Office had taken a more 
principled line. The number of citizens charged by the 
Prosecutor's Office with avoidance of military service is 
minimal. 
  [Bedula] What is life like generally for a deserter from the 
moment that he leaves the unit? 
  [Sergeyev] Bad. In Tatarstan, for instance, there were 
quite a few people who succumbed to All-Tatarstan Public Center 
propaganda and stole back into the republic to march under 
national banners. But it turns out that no one was expecting 
them here. As a result, the "returners" were left to face some 
serious problems by themselves: There was no possibility of 
drafting them into a unit on the republic's territory to 
complete their service here and there was no legal justification 
for discharging them into the reserve. No one offered them a 
job. Who needs a man with no documents? Consequently, many 
went back to their units and made amends... 
  [Bedula] It is no secret that one reason for desertion is 
the collapse of the system of military-patriotic education which 
existed in schools, vocational and technical schools, technical 
colleges, and social organizations. No worthwhile alternative 
has been found yet. Is it really inevitable that we will 
squander the considerable potential of young people's 
preparation for service? 
  [Sergeyev] Much has indeed been lost. But some things have 
been gained. Recently I learned that in Bashkortostan boys 
virtually from junior class age dream of serving in the 
"Mosfilm" Movie Studio's cavalry regiment. Recruits to this 
unusual military unit traditionally come from draftees from 
Bashkiria. The current draft is no exception -- 15 young men 
have already been sent to Golitsyno, near Moscow, where the 
cavalry regiment is stationed. There is just as much competition 
for the right to serve on the submarine Komsomolets Bashkirii. 
Similarly people from Samara and Penza maintain their right to 
serve in the "president's" regiment. Recently the General Staff 
received a letter from the Chuvashia leadership requesting that 
this year young men be drafted to serve on the submarine 
Chuvashskiy Komsomolets. The Dzerzhinskiy internal troops 
division is very popular with future draftees from Saratov 
Oblast. Requests from local authorities and the public to send 
draftees there are granted whenever possible. 
  When draftees are sent specifically to "their" division, 
regiment, or category of troops it is not only the Army which 
gains. Traditions are established in schools, at enterprises, 
in cities, and in whole republics. Pride will not allow a young 
man to do service that is inferior to that of his older friends 
or his neighbors in the apartment block or on his street. 
  Can people fail to be moved by the tradition which has been 
revived in Orenburg Oblast's Pervomayskiy Rayon: When draftees 
are being given a send-off, each one receives a small bag 
containing a handful of his native soil. There has not yet been 
a single case of desertion by a soldier who has been given such 
a sacred gift. 
  [Bedula] Nevertheless, increasingly frequently it is being 
said that this year's draftees are the "wrong sort," that 
completely different approaches are needed with them because the 
traditional methods of education are not working.... 
  [Sergeyev] The directorate for work with personnel has 
studied this problem and come up with some surprising 
conclusions. The nature of the inner conflicts that draftees are 
suffering from is due not to national interests, as used to be 
the case, but to their social status before joining the Army. 
There are quite a few soldiers in service now who have engaged 
in no socially useful activity. There is another section 
consisting of draftees from families with wealthy parents, 
sometimes commercial traders, and some of the draftees were 
engaged in trade themselves. A third group -- the most numerous 
-- comes from the families of workers and peasants. Finally 
there is a fourth group -- soldiers with less than perfect 
health but passed as fit by the medical commissions. If we 
manage to correctly assess the different forms of relationships 
that develop among soldiers in all four groups and elaborate 
forms of work with them, we will keep potential "runaways" in 
military formation. That is why many officers now sit on 
republic draft commissions. They have a specific task: To 
study, analyze, and systematize all problems relating to the 
draft and give specific recommendations on work with young 
people. Not just to the troops but also to the organs of public 
education, social organizations, and committees of soldiers' 
mothers. 
  Of course, the "anti-desertion" campaign will be as 
productive as possible if all society becomes really interested 
in it. The forms of work with young people of draft age are 
most diverse. In Udmurtia, for example, draftees are subject to 
a fine of one-half the minimum wage the first time that they 
fail to appear before the military commissariat. The total fine 
is increased for failure to turn up a second time. With the 
introduction of financial sanctions the number of "draft 
dodgers" in the republic fell noticeably. I know that in the 
Volga region and Urals republics they are studying the question 
of making deserters repay the cost of the investigation. After 
all, it costs the Armed Forces between R70,000 and R100,000 to 
find and bring back one deserter. But given that some Komi 
Republic enterprise leaders are inciting young men to refuse to 
serve "for peanuts" by promising them wages of half a million, 
we will still be tackling the problem of desertion for a long 
time to come. 
  [Bedula] Anatoliy Ipatovich, reports are coming in from 
local level about a lack of coordination in the military 
department's work and mistakes in organizing the draft. 
  [Sergeyev] Indeed, there have been mistakes. The Defense 
Ministry Central Directorate of Military Transport 
Communications and the Central Finance Directorate took too long 
to resolve the question of allocating money for the transport of 
young draftees to the Far East and the Transbaykal region by 
civil aircraft. 
  There have been occasions when induction officers from the 
District fail to arrive to meet new recruits at the prescribed 
time. But there have been far more instances of a different 
kind -- of well organized work by commissariats. To assess the 
situation here in general terms, the present draft has been 
complex but is proceeding normally. The Army and the Navy will 
receive a worthy batch of new recruits. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61049 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reflections on Russian Relations with NATO </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0156A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 6 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0156A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant General Dmitriy Kharchenko in the </F>
column "On the Eve of the Event": "What to Expect from the 
Brussels Meeting"] 
  [Text] Opening on the 10th of January in Brussels, the 
capital of Belgium, is a NATO Council summit of heads of states 
and governments of countries that are members of this military 
and political organization. It is expected that the focus of 
attention will be on two major issues: How to resolve problems 
of international peace, and what to do about a request made by a 
number of Central and Eastern European states for inclusion into 
the North Atlantic Treaty Alliance. In essence, the discussions 
will boil down to the future of this Alliance in the 
contemporary world. 
  On this eve of the NATO summit meeting, it would be 
advantageous to examine the question of the relationship 
existing between Russia and NATO. However, before we attempt to 
find an answer to this question, it seems to me that certain 
remarks are in order. 
  A truly paradoxical situation has come about. Virtually 
everyone in the West is of the opinion that the NATO Alliance 
has emerged from the Cold War as the victor. At the same time, 
in no time in the past has the Alliance faced problems that are 
so pressing and difficult of resolution as it does now. It is 
also said that NATO is undergoing its own crisis. 
  This statement of the bloc's crisis situation is all the 
more 
surprising, since it came directly on the heels of the explosion 
of euphoria which in the West was accompanied by the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, self-dissolution of the Warsaw Pact Organization, 
and disintegration of the Soviet Union. Leaders of states and 
governments of Alliance countries in a London meeting held in 
the summer of 1990 were triumphant in their welcoming the 
changes occurring in Europe, even calling them historical. Then 
suddenly the crisis. What went wrong? 
  The fact is that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, in 
the form which it was at the end of the 1940's, has virtually 
ceased to exist. The "threat from the East" has disappeared. So 
has the enemy. The point here is that they were essential to the 
bloc's organizers not only to set a course of "containment and 
repulsion" of communism, but more importantly to consolidate the 
leading role played by the USA in the post-war world. Serving as 
an instrument of Washington's politics and pulling into this 
political channel other Western countries was for many years the 
major function of the bloc. 
  And something else. NATO, after having rid itself of real or 
imaginary fears concerning a "massed assault from the East," 
came to face new and this time real dangers. These were the 
unstable situation in Russia (let us recall how much someone in 
the West suffered over the parliamentary election results in our 
country) and in other states which sprang up on the territory of 
the former USSR; the possibility of uncontrolled proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction; and, finally, the inter-ethnic 
and ethnic conflicts occurring on the periphery of the bloc that 
turned into fierce armed conflicts, such as those in Yugoslavia, 
Moldova, and the Caucasus. How to react to all these dangers? 
What could and should NATO do under these conditions? 
  The above questions should be answered at the NATO summit. 
  All of the above bears a direct relationship to Russia. All 
the more since this raises full-force the question of expansion 
of NATO's limits by virtue of including a number of Eastern 
European countries into the organization. One cannot fail to 
respect the sovereign right of every state of selecting those 
forms and means of insuring the security it deems most suitable. 
However, NATO's leading circles are aware of Moscow's negative 
attitude toward possible forced expansion of the Alliance. This 
could lead to new problems rather than to the resolution of 
existing ones. For example, this could disrupt the legally 
formalized system existing on our continent, primarily the 
Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. Instead of 
strengthening of trust and stability, this would sow new seeds 
of distrust, which undoubtedly would lead to destabilization of 
the entire situation. 
  Expansion of NATO's zone of responsibility would directly 
impinge upon the interests of Russia in the geopolitical, 
military, and home policy areas. Expansion of the Alliance of 
the world's largest military bloc would push out its boundaries, 
which would then be located close to the Russian borders. This 
would necessitate a fundamental rethinking of all our defensive 
concepts, restructuring of the Armed Forces, reviewing of the 
operational configuration of the theater of military operations, 
developing an additional infrastructure, relocation of large 
military contingents, and changing of operational plans and the 
nature of combat training. 
  One can easily imagine that the expansion of NATO's circle 
of 
members would be perceived by both the leadership and public of 
Russia as attempts to set up isolation, creating a "sanitary 
cordon" at our western borders. One would not be out of line if 
he were to point out that that could lead to xenophobia in our 
society and an intensification of the influence of radical-right 
nationalistic parties and organizations. 
  Incidentally, the above opinion is not solely that of 
Russians. It is no accident that the influential German 
newspaper WELT recently wrote that the driving force behind all 
of NATO's attempts to expand eastward is an intent of erecting 
another "Iron Curtain" that would constitute a barrier against 
an unstable neighbor: Russia. 
  NATO's leading circles do understand the nuances of this 
situation. It appears that the latter are in no hurry to accept 
new members, in spite of insistent requests made by Poland, 
Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, the Baltic states, and a 
number of other Eastern European countries. As an alternative, 
the US President has presented an idea that has come to be known 
as the "Partnership for Peace." It seems to me that Russia could 
support this idea, to the extent that it incorporates the 
security interests of all states without exception. Of course, 
this partnership should be based on the drafting of universal 
standards of security applicable to the entire North Atlantic 
area. A genuine partnership would include priority development 
of political dialogue, constant consultations, agreement on 
positions, and, in the future, coordinated actions. 
  Ministers of foreign affairs and defense of NATO countries 
in 
their sessions held in the beginning of December affirmed their 
support of the "Partnership for Peace" plan advanced by 
Washington. However, the nature of the plan and the methods of 
its implementation are not yet clear. These problems will 
obviously be objects of close examination at the forthcoming 
session of the NATO Council, and it would be very desirable if 
the participants would take into consideration the Russian point 
of view relative to the given problem. Of course, the decisions 
made in Brussels will be discussed by the Presidents of Russia 
and the United States during their meeting to take place in the 
next few days. 
  All of the above does not mean that Russia and NATO are 
separated by an unbridgeable gulf. This was evidenced at the 
recent meeting of Russian President Boris Yeltsin and NATO 
Secretary-General Manfred Woerner. On that occasion, it was 
pointed out that an objective evaluation of Russia's role 
relative to the assurance of international security and 
stability requires that Russia's relationships with the NATO 
Alliance be accorded priority, with respect to rate of progress, 
scope, and depth, over relations between the latter and 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe. 
  Noteworthy in this regard is that there already exists 
compatibility in a number of fundamental views in military and 
political concepts held by Russia and NATO member countries. 
This is a beneficial result of the de-ideologization of 
international relations on the one hand, and a coincidence of 
views held by both sides relative to basic problems of security 
assurance on the other. 
  In this regard, both sides accord political methods a 
position of priority. The use of military force is looked upon 
as an exceptional measure, one permissible only in the interests 
of self-defense and in peacekeeping operations. Both the "new 
strategic NATO concept" adopted in 1991 and the recently 
approved "Basic Military Doctrine Principles of the Russian 
Federation" contain extremely important provisions asserting 
that neither the North Atlantic Alliance nor Russia will 
consider any state or coalition to be an enemy. Both documents 
acknowledge that the limitation and reduction of armaments are 
in agreement with the national interests of all states and 
promote strengthening of general security. It may be said that 
this opens up a real possibility of eliminating the remaining 
elements of military confrontation in Europe. 
  And the above kind of elements do still exist. Russia is 
carrying out a deep restructuring of her Armed Forces, has 
already effected considerable manpower reduction, and intends to 
proceed in this direction, while the NATO countries are slow in 
abating their military activity. In a recent session of the 
bloc's Military Planning Committee, it was pointed out that the 
last few years have seen a mere 15&percnt; reduction in manpower 
of 
member countries, while military expenditures still amount to 
3.2&percnt; of the gross national product. And this in the 
absence of 
a real enemy! 
  But this raises another question. If Russia considers 
expansion of the NATO structure disadvantageous, so to speak, 
and if the details of the "Partnership for Peace" are still 
unclear, can there be a solution to the existing situation? It 
appears that there can be, and, possibly, more than one. For 
example, one can point to further improvement in the role and 
significant activity of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council 
(NACC). Even now it unites 38 states, being NATO members on the 
one hand, and former members of the WPO (Warsaw Pact 
Organization), including of course the Russian Federation, on 
the other. Russia participates actively in sessions of the NACC 
at the level of ministers of foreign affairs, while 
representatives of her Ministry of Defense take part in the work 
of various commissions, seminars, and courses, within the 
framework of this organization. 
  However, the above framework is still limited. The time has 
obviously come to effect a considerable expansion in this area. 
There are real possibilities for transforming the NACC into a 
collective security organization in Europe. This would be 
associated with diminishing the role of the CSCE (Conference on 
Security and Cooperation in Europe), but due to the fact that 
the work of the CSCE involves a much smaller number of states 
compared with the NACC, it would be easier to arrive at 
mutually-acceptable solutions and render the latter more 
effective and responsive to pressing tasks and requirements 
related to the situation. 
  One would not be out of line here to point out that the 
above 
is understood by all NACC members. Issued at a recent meeting of 
the North Atlantic Cooperation Council was a statement 
discussing the measures advanced for improving 
interrelationships within the framework of this organization. 
The latter has identified for itself the task of continuing and 
activating consultations related to political problems and 
problems associated with security assurance and to the 
development of cooperation in the military area. For example, 
this served as the purpose for approving a new working plan of 
dialogue, partnership, and cooperation for 1994. 
  Why the selection of organizations such as North Atlantic 
Cooperation Council? Why not charge NATO with the function of 
assuring regional security? The answer is that the NATO Alliance 
was set up as a specific organization of leading Western 
countries under definite conditions to accomplish definite 
goals. But the conditions have changed radically. 
  There can be no doubt that any attempts made to transform 
NATO will effect virtually no change in its nature. The NATO 
Alliance is an organization of the past. Occupying its agenda 
should be not its modernization, but instead a move away from 
bloc thinking and toward an efficient and effective system of 
European and international security. The time has obviously come 
to infuse with vitality the fruitful idea of creating a security 
system stretching "from Vancouver to Vladivostok," to prepare 
and implement the necessary machinery. 
  The above are the considerations I would like to share on 
the 
eve of the NATO summit relative to a problem as serious as 
relations between Russia and the NATO Alliance. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61050 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> AIR, AIR DEFENSE FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Specifications, Performance Improvements to SU-25 Variants </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0154A Moscow KRYLYA RODINY in Russian No 9, Sep 93 pp 
17-19 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0154A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRYLYA RODINY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Conclusion of article by Mikhail Levin: "For Rough </F>
Work"; previous parts in KRYLYA RODINY, Nos 7 and 8, 1993] 
  [Text] In Afghanistan in 1982 a pilot was unable to pull 
out from an attack and the Su-25 "disappeared" into the ground 
although it had not come under fire. The onboard recorder showed 
a control system jam caused by high flight speed. The attack 
aircraft usually attacks from a dive at a 35-40 degree angle, 
which takes a rather long time since it is necessary not only to 
impose the sight's center dot on the target, but also get the 
device to "calm down." Thus, if the attack is entered at a speed 
of 550-600 km/hr, the aircraft may have accelerated to 850-900 
km/hr at the end of the attack. There was not enough aileron at 
high speeds. 
  In an attack, in order to prevent the roll which arises with 
one-sided separation of a bomb (from one wing), the requirement 
was introduced for a symmetrical drop of the load in pairs from 
underwing points (simultaneously from the second and ninth 
points, third and eighth points and so on). But in Afghanistan 
every bomb was worth its weight in gold and was expended very 
economically. The dead pilot also dropped just one. He tried to 
parry the roll that arose by moving the ailerons, but at high 
speed they went to the stops because the balancing tabs operated. 
  After this crash, hydraulic boosters were placed in the 
transverse channel. Despite fears, it was learned that aircraft 
survivability essentially did not suffer: When the wing with 
booster was fired on at the range, it took 23 23-mm rounds to 
disable the hydraulic booster. 
  Boosters began to be installed on newly built series attack 
aircraft in 1984, which permitted increasing maximum permissible 
flight speed. 
  In addition, the brake flaps on wingtip pods were modified 
to 
stabilize a high-angle dive without exceeding a speed of 700 
km/hr. Additional deflectable surfaces were installed on them 
that were kinematically connected with their main surface. This 
considerably increased the effectiveness of these flaps (by 60 
percent) without increasing their area, and speed was stabilized 
at the level of 650-680 km/hr. 
  The Su-25T variant (Su-34) intended for operations against 
moving targets, above all tanks, is equipped with the I-251 
aiming system developed by the Krasnogorsk Zenit OMZ [Optical 
Equipment Plant]. According to some assessments, the system is 
5-6 years ahead of similar ones abroad. 
  The system is intended for automatic identification and 
tracking of small mobile targets (tanks, motor vehicles, small 
craft and so on), target designation, automatic missile 
guidance, and also for supporting the fire of free-flight 
rockets and the gun. The system includes the Shkval day 
opto-electronic system, which is accommodated in the aircraft 
nose and which includes a television channel with wide field of 
view (27x36 degrees), a television channel with narrow 
("needle") field of view (0.7x0.9 degrees) and 23X 
magnification, and a laser rangefinder/target designator. Shkval 
system sensors are mounted on a unified platform stabilized in 
pitch, yaw and roll and can be deflected in the range from +15 
degrees "over themselves" to -80 degrees "beneath themselves" 
and from +35 to -35 degrees in heading. The day-channel target 
acquisition and lockon range is 12 km. Its video data are sent 
to a monochromatic CRT mounted in the upper right of the cockpit 
instrument panel. 
  A basic element of the Shkval system is a target image 
tracking unit with accuracy to 0.5 m. Operation of the automatic 
telecontrol was checked by tracking the flight of birds such as 
crows, which change their flight path in a random manner, and 
the movement of real targets. High accuracy permitted selecting 
even specific areas of a tracked target for tracking. 
  In control tracking of a Tu-16 on the range, the marker was 
placed on the bomber engine area; the automatic telecontrol 
reliably "held" this image and the guided missile "stuck" 
precisely into the engine from a distance of 4 km. 
  Range tests during operations against ground targets using 
the Vikhr ATGM also produced high results: A tank turret was 
"blown off" from a distance of 10 km. 
  The Shkval system's high characteristics were confirmed in 
1989 during a tactical exercise near Lvov in which 96 pieces of 
armored equipment and 10 Tor SAM systems took part. 
  For night operations the I-251 system can be supplemented by 
the Merkuriy thermal imaging system mounted in a suspended pod 
installed on a belly station. The pod cross-section is nearly 
rectangular and its front part is closed by a cover which 
protects the optics during takeoff and landing. The television 
system has a lens with broad and narrow (5.5x7.3 degrees) fields 
of view. The night-channel optical system is not stabilized. 
Target acquisition and lockon range by the thermal imaging 
system is somewhat less than 10 km. Night-channel video data 
with narrow field of view are displayed on a monochromatic CRT 
also connected with the day television channel, and the image 
from the night channel with wide field of view is sent to the 
instrument landing system. 
  It is common knowledge that peak losses of military pilots 
fall in their first several dozen combat sorties. Only after 
flying 30-40 of them do they gain necessary experience 
permitting them to get their bearings rapidly and confidently 
and find the optimum way out of difficult situations. To help in 
adaptation, in 1987 designers developed the SAU-8, an automated 
control system for the Su-25T. It operates together with the 
aircraft aiming and navigation system, simplifies pilot actions 
to the maximum, and supports an automatic target approach with 
high accuracy. 
  The presumed target coordinates and coordinates to 12 
enroute 
waypoints are loaded into the system on the ground before 
takeoff. After the pilot takes off and presses the 
"Navigation-SAU [Automated Control System]" button, the aircraft 
proceeds in an automatic mode. The scanning mode of the 
optical-television system's narrow channel switches on in the 
presumed target area 12 km from the target. On detecting the 
target, the pilot frames the target image on the CRT and presses 
the "Fix" button. After this it is as if aircraft and target are 
linked by an invisible thread; the target is tracked 
automatically even in inverted flight and there is no break off 
even if the target has stopped or briefly entered a shadow. The 
system automatically turns the aircraft toward the target and 
launches missiles or releases bombs after the ordnance release 
button is pressed. 
  Bombing accuracy usually is 35-40 m on strike aircraft, but 
it is 2-5 m on the Su-25T. After the first pass the aircraft can 
make a repeat pass in the automatic mode at the pilot's command. 
  The pilot takes over control only just before landing. 
  Over 500 Su-25 attack aircraft had been produced by the fall 
of 1992, including over 250 delivered [to] CIS countries and the 
rest to other countries. The Su-25T is the most advanced of 
presently developed versions. It has not been placed into series 
production and prospects for its production are problematical. 
Talks have been held with 60 agents from 25 countries, but no 
specific agreements have been reached. Nevertheless, the OKB 
[Special Design Bureau] is working to perfect the aircraft. It 
is planned to increase operating altitude from 7 to 10 km and 
range by 30 percent. One potential client (Philippine Air Force) 
took an interest in a multipurpose version of the aircraft with 
an air-to-air combat capability. The OKB is studying that 
project, assuming that because of the basic Su-25 aircraft's 
high maneuver characteristics (limit load factor 6.5, unit wing 
load with normal takeoff weight 433 kg/m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt; , 
thrust-to-weight ratio with normal takeoff weight 0.62), its 
multipurpose version will be able to fight on equal terms with 
many modern fighters. Demonstration flights of the "Sky Hussars" 
aerobatics team serve to confirm this. 
  The Su-25 was created with a small displacement in time 
periods relative to the U.S. A-10 attack aircraft, design 
studies on which began in 1966 (Su-25 in 1968) and the first 
flight of the first experimental aircraft was in May 1972 (Su-25 
in February 1975). U.S. and Russian designers proceeded from 
experience of the very same conflicts (Vietnam, Korea and the 
Near East), which predetermined approximately the very same 
missions (a low-altitude, subsonic, highly maneuverable, 
low-vulnerability aircraft for direct support of ground troops) 
and in a number of cases similar design solutions such as the 
armored "tub" for the pilot (which, by the way, was realized for 
the first time in the Il-2 attack aircraft) and the almost 
straight wing. But the OKB imeni P. Sukhoy took its own path in 
shaping the Su-25's appearance. Originality of appearance is 
apparent not only in the already noted fundamental 
configurational and dimensional distinctions of the Su-25 and 
A-10, but also in characteristics. The A-10, for example, has a 
lower thrust-to-weight ratio (0.54 compared with 0.62 in the 
Su-25 with normal takeoff weight), which degrades the A-10's 
maneuverability in the vertical plane. The A-10 also has less 
unit wing load (322 kg/m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  as against 433, also with 
normal takeoff weight). This indicates somewhat better 
horizontal maneuverability of the A-10, but also lesser accuracy 
of fire as a result of the aircraft's increased buffeting under 
conditions of turbulent atmosphere near the earth. The A-10's 
flight speed is substantially lower (maximum near the ground 706 
km/hr as against 950-975 for the Su-25). This has been the cause 
of serious criticism of the A-10 abroad of late, since speed is 
one element for reducing aircraft vulnerability, and with a slow 
flight speed even the A-10's increased armoring does not save it 
(overall weight of means of protection exceeds 8.5 percent of 
normal takeoff weight compared with 7.5 percent for the Su-25). 
  One more fundamental difference of the A-10 and Su-25 lies 
in 
a different approach to onboard gear and munitions to be 
expended. The Americans adopted the concept of cheap onboard 
gear and complex, expensive missiles; the pilot aims through the 
homing head of the AGM-65 Maverick missile using an instrument 
panel indicator. It is the reverse approach on the Su-25: 
Powerful onboard gear in combination with "obtuse" missiles, 
which appears considerably more rational under the 
cost-effectiveness criterion. 
  The emphasis on different kinds of weapons also is 
important. 
In developing the A-10 it was assumed that the GAU-8/A cannon 
"around" which it was designed would be the basic means of 
combating tanks, but according to the U.S. Air Force, use of 
Maverick missiles and not the cannon turned out to be more 
successful during the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Su-25 designers 
departed from the doctrine of operating against tanks with 
cannon fire back in the stage when the aircraft's appearance was 
being shaped. It was then they concluded that the cannon was 
becoming a "historical relic," for it is effective only at short 
ranges, while in a relatively high-speed jet aircraft the pilot 
already has to pull back on the stick to recover about 800 
meters from the target. This leaves him little time for aimed 
fire and it is too far for unequivocal destruction of a target 
with powerful armor. On the Su-25 the cannon is used basically 
for engaging weakly armored targets of the APC type. 
  A 45-mm cannon of nontraditional design based on a 
rocket-assisted principle with a rate of fire of 1,250 rounds 
per minute was studied for the Su-25T version. The length of the 
projectile fitted with a rocket motor was 250 mm and it had a 
shaped-charge warhead with 200 mm of armor penetration. The idea 
of employing such a cannon arose when the task was assigned to 
increase hit probability with the first pass, for a situation 
often takes shape where the target is detected too late and a 
repeat pass must be made. The rocket-assisted cannon had to be 
fired backward after passing over the target. In tests it 
succeeded in "sticking" up to 6-8 rounds into a tank, and at an 
angle up to 60 degrees, which increased armor penetration. But 
development of this cannon was suspended for reasons of a 
nontechnical nature. 
  Su-25TK armament includes Kh-29T air to surface missiles 
with 
TV [not further expanded, possibly thermal imaging] or Kh-29L 
laser-guided air to surface missiles intended for engaging 
relatively invulnerable ground targets (reinforced concrete 
shelters, concrete runways, large railroad and highway bridges). 
They are equipped with a high-explosive penetrating warhead 
weighing 320 kg. Kh-58 antiradar guided missiles also are 
mounted, and outfitting with the more powerful Kh-31P antiradar 
missile is proposed in the future. This is connected with the 
desire to improve the attack aircraft's autonomy in operations. 
In an actual combat situation it is difficult to count on 
receiving required support from interworking aircraft in time. 
Therefore, in V. P. Babak's opinion, as a front line aircraft 
the attack aircraft should be capable of "punching" a road for 
itself extending up to 150 km beyond the front line. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Performance Characteristics of Su-25 Variants                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Variant           |Su-25/R95Sh       |Su-25/R-195       |Su-25TK           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan, m       |14.36             |14.36             |14.36             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length w-|15.36             |15.36             |15.33             | 
|ith pitot tube, m |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m|4.80              |4.80              |5.20              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m&lt;sup&gt; 2|30.1              |30.1              |30.1              | 
|&lt;/sup&gt;             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew              |1                 |1                 |1                 | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and make   |2xR95Sh           |2xR-195           |2xR-195           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Thrust, kg        |2x4,100           |2x4,500           |2x4,500           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum takeoff w-|17,530            |17,600            |19,500            | 
|eight, kg         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Empty aircraft    |9,430             |9,500             |No data           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum combat pa-|4,340             |4,340             |4,340             | 
|yload, kg         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Internal fuel, kg |3,000             |3,000             |3,840             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight sp-|950               |975               |950               | 
|eed near ground,  |                  |                  |                  | 
|km/hr             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum Mach      |0.82              |0.82              |0.82              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum range, km |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At high altitude  |                  |1,250             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Near ground       |750               |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range       |1,850             |                  |2,500             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of takeoff |                  |                  |                  | 
|roll, m           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Concrete runway   |550-600           |600               |No data           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dirt runway       |900-950           |1,200             |600-700           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of landing |                  |                  |                  | 
|roll with brake c-|                  |                  |                  | 
|hute, m           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Concrete runway   |550-600           |400               |No data           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dirt runway       |650-750           |                  |600-700           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Limit load factor |6.5               |6.5               |6.5               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The foreign press reports that the new Su-37 strike aircraft 
being designed under Babak's direction has even more difficult 
missions to perform. Its appearance is determined by the 
assigned task of ensuring full autonomy, also including the 
capability of successfully conducting defensive air-to-air 
combat against modern fighters. In addition to high combat 
survivability, it also must possess increased flight speed 
(1,400-1,500 km/hr). 
  Babak believes that advanced cluster weapons with 
individually guided submunitions intended to be launched from 
multirole aircraft at a great distance from targets do not 
represent a serious alternative to attack aircraft. In his 
opinion, there are two basic premises for successful performance 
of strike operations: First of all, the target must be visible; 
and secondly, low-powered submunitions ("peas") are not suited 
for engaging heavily armored targets--a "serious weapon" is 
needed here, which can be carried only by a battlefield aircraft 
optimized for strike operations. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Krylya Rodiny" 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61051 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Navy and Russian National Security' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0147C Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
(signed to press 8 Oct 93) pp 3-6 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0147C </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Captain 1st Rank Yu. Gavrya, candidate of </F>
technical sciences; Rear Admiral A. Rudometkin; Captain 1st Rank 
Yu. Sinchenko, candidate of military sciences; and Captain 1st 
Rank (Retired) V. Khyaninen, candidate of military sciences, 
under rubric "Time and the Navy"] 
  [Text] A navy is a specific "attribute" of a state's 
political, economic and military activity. History provides many 
examples of its deciding effect on the course and outcome of 
wars which Russia fought. And in quite recent times, in 1967, 
the Navy's presence in the Mediterranean helped stabilize the 
situation in the Near East and deterred the United States from 
intervening in the conflict on Israel's side. In addition, the 
constant presence of our naval forces in politically tense ocean 
areas permitted deterring the aggressive aspirations of 
individual states (disruption of the attack on Libya and Angola, 
prevention of a coup d'&eacute;tat in Guinea and so on). And the 
involvement of ships to ensure security of Persian Gulf shipping 
during Iran's war against Iraq permitted us to avoid vessel 
losses. 
  Despite the general trend toward a reduction in the threat 
of 
initiation of a world war, the danger of the outbreak of 
military conflicts and local wars presently is preserved, 
especially for territorial, economic, ethnic and similar 
motives. Preconditions existing in individual regions for the 
outbreak of military conflicts and even local wars may be 
realized under certain conditions, which is fraught with their 
escalation into a large-scale war and with a large number of 
states, including those such as the United States and Russia, 
being drawn into its orbit. 
  Unquestionably, the immediate threat of nuclear war has been 
minimized, but there remains the danger of its outbreak because 
of the presence of considerable arsenals of these weapons in the 
hands of a number of leading states and the trend which has 
appeared toward their proliferation in third world countries. It 
is impossible not to take this into account. The possibility of 
a large-scale conventional war escalating into a nuclear war 
also is not precluded as a measure which a country subjected to 
attack takes in order to respond to actions of an aggressor who 
is disrupting the functioning of its strategic deterrence forces. 
  Russia has no grounds to regard any country or coalition of 
states as probable enemies in the international situation which 
has taken shape today. Russia also threatens no one: It is 
sharply reducing the makeup and changing the structure and 
stationing of its Armed Forces and, in accordance with its 
defensive military doctrine, is limiting them to the framework 
of necessary defense sufficiency. 
  As applied to the Navy, we take such sufficiency to mean the 
makeup, structure and stationing of fleet forces as well as that 
status of all kinds of support, command and control and training 
systems which meet the level of possible military threat from 
maritime sectors. They should guarantee the country's reliable 
defense against aggression on the part of possible groupings of 
naval forces and of other states in zones from where their 
offensive precision weapons can hit important targets in the 
depth of our territory. 
  The buildup by any state (or coalition of states) of 
groupings of its forces on the territory of states contiguous 
with Russia or of groupings of its naval forces in the 
aforementioned zones, as well as the exceeding of an agreed upon 
time period for the presence of aircraft carriers and missile 
ships in these zones and certain other reasons may become 
grounds for categorizing any state (or coalition of states) as a 
potential enemy. In our opinion, it must be reflected in Russian 
Federation naval strategy that in such situations Russia retains 
for itself the right to retaliatory (including also adequate) 
operations. 
  It should be borne in mind that militarily strong foreign 
states, above all the United States, are in no hurry to give up 
the term "potential enemy." And no small number of examples from 
their practical activity today indicates that the direction of 
their policy toward force remains unchanged. Thus, new NATO 
military strategy does not preclude the option of war over the 
Baltic countries against Russia. 
  It is also impossible not to take note of the fact that 
according to a book well known in naval circles, "...From the 
Sea. New Direction for the Navy," written by a group of 
prominent U.S. naval figures and published in 1992, U.S. 
national security strategy openly, and even with clear pride in 
its Navy, emphasizes that "national interests require of the 
Navy not only performance of the long-range mission of ensuring 
strategic deterrence, a powerful military presence on forward 
lines, sea control, and reaction to crises in remote areas, but 
also conduct of large-scale offensive operations." Moreover: "To 
meet national security requirements with the shift in emphasis 
to regional problems, construction of new naval forces is 
oriented toward increasing their flexibility and might." 
  Along with external factors which introduce an element of 
uncertainty and unpredictability to the Navy reform process, 
considerable difficulties also are caused by internal factors, 
above all economic and financial. Their influence is felt not in 
the last instance in building the fleet--one of the most mobile, 
versatile and consequently costly branches of the Armed Forces. 
  What kind of Russian Navy do we see and what kind of navy 
must it become? 
  It is difficult to overestimate the importance of doctrinal 
aims for orienting the direction of naval reform. What kind of 
navy the Russian Navy will become and whether or not Russia will 
retain the status of a great naval power depends on them. 
Unfortunately, a careful study of the published draft "Osnovy 
voyennoy doktriny RF" [Fundamentals of Russian Federation 
Military Doctrine]&lt;sup&gt; 1&lt;/sup&gt;  shows that despite recognition 
of the fact that an invasion most probably may begin from the 
sea, the role of the Navy in repelling it essentially is not 
covered; somewhat more attention is given to the involvement of 
naval infantry as part of mobile forces, to whom priority is 
given in development of arms. But functions of other components 
of naval forces are limited to the defense of sea lines of 
communication and support of mobile forces. An underestimation 
of experience of the last wars and local conflicts such as in 
the Persian Gulf, which demonstrated the helplessness of a 
defending country without sufficient naval forces to repel an 
attack from the sea, clearly tells here. 
  Such disparagement of the Navy's role as a tool of Russian 
foreign policy can undermine the status of a great naval power. 
It is apropos here to take another look at the aforementioned 
book in order to see the attitude toward the Navy on the part of 
the U.S. Navy leadership. The Navy, "operating on forward lines, 
supports America's positive image, creates foundations for 
forming coalitions, . . . raises the spirit of allies and 
demonstrates American might and resolve." Take note: Not the 
might of the Navy, but the might of America. And further: 
"Operating on forward lines, naval forces inspire friends and 
serve as a warning to potential enemies, . . . they deter 
crises. . . . We will take advantage of the Navy's unique 
capabilities in coastal operations from sea sectors." 
  The Russian Federation Navy also is a unique, versatile 
branch of the Armed Forces, possessing essentially all means of 
warfare and their support systems which other branches of the 
Armed Forces possess. This permits it to effectively defend a 
broad spectrum of Russia's national interests. The high mobility 
and combat readiness of naval forces and assets permit employing 
it both in peacetime as well as wartime. 
  According to rules of international law, naval forces are 
not 
bound by the need to obtain permission from governments of any 
state for making a transit to arrive at a destination. They also 
are guaranteed access to coastal waters of any country right up 
to the limit of its territorial waters. This gives the Navy an 
exceptional opportunity to perform its functions, including 
peacekeeping functions, in dangerously explosive zones to keep a 
crisis from deepening and to stop armed conflict. 
  The concept of "showing the flag" entered the political 
dictionary from naval practice. Frequently this is the sole 
method for the legal presence of states' force (usually with UN 
sanction) in regions remote from one's own territory. It is more 
difficult to introduce tanks and, as experience has shown, even 
more difficult to remove them. Only the Navy can perform the 
function of defending Russian citizens abroad. It appears to us 
that few people will be found in all the world who condemn 
America for decisive actions to defend its citizens abroad, when 
an entire squadron of ships is sent for the sake of a few 
persons to the shores of a country encroaching on their freedom. 
True, for this a state must possess corresponding naval might. 
  Russia's adoption of international obligations for 
involvement together with other countries in humanitarian and 
police actions and in local conflicts under UN aegis logically 
leads to the need to have as part of the Navy (along with naval 
forces intended for deterrence and repulse of possible 
aggression from the sea) sufficiently large, oceangoing ships 
capable of deploying rapidly even to remote tasking areas and 
there performing missions with high intensity, often for a 
lengthy time. A need also may arise for the capability of 
replacing these forces. Therefore, not only naval infantry 
units, but also rather large ship forces with means of their 
logistic support must be included in the makeup of mobile forces. 
  It is also impossible not to take account of the fact that 
Russia's maritime border is double that of the land border and 
that world naval powers continue to build up capabilities of 
their naval forces. One would like to believe that the peace and 
cooperation of leading states will continue forever, but in case 
the situation is exacerbated we must have guaranteed protection 
against strikes from sea directions. And only the Navy is 
capable of this mission (with appropriate attention to its 
construction). 
  In addition to the above, it should be noted that developing 
the Navy as the most complex system of armament saturated with 
the most modern equipment lends powerful impetus to technical 
progress. Thus, results from special-purpose developments for 
the Navy were introduced to the national economy in the area of 
heat engineering, radio engineering, radio communications, 
atomic power engineering, and underwater equipment and devices 
for developing the ocean, including natural resources of the 
continental shelf. 
  Thus it can be asserted that the sphere of Navy activity in 
the scheme of ensuring Russia's national security literally 
consists of 13 seas and three oceans washing its shores, and 
from the standpoint of protecting its interests it consists of 
the entire world ocean. It appears the Navy should perform the 
following missions: 

  -  guaranteed deterrence of potential enemies (as part of 
strategic nuclear forces) from initiating combat operations by 
maintaining combat readiness of strategic naval nuclear forces 
and ensuring reliability and safety of their functioning; 
  -  guaranteed repulse and disruption of aggression from sea and 
ocean directions under any situation conditions; 
  -  maintaining a 
favorable operational regime in contiguous and inland seas; 
  -  assistance to naval units of border guard troops in 
performing 
their assigned missions of protecting the state border and the 
maritime economic zone; 
  -  ensuring security of our shipping in 
various ocean areas and protecting fisheries (animal industries) 
and other industrial activity, above all on our continental 
shelf; 
  -  participation in joint humanitarian and police actions 
with other states; 
  -  participation of specially formed expedition 
groupings of naval forces (as part of mobile forces) in local 
conflicts under the aegis of the United Nations or other 
international organizations to keep conflicts from escalating to 
large-scale wars. 

    Summing up what has been said, the conclusion can be drawn 
that the Navy's role in the scheme of ensuring Russia's national 
security is determined by its contribution to performance of 
missions facing the state's Armed Forces, and it must possess a 
potential that in peacetime is capable of ensuring Russian 
Federation security and protection of its national interests and 
citizens in ocean areas by deterring any state or coalition of 
states from using force against Russia and its allies. In case 
war is initiated against Russia, the Navy must be ready to repel 
aggression from sea and ocean directions and deprive enemy naval 
forces of the opportunity to conduct offensive operations 
(actions) in seas adjoining our territory and in other vital 
ocean areas. 
Footnotes 
  1. VOYENNAYA MYSL, Special Edition, 1992. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61052 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Arctic Transit to Pacific Fleet of Sub `Kasatka' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0147B Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
(signed to press 8 Oct 93) p 17 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0147B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Despite Difficulties"] </F>
  [Text] Combat training continues in the Navy despite the 
economic and political crisis being experienced in the country. 
Thus, the nuclear powered submarine Kasatka commanded by Captain 
1st Rank A. Yefanov made a transit from the Northern Fleet to 
the Pacific Fleet in the period from 16 August through 12 
September. After covering thousands of nautical miles in the 
watery depths of two oceans and beneath Arctic ices, the Kasatka 
moored safely at a berth in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy. In the 
opinion of Rear Admiral M. Motsak, senior officer of the 
deployment, the submariners demonstrated a high training level 
and the ship showed the reliability of equipment. The traditions 
of Arctic under-ice deployments, which you can read about on pp 
91-94 of this journal issue, continue. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61053 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Navy's Shortened Reach </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0148A Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
(signed to press 8 Oct 93) pp 33-35 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0148A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by military journalist Captain 2nd Rank V. Pasyakin </F>
under rubric "Deployments and Flights": "And Again in the 
Mediterranean..."] 
  [Text] No matter how difficult the conditions in 
which the Russian Navy now finds itself, it lives and is 
performing assigned missions. This is indicated by the recent 
deployment of a group of ships of the Northern, Baltic and Black 
Sea fleets as well as of Leningrad Naval Base into the 
Mediterranean Sea. Military journalist Captain 2nd Rank V. 
Pasyakin acquaints readers with its details. 
  It was the typical working atmosphere in the operations room 
of the flagship, the large ASW ship Kerch. Rear Admiral A. 
Grinko, chief of the deployment staff, and his closest 
assistants captains 1st rank N. Mikheyev and G. Ukhanov were 
bending over a chart with a colorful abundance of symbols. A 
hunt was under way for a conditional enemy submarine by the ship 
detachment made up of the Kerch, patrol ships Ladnyy and 
Razitelnyy and hydrographic vessel Liman (Black Sea Fleet); the 
patrol ship Legkiy (Northern Fleet); and the patrol ship 
Druzhnyy (Baltic Fleet), divided into two interworking groups. A 
submarine and the oceanographic vessel Polyus of Leningrad Naval 
Base also were in the exercise area. 
  What is typical is that all ships and vessels began search 
operations in an organized fashion without preliminary joint 
drills. Later, while the Liman was maneuvering in the area in an 
attempt to detect the submarine, crews replenished fuel and 
water stores from the large ocean oiler Ivan Bubnov. 
  It was eight years ago in the Mediterranean that I had 
occasion to observe the Ivan Bubnov in the simultaneous underway 
replenishment of three ships, including the air-capable cruiser 
Kiev, by the abeam-astern method. A guided missile cruiser, 
destroyers, large ASW ships and patrol ships of the Northern and 
Black Sea fleets were waiting their turn. We were paid more than 
one visit by NATO aircraft and helicopters, which trained 
television, camera, and movie lenses on the floating "city." 
  Unfortunately, the Russian Navy now cannot boast of such a 
scale. Ships of the once great naval power put onto the oceans 
more and more rarely. Our Navy has been a rather rare guest in 
these regions since squadrons in the Mediterranean and South 
China seas and in the Indian Ocean were abolished. Is it 
surprising that instances of seizure of our merchant vessels 
have become more frequent of late? This time, too, one other 
ship of the Northern Fleet, the patrol ship Bessmennyy, was 
supposed to take part in the joint exercise, but she was sent to 
the Suez Canal, where a Russian tug was being detained for 
unknown reasons. It was well that our forces were in the 
Mediterranean and reacted promptly to the incident. But if they 
had not been? 
  Yes, the Russian Navy must be present constantly in areas of 
active shipping and fishing, not "vegetating" in bases. But 
evidently not everyone understands this. Or perhaps they give 
the appearance that they do not understand? Our air-capable 
ships are not seen at sea. By the way, Russia has been left with 
just one, the heavy air-capable cruiser Kuznetsov, and she has 
to be brought up to snuff. But the cradle of these ships, the 
Black Sea Shipyard, went over to sovereign Ukraine. Ukraine, 
however, is incapable of having such giants and so they cut up 
the heavy air-capable cruiser Ulyanovsk--our first air-capable 
ship with a "normal" configuration for aircraft takeoff and with 
a nuclear power plant--for scrap just when she was being born. 
The almost ready heavy air-capable cruiser Varyag "got caught 
between heaven and earth." The air-capable cruisers Kiev, Minsk 
and Novorossiysk were decommissioned because of the absence of 
funds and a repair facility. 
  Now our Navy's ships and auxiliary vessels rarely go beyond 
the Bosporus. True, the oiler Ivan Bubnov is there somewhat more 
often than others, in the words of her captain, A. Danilenko, 
but his crew today also has a large number of problems. 
  "The captain of our enormous oiler has a salary of only 
18,000 karbovantsy," said S. Sukharevich, chairman of the 
vessel's trade union committee, seething with just indignation. 
"And what does that say about seamen, when the subsistence wage 
in Ukraine long ago topped 22,000? How can a family be clothed, 
provided with shoes and fed on such money?! It was not without 
reason that above all the low pay and a desire to draw attention 
of authorities to our beggarly situation forced the seamen of 
Black Sea Fleet auxiliary vessels to hoist the St. Andrew's 
ensign." 
  Problems of the Black Sea Fleet's status, unresolved through 
the fault of the leadership of Russia and Ukraine, often creates 
extreme situations. For example, the Ivan Bubnov was forced to 
put to sea from Sevastopol... without necessary fuel for 
refueling, and it was not so much because of its scarcity. 
  "We were detained in Sevastopol by Ukrainian customs for two 
days," I was told by first mate V. Zadorozhnikov. "They let us 
go only after seeing that we had no fuel for refueling 
ships(!--Ed.), but only necessary minimum fuel for 
the transit, and this despite the fact that it is Russia that 
completely supplies the Black Sea Fleet with all fuels and 
lubricants. So our Bubnov had to proceed across the 
Mediterranean to replenish stores from her Northern Fleet 
colleague, the oiler Dnestr, near the Strait of Gibraltar. She 
received another 2,300 tonnes of fuel from the Baltic oiler 
Lena, and only after that were we able to begin refueling ships." 
  It was here in the Mediterranean that it was clear how much 
we need not only combatant ships, but also auxiliary vessels, 
without which the Navy risks becoming only a coastal fleet. 
  After refueling, the search group continued the "hunt" for 
the submarine, especially as they were not forced to wait for 
information on her--Captain 2nd Rank V. Borisenko's subordinates 
from the hydrographic vessel Liman had worked professionally. 
After studying the data received, the deployment staff adjusted 
the maneuvering scheme and places for laying the antisubmarine 
barriers which ASW aviators were supposed to put out. After some 
time a Ka-25 helicopter (a Saber-Toothed Tiger, as it was dubbed 
on the ship because of the emblem on its sides) piloted by 
Lieutenant Colonel I. Chernenko and navigator Major I. 
Sinigovets soared upward into the sky. Although it was not the 
first time ever for them to perform such an assignment (the two 
Ivans already had been flying together for six years and had 
learned to understand each other with hardly a word spoken), 
each hunt for a submarine conceals surprises. 
  "Arrived in area, beginning placement," was the report the 
flagship received from the crew of the rotary wing craft. 
  After laying two antisubmarine barriers, the helicopter 
personnel departed for the observation area. They did not have 
long to wait. Soon a report went to the flagship about contact 
with a submarine. Chernenko and Sinigovets immediately received 
the command to drop a series of "clarifying" buoys. It became 
clear from the information soon received from the Ka-25 crew 
that contact with a submarine had been established. This also 
was confirmed by listening to the sea using a dipping sonar. So 
the "long arm," as those in the Navy often call Naval Aviation 
aircraft and helicopters, proved its advantage this time as 
well, but it is becoming more and more difficult for that same 
Chernenko and Sinigovets to do this. I have to admit I was 
surprised to learn that their "tiger" has an even more venerable 
age than the twenty-year-old Kerch. The Ka-25 already was 
removed from production long ago and spare parts, instruments 
and accessories are not being produced for it. Senior 
technicians captains A. Mezentsev, V. Bakhtin and N. Maksimov 
have to work a great deal to see that their "little old man" 
does not let people down in flight, which is why the 
"Saber-Toothed Tiger" still retains sharp "claws" and "fangs" 
despite its venerable age. 
  When the area in which the conditional underwater enemy was 
located became known for certain thanks to the helicopter 
personnel, the deployment staff developed a precise tactical 
plan of action: Each ship was assigned a specific mission by 
Chief of Staff and First Deputy CinC Black Sea Fleet Vice 
Admiral P. Svyatashov, the exercise director, and the helicopter 
was brought back to the ship. By the way, a half-hour after its 
return the "tiger" again took off into the evening sky: a 
multiton "little fish" already was heading into the "net"... 
  Much more could be written about actions of ASW personnel on 
this deployment and about the people whom I met in the 
Mediterranean, but another issue worries all sailors today. Many 
crew members, even those who have served more than a single year 
in the Black Sea Fleet, were in the Mediterranean for the first 
time. Will they have occasion to be here in the future? Will not 
our navymen soon be navymen in uniform only, going on coastal 
cruises only rarely, and will not the appearance of the St. 
Andrew's ensign over expanses of oceans and distant seas become 
something exotic? By the way, it is not the Fleet which has to 
be asked this question... 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61054 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Continuing Decline in Capabilities Predicted </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0148B Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
(signed to press 8 Oct 93) pp 36-39 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0148B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Captain 1st Rank Yu. Koshelev under rubric </F>
"Discussion Rostrum": "Organization of Combat Training (Problems 
of Improving Its Effectiveness)"] 
  [Text] It is common knowledge that combat training is 
conducted on ships to train their crews to perform combat 
missions and keep ships in constant combat readiness, and it is 
the most important and determining thing in the life and 
activity of naval formations and units. But today, when the 
number of ships performing missions on long deployments has 
dropped considerably, the opinion has appeared that preventing a 
reduction in the personnel's level of training and in 
cohesiveness and combat readiness of ship crews and staffs has 
become the primary combat training mission.&lt;sup&gt; 1&lt;/sup&gt;  Such an 
approach to determining combat training goals appears too 
oversimplified to me. We know that the level of preparedness of 
any ship crew inevitably has inherent ups and downs, and there 
are many reasons for this: The commander was replaced, some of 
the personnel were discharged to the reserve, there was a 
significant interruption in operation because of repairs or a 
difficult ice situation, and so on. Consequently, it is more 
proper to consider the primary combat training mission to be to 
ensure a level of preparedness corresponding to the assigned 
combat readiness of the ship, unit or formation. 
  Is it possible to perform this primary mission effectively 
today with the increasing understrength in personnel and the 
considerable scarcity of fuel, spare parts and other supplies? 
We will attempt to analyze the state of affairs in terms of 
certain fundamental requirements placed on the organization of 
combat training. 
  First of all, high effectiveness of combat training is 
possible only when its organization is scientifically 
substantiated. The question arises: Why have there been no 
practical results to this day from work done by military 
academies and institutes on such a pressing problem? Finally, 
where is it possible to turn for training aids and theoretical 
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of combat 
training? 
  New officers coming onto the Navy Combat Training staff and 
into local entities for directing combat training learn from 
their predecessors and, along with positive experience, also 
adopt their shortcomings. Neither military schools nor the Naval 
Academy train specialists along that line. This is difficult to 
do independently because of an absence of sufficiently developed 
methods aids. And the main normative document, the "Rukovodstvo 
po boyevoy podgotovke VMF" [Navy Combat Training Manual], 
developed in the early 1980's, declares only certain basic 
provisions and clearly is out of date. 
  The very organization of the combat training process has 
stagnated and progress in improving it is very slight. Formation 
base exercises probably are the only innovation in recent years. 
Accounts and reports going to the Combat Training staff often 
remain ungeneralized as they return to the fleet in 
recommendations; moreover, they are not even reviewed. Then why 
are our accounts required? 
  In 1988, who scientifically substantiated the need for 
setting up staffs of main specialists in combat training 
directorates and helped in their very difficult formation only 
to have this same staff planned for elimination five years 
later? As a result, dozens of first-rate officers, organizers of 
specialized training in the fleets, will be out of a job... 
  For what reasons was the network of fleet training 
detachments resubordinated to the combat training directorate if 
other directorates will handle specialized training of navymen 
when the staff of main specialists is eliminated? The fact is we 
now do not even have such specialists as communicators, chemical 
warfare personnel, motor transport personnel, and so on who must 
organize basic military training. 
  For example, who proved theoretically that a submarine needs 
20-30 days to rehearse and pass a ship-type training task? Why 
not 10-40? But if this is substantiated, then how is one to 
explain the absence of new standards in connection with 
transition to a two-year term of service for draftees, the high 
personnel turnover caused by this, deterioration of their 
overall preparedness, problems in manning crews, the freeze on 
development of training facilities and so on? 
  Of course, it is impossible to have rules for all instances 
in life, but fundamental, scientifically substantiated 
recommendations determining the organization of the system of 
personnel training measures in the fleets must be worked out 
regularly. 
  Secondly, combat training effectiveness is achieved by high 
quality of planning, i.e., by compiling realistic, materially 
substantiated plans that are coordinated with plans for ship 
repairs and trials and with capabilities of assets for 
supporting combat training. 
  To be sure, planning quality depends directly on the 
professional training, industriousness and initiative of staff 
officers of formations, large strategic formations and 
directorates. Nevertheless, it seems to us the reality of our 
plans is far from perfect often for entirely other reasons. 
Thus, annual plans for training command and control entities and 
fleet forces for each new training year are draw up and approved 
during October-November of the preceding year, but the actual 
plan of execution for ship repair goes to the fleet only during 
March-April, the practice missile ordnance limit during 
February-March, the plan for trials during January-February, and 
documents changing the fleet table of organization structure 
throughout the year. All this forces the leadership to regularly 
adjust already approved combat training plans, usually in the 
direction of their reduction, which dampens the ardor of staffs 
and crews and allows insufficiently responsible commanders to 
fulfill them incompletely or not on time. For example, 125 
activities for the record (over 15 percent of the plan) were 
excluded from the Pacific fleet combat training plan or 
postponed to later dates in the winter period of the current 
training year. The entire training system suffers from this. If 
there is no thoughtfulness and constancy in it, there also will 
be no good results. 
  We see a solution only in comprehensive planning of all 
fleet 
activity, but this does not appear possible at the present time 
above all because of unstable financing, uneven deliveries of 
fuel and other supplies, and problems connected with the call-up 
of young replacements. 
  Thirdly, effectiveness of combat training is achieved 
because 
of constant monitoring of its course and of the quality with 
which missions are rehearsed and because of commanders' firm 
knowledge of methodologies determining the conduct of combat 
training measures. In my view, this thesis requires no special 
commentary. Everything depends only on ourselves, on personal 
organizational work of commanders in chief, commanders and staff 
officers at all levels. Behind each combat training violation 
stands a specific person and he must bear personal 
responsibility for this. But now as a rule responsibility is 
placed only on combat training directorate officers for 
omissions in combat training. And what is the level of 
leadership in combat training of the subordinates, for example, 
of the commander of a Pacific Fleet ship formation if neither he 
nor his deputies put to sea a single time in the winter training 
period? It turns out that directing the housekeeping activity of 
subordinates and organization of their everyday routine and so 
on is more in view than performance of combat training missions, 
which means that defining it as the principal form of fleet 
activity in peacetime is only a declaration. 
  Fourthly, effectiveness of combat training measures depends 
on availability of modern means of supporting them and proper 
use of what is available. This too is a sore subject. We now 
lack not only modern guided surface and airborne (high-speed, 
small-size, low-flying) targets, but even a sufficient number of 
the old ones. The shortage of funds keeps us not only from 
producing new ones, but also from repairing damaged targets. To 
a certain extent it is possible to find a solution to the 
situation (and we are finding one) in additionally equipping 
written-off craft and vessels as naval targets, which is 
considerably cheaper than building new ones. But special 
financing is not provided even for these purposes, and using 
what are even at that miserly funds intended for ship repair 
hardly is advisable. 
  Seventy percent of missile firings in the fleet were carried 
out against simulated targets in the winter training period, 
which inevitably leads to a drop in the training level of the 
fleet's ship crews and shore-based missile units. This problem 
cannot be resolved without special financing, otherwise it will 
be necessary to change criteria of personnel preparedness. 
  Fifthly, combat training effectiveness cannot be raised 
without high quality of base training and full-fledged use of 
training facilities. 
  In the last two years this matter has been given very 
careful 
attention both on the Navy Combat Training staff and in fleet 
directorates. Conduct of formation base exercises has become a 
system; they allow preparing ships and staffs for comprehensive 
performance of missions at sea and rehearsing interworking with 
ship, air and shore-based formations and units without expending 
materiel at authorized control stations, battle stations, and 
simulators. 
  Positive examples of the effectiveness of formation base 
exercises are cited by Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Navy and 
Chief of Navy Combat Training Directorate Vice Admiral A. V. 
Gorbunov in the article "And Still We Go To Sea."&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt; 
And if at times the return from exercises is not up to 
expectations, evidently this is above all the direct fault of 
the corresponding commander and staff. There are conditions for 
conducting formation base exercises in all formations; it is 
only a matter of the organizing abilities and personal 
preparedness of formation commanders. 
  To improve the methodology and quality of formation base 
exercises, at the beginning of each winter and summer training 
period they are planned and conducted as demonstration exercises 
under the direction of commanders in chief of large strategic 
formations ("teachers also have to be taught"). But base 
training is not only and not so much formation base exercises; 
it is the training of each individual specialist, battle 
station, combat team and crew as a whole. It is impossible to 
organize it qualitatively without a modern training facility. 
Again the question rests on financing. Construction of a network 
of fleet training centers essentially has been frozen: 
Insignificant funds are allocated only for creating or 
renovating individual simulators. At the same time even the 
existing training facility is not being used effectively enough. 
It is difficult to change commanders' psychology with respect to 
full-fledged base training, which is the only thing capable of 
even partially compensating for the constant reduction in 
training of personnel at sea (although everyone understands that 
no base training will fully replace practice at sea). There are 
objective difficulties in organizing base training itself: The 
low personnel strength level of crews and the related need for 
constantly using them for fatigue duties, numerous details, 
searches for deserters and so on to the detriment of training; 
the lowered overall training level of draftees in connection 
with adoption of laws halting the call-up of students for 
military service; transition to a two-year term of service; and 
the unsatisfactory state of health of young replacements (every 
third draftee of the last levy is underweight, every fifth one 
is unfit for service afloat and so on). All these problems 
evidently can be solved by a transition to contract service, but 
for now this system of training has not been properly worked 
out, and generally this is a separate discussion. 
  Sixthly and finally, combat training effectiveness depends 
on 
keeping weapons and technical equipment of ships in exemplary 
condition and on their timely, quality servicing and 
maintenance. This probably is the most difficult problem for the 
fleet. Financing of ship repairs is constantly being reduced. 
There is a growing number of ships whose operation is hampered 
and at the same time there is an increased likelihood of 
equipment breakdowns because of the expiration of time periods 
between repairs and between drydockings. There is also a growing 
number of ships being removed from the fleet order of battle 
exclusively because of the absence of funds for ship repair or 
modernization. The destruction of economic ties with many 
enterprises manufacturing arms and equipment which ended up in 
"nearby foreign countries" led to a restriction on or cessation 
of warranty servicing and repair of equipment and deliveries of 
spare parts, instruments and accessories. On the other hand, the 
drop in the personnel's level of specialized training leads to a 
growth in equipment breakdowns, which in turn leads to the need 
for additional repair expenditures. 
  As a result, the reduction in the number of combat-ready 
ships and in their sorties to sea has a negative influence on 
morale in collectives: Discipline drops and criminal activities 
grow. 
  Summing up what has been said, it is possible to dwell on 
two 
main, although possibly not indisputable, conclusions: 
  1. The level of preparedness of a significant number of ship 
crews to perform missions in accordance with their immediate 
purpose is steadily dropping. We can only slow this process by 
various organizational measures and by toughening demands and 
increasing responsibility at all levels, but the Navy is 
incapable of stopping it on its own. 
  2. Personnel proficiency will not correspond even to 
necessary combat training of fleet forces without capital 
investments in the creation of new naval assets and in the 
development of a system of basing, ship repair, training 
facilities and means of supporting combat training. But 
changing, simplifying or reducing preparedness criteria only 
creates an appearance of sufficiency of combat readiness, and it 
will be necessary to expend enormously more funds subsequently 
for its actual restoration as a result of this. 
  From the editors: We invite officers to take part in 
the discussion and express their opinion on the components of 
combat training examined by the author. 
Footnotes 
  1. "Combat Training Today," MORSKOY SBORNIK, No 3, 1992, p 
3. 
  2. MORSKOY SBORNIK, No 11, 1992, pp 3-6. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61055 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Modern Problems of Naval Ship Construction </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0147A Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
(signed to press 8 Oct 93) pp 61-64 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0147A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vice Admiral L. Golovko, deputy </F>
Commander-in-Chief of the Navy for shipbuilding and armament, 
under rubric "Armament and Equipment"] 
  [Text] Since olden times Russian people have been connected 
with naval affairs and have been famed for the art of 
navigation. The Russian Navy always proudly sailed the waters of 
all the planet's seas and oceans. And the fact that we had an 
entire galaxy of innovative scientists who achieved major 
successes in naval shipbuilding and in creating naval ordnance 
largely contributed to this. The work of many of them--Ye. 
Nikonov, S. Dzhevetskiy, V. Yershov, A. Popov, P. Titov, E. 
Gulyayev, S. Makarov, M. Naletov, I. Bubnov, V. Pyatov--was 
known far beyond Russia's confines. 
  Russians were pioneers in the development and combat 
employment of mine and torpedo ordnance. Our scientists also 
performed great services in the area of radio communications, 
hydrology, meteorology, cartography, oceanography, piloting and 
dead reckoning, nautical astronomy, deviation and so on. 
  The traditions of Russian scientists, designers, and 
creators 
of combat equipment and naval ordnance were continued in Soviet 
times. Realization of the latest discoveries in the area of 
nuclear power engineering, electronics and rocket building 
permitted the Navy to become truly oceangoing and capable of 
combating a strong naval enemy. It was in this period the Navy 
acquired qualities of a long-range Navy and the capability of 
exerting substantial influence on the course and outcome of 
warfare in enormous ocean and even continental theaters of 
military operations. 
  Any state's navy is intended for protecting its interests 
through naval warfare. Based on this, construction of the home 
fleet in all historical stages was dictated by an aggregate of 
factors determined by the disposition of military-political 
forces in the international arena, the nature and degree of the 
military threat, missions of ensuring state security stemming 
from this and, in addition, by established views on the Navy's 
role and place in the system of the country's Armed Forces and 
by the country's economic capacities. A scientific-technical 
direction of creating ships formed with consideration of the 
growth in combat capabilities of the probable enemy's naval 
forces and with consideration of conditions for Navy employment 
in light of general patterns of development of means and methods 
of naval warfare. 
  A combatant ship is a concentration of complex, interrelated 
machinery, i.e., a unified system created on the basis of latest 
achievements of science and technology. Participants in its 
many-sided, complex process of creation are hundreds on 
thousands of scientists of different specialties, designers, and 
personnel of various types of enterprises, and they are navymen 
and organizers of shipbuilding production and of shipbuilding as 
a whole. 
  The improvement in naval shipbuilding based on the latest 
scientific-technical achievements and foremost technologies has 
acquired especially great importance at the present time, when 
we began making reasonable sufficiency for defense and not the 
principle of a competition of strength the basis of Armed Forces 
organizational development. Therefore the nature of Russia's 
military doctrine of today envisages a substantial increase in 
qualitative parameters of armament and military equipment 
ensuring high combat readiness of our Armed Forces, including 
the Navy. 
  USSR shipbuilding in the postwar period represented a 
powerful, involved complex of enterprises for scientific 
research, planning and design, shipbuilding, instrument making 
and machinebuilding that were capable of creating any classes of 
ships, vessels and naval facilities in close cooperation with 
enterprises of other sectors of industry. With full readiness of 
its capacities, the sector was capable of supporting an annual 
output as follows: 

  -  ships for the Navy as well as vessels and floating 
facilities for the national economy with an overall displacement 
up to 900,000-1,000,000 tonnes, including for export; 
  -  consumer 
goods amounting to around two billion rubles (1991 prices) 
overall. 

    The status of Soviet shipbuilding basically corresponded to 
the world level with the exception of the production of 
electronics and individual set-making articles for vessels, 
which resulted from our lag in the area of an element base and 
in production of nonmetallic materials. It gave the USSR an 
opportunity to have a Navy with an overall tonnage of around 
four million (the United States now also has around four 
million) and a civilian fleet (not counting river transport 
vessels) with an overall deadweight of 24.3 million tonnes (the 
United States has 23.3 million). 
  In connection with the USSR's disintegration and the 
political and economic reorganization going on in the Russian 
Federation, conditions have changed significantly for 
development and series deliveries of armament and military 
equipment. A need has arisen to shift production and development 
of their individual models, including also of set-making 
assemblies for their manufacture, from former USSR republics to 
Russian Federation territory. Cooperation of enterprises of 
defense sectors of industry continues to collapse due to the 
absence of a precise conversion program and nonallocation of 
sufficient funds to support production activity of remaining 
defense enterprises. The sharp limitation of their financing is 
leading to a reduction in military orders, curtailment of 
production, a drain of skilled cadres, and a changing 
specialization of enterprises. And where there still are 
military orders, the workers' pay is considerably below that of 
civilian production enterprises. 
  For the very same reason, many Navy ranges and scientific 
research experimental bases created to support weapon test 
programs ended up outside the Russian Federation, while those on 
its territory need additional outfitting with ships and 
equipment for making path measurements (airborne, underwater) 
and performing capital construction (shops, berths, storage 
areas, laboratories, hotels, barracks). 
  Around two-thirds of the overall potential of the former 
USSR 
shipbuilding industry now is concentrated on Russian territory. 
At the same time, the potential is substantially lower for 
individual kinds of production such as construction of 
large-tonnage ships and vessels; production of mines, torpedoes, 
antimine weapons, rolled plate and particularly special sections 
for shipbuilding; and production of ship gas-turbine plants and 
radar and sonar equipment. 
  It should be noted that in order to retain the sector's 
vital 
capacity Russia requires a transition period lasting a minimum 
of 5-7 years, during which problems of cooperation must be 
resolved either by continuing mutual deliveries within the 
framework of the CIS or by bringing in exports from other 
countries or by creating Russia's own industries. A possible 
form of solving the problem seems to us to be bilateral and 
multilateral government agreements regulating mutual deliveries 
and the procedure for joint work within the CIS framework. 
  As of today warships which require allocation of significant 
resources for a period up to 5-6 years for fitting out and which 
can support the employment in Russia alone of approximately 
150,000 workers, including 60,000 highly skilled workers, are on 
the ways and at the outfitting quays of shipyards in varying 
degrees of readiness. 
  Cutting up incomplete ships, especially among those on the 
ways, also requires great expenditures (including moral!) and 
cannot be performed quickly enough. In case of a refusal to 
complete the construction of ships, funds will be required for 
their recycling in amounts exceeding expenditures for 
fabrication. The situation at hand must be regarded as an 
emergency and a way out should be found in the shortest possible 
time. 
  Before the beginning of the 1990's the USSR Navy included 
two 
ocean fleets (Northern and Pacific) and two fleets on inland 
seas (Baltic and Black Sea), as well as the Caspian Flotilla. 
The Navy order of battle included nuclear powered missile 
submarines, nuclear powered multipurpose submarines, diesel 
powered submarines, air-capable ships, cruisers, destroyers, 
large ASW ships, large patrol ships, small combatant ships, 
combatant craft of various design projects and support vessels 
for various purposes. At the present time its ship order of 
battle essentially has shifted completely to Russia's 
jurisdiction and now is the basis of the Russian Navy. At the 
same time the present Navy infrastructure differs substantially 
from the previous one. Above all this is caused by loss of a 
number of naval bases in the Baltic, Black and Caspian Sea. But 
problems facing the Russian Navy and its naval shipbuilding 
basically were inherited from previous times; moreover, they 
were exacerbated considerably as a result of the USSR's 
elimination. 
  All these problems can be grouped along two lines. The first 
group of problems is insufficient development of fleet systems 
of basing, servicing and repair and the shortage of support 
ships and a floating logistic establishment. This is especially 
characteristic of the North and Far East in connection with 
difficulties of capital construction in these regions. The 
second group of problems is the high proportion of obsolete 
ships with reduced combat effectiveness in the Navy makeup, but 
which require the very same and in a number of cases even 
greater expenditures for keeping them in formation than for new 
ships. 
  In examining the status of naval shipbuilding it is also 
necessary to consider the status of the civilian maritime and 
river fleet inasmuch as they are interrelated, since they are 
determined by activity of the country's unified shipbuilding 
complex. Therefore, it also seems advisable to make brief 
mention here of problems facing civilian shipbuilding, as the 
naval and civilian fleets are created in the same national 
economic sector. 
  The USSR civilian fleet represented an involved complex, 
including vessels of various classes and for various purposes as 
well as ship repair yards, establishments and rather developed 
port facilities. As a result of partitioning of the civilian 
fleet, Russia was left with approximately 55 percent of 
cumulative deadweight tonnage of maritime transport vessels, a 
little over 60 percent of fishing industry fleet vessels, 30 
percent of offshore oil and gas field supply vessels, and 12 of 
the 27 floating drilling units that were in the USSR. Russia's 
share of the overall number of former USSR ports today is 53 
percent, but it is around 40 percent in cargo volume. 
  This situation on the one hand demanded either conclusion of 
appropriate agreements on leasing or on joint use of ports or 
government decisions on constructing new ones, above all in the 
Baltic and Black Sea. On the other hand, an acute need arose for 
an accelerated buildup of Russia's civilian fleet tonnage. There 
is no other way to get out of the existing situation than on the 
basis of conversion of the shipbuilding industry. 
  Thus, in building a concept for developing the Russian Navy 
under present conditions it is necessary to take into account 
such factors as quantitative and structural makeup of the now 
existing naval fleet; reality of a sharp reduction in 
appropriations for its construction and upkeep; a change in the 
world situation as a whole and in the Baltic and Black Sea in 
particular; the obviousness of the need for Russia to preserve 
the status of a naval power; and the insistent need for 
increasing civilian fleet construction rates. 
  In considering the concept of the development of 
shipbuilding 
in Russia, one also should bear in mind that shipbuilding is 
capable of playing the role of a leading sector supporting 
progress of other sectors of industry and of the country's 
economy as a whole, as occurred in Japan and South Korea. In 
addition, Russia's shipbuilding has good chances to be one of 
the leaders in the world shipbuilding market since, first of 
all, its level of development in Russia is rather high; 
secondly, market capacity is sufficient and is around $300 
billion for the near term (8-10 years); thirdly, shipbuilding 
today is shifting to third world countries, and competition with 
them is within Russia's capability even under today's 
conditions. An additional argument in this regard is the 
competitiveness of many of our ship classes with the possibility 
of their sale on the world market, as demonstrated recently at 
the IDEX-93 international exposition in Abu Dhabi. 
  Thus, it should be stated that a reduction in the proportion 
of naval shipbuilding within the overall volume of Russian 
shipbuilding is a real fact, but it must be emphasized that 
maximum permissible replacement rates of military products with 
civilian products at yards of the shipbuilding sector should not 
exceed 15 percent per year. Otherwise this will lead to "locking 
up" ways with ships being built on them and to disintegration of 
labor collectives at these yards. Another question of state 
importance under present conditions is recycling of written-off 
ships, especially ships with nuclear power plants, which also 
requires appropriate capacities. 
  Based on everything that has been said, the concept of 
development of Russian shipbuilding and arms under present 
conditions should, in our opinion, provide for the following: 
Mandatory fitting out of ships and vessels which are in a high 
degree of readiness, if only to free up capacities for civilian 
products, i.e., receiving permanent credits for financing their 
fitting out; licenses for selling a portion of fitted-out ships 
and vessels on the world market and for sale of secondary 
resources to direct the proceeds toward renovating shipbuilding 
and ship repair bases and support sectors; and financing of the 
program for recycling written-off ships and vessels. For its 
realization, in the first stage (over the next 3-5 years) we 
propose to fit out combatant ships and auxiliary vessels which 
are in various degrees of readiness. At the same time, work must 
be done to upgrade and renovate the fleet basing and repair 
infrastructure. In parallel, it is necessary to accomplish work 
of inspecting the available ship order of battle in order to 
clarify the status of each specific ship and determine prospects 
for her further use: Keep some in the order of battle, prepare 
others for modernization and support such modernization, and 
mothball still others or send them for recycling (to be written 
off). 
  At the same time, within the scope of the new military 
doctrine and new missions facing the Russian Navy, we must not 
reduce rates of RDT&amp;E and planning work to determine basic 
directions of Navy development for the future and to form a 
permanent sliding program of naval shipbuilding for the next 
10-15 years. It is quite clear from the studies conducted that 
we cannot get by without creating new strategic missile 
submarine cruisers, nuclear and non-nuclear powered multipurpose 
submarines, aircraft carriers (or air-capable ships), 
multipurpose surface combatants of the destroyer, frigate and 
corvette types and mine countermeasures ships, as well as small 
combatants and new-generation floating logistic support ships 
and vessels. 
  Today it is premature to speak of a specific appearance and 
standard types of the above ships. It is enormously more 
important to emphasize the problem of the need for intensifying 
test-design work to create weapons, armament and equipment of 
the future with an optimum combination of high specifications 
and performance characteristics and with resolution of problems 
of their standardization, unification, modernization capability, 
and maintainability. This means that the scale of research and 
test-design work should not be reduced. Moreover, under present 
conditions this must be given even more attention than before. 
  Prospects of domestic naval shipbuilding are linked closely 
with successes and achievements of S&amp;T progress. Its 
interests 
lie not only in the area of solving applied S&amp;T problems, but 
extend to a wide range of basic research in various directions. 
Therefore naval shipbuilding plans must rely on results of 
fulfillment of major comprehensive and specific state research 
and scientific, planning and technological work. 
  The history of domestic naval shipbuilding has shown 
repeatedly that "ups" and "downs" in the process of constructing 
ships and vessels had a pernicious effect on the Navy's status 
for decades. To the contrary, construction of the Fleet requires 
"monotonous continuity," and this is possible in part with 
observance of a number of basic conditions, the principal ones 
of which are long-range (for 10-15 years), specific program 
planning and stable (with consideration of inflation), 
continuous financing of the fulfillment of this program. But 
loss of achievements of our naval shipbuilding may bring broader 
and deeper consequences than simply a temporary loss of existing 
military-strategic or political-economic parities in naval 
armaments. 
  Thus, on the eve of its tricentennial, Russian naval 
shipbuilding is faced with solving serious new problems. The 
difficulty of this solution is determined by many political, 
economic and social factors. But we always must remember our 
forefathers' behest--"let there be maritime vessels"--and in the 
situation that is taking shape find real ways to maintain 
Russia's naval might at a level worthy of a Great Sea Power. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61056 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kokoshin: Russia Needs Reliable Fleet </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0151A Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 11, Nov 93 
(signed to press 5 Nov 93) pp 3-7 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0151A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andrey Afanasyevich Kokoshin, first deputy </F>
minister of defense of the Russian Federation, by Capt 2d Rank 
Ye. Vodopyanov: "Russia Needs a Worthy Fleet"] 
  [Text] During the course of preparations for 
celebrating the 300th anniversary of the Russian Fleet, besides 
pride in its glorious centuries-old history, military seamen are 
also experiencing well-founded concern for the future of the 
Russian Navy. People devoted to the sea are bitter about the 
fact that for the first time in many decades, not a single ship 
was laid down at Russia's shipyards last year, and completion of 
those under construction was suspended or is being done at an 
extremely slow pace against the background of the massive 
decommissioning of ships and vessels, both obsolete ones and 
ones that could be preserved with the proper repair and 
modernization. What is the reason for this situation--is it 
merely economic difficulties, or is it an aggregate of other 
reasons? It is with this question that we began our interview 
with Andrey Afanasyevich Kokoshin, first deputy minister of 
defense of the Russian Federation. 
  [Kokoshin] The difficult situation of the Russian Navy is 
explained not only by the difficulties of the present situation 
in Russia and the political and economic consequences of the 
breakup of the USSR, but also by the past mistakes in 
organizational development of the Navy, when warships were being 
created, and basing and ground support and servicing systems, 
that is, all that we call infrastructure, were not properly 
developed. The same can be said about fleet armament, as well as 
reconnaissance and target designation assets. There is another 
aspect. Ships, even after being adopted into operational 
service, took a very long time to complete and, naturally, could 
not fully accomplish combat missions. What is more, today at the 
Baltic Shipyards the guided-missile cruiser Peter the Great is 
being completed. Only now is this ship, the fourth of this 
project, getting all the weapons that were to be on the first 
one. Huge delays in creating assemblies, individual components, 
and weapons systems of the warships also have an effect. So, the 
Navy is a victim both of the most difficult crisis situation of 
our economy and, simultaneously, of those problems of 
shipbuilding that built up over several decades. 
  [Vodopyanov] Apparently, we can also include here the 
difficult situation with housing and other problems of social 
security which have taken shape in the fleets? 
  [Kokoshin] Unquestionably. The trouble is that we created 
ships, including outstanding ones, but essentially forgot about 
people. This concerns not only officer personnel but also 
enlisted personnel. It seems that the large number of incidents 
in the Navy, including cases of suicide, are associated with the 
fact that crews are located in the secluded space of ship 
compartments for too long a time, and the conditions have not 
been created for them for real rest and relaxation on shore. 
  [Vodopyanov] Andrey Afanasyevich, if the conversation turns 
to development of the Navy's infrastructure, a logical question 
arises: What is being done today to solve the problems you 
mentioned? 
  [Kokoshin] Development of a system of basing and life 
support 
is a long-term program which must be planned for 15-20 years. In 
doing so, we must proceed from the fact that the idea of 
dispersing the infrastructure facilities for basing ship 
groupings intended to operate in one or several closely located 
operational areas is outdated. You see, a massive strike, not 
even nuclear but conventional, but with high-precision weapons, 
will destroy practically all the facilities no matter how we try 
to move them apart. Therefore, I consider justified the 
viewpoint of those experts who propose to position the fleets at 
several bases unified in technology of supporting the vital 
activities of the ships, weapons, and use of forces and weapons 
at sea. Such a concentration of forces give a tremendous 
advantage both for the development of the Navy's infrastructure 
and for creating normal living conditions for servicemen and 
their families. 
  [Vodopyanov] In doing so, obviously, we must proceed from 
the 
real conditions and capabilities of our state? 
  [Kokoshin] Undoubtedly. Unfortunately, we are just now 
beginning to really count our money, to say nothing of the 
Americans, Germans, and British. They will not invest their 
money unless they are convinced that every dollar, mark, or 
pound will provide the maximum return. In Russia's history, the 
great Prince Konstantin Nikolayevich--general-admiral of the 
Russian Fleet--and his fellow reformers devoted much attention 
during the reform period to what is now called "cost 
effectiveness." Today, every commander must become an economist. 
The general customer of the Navy's arms in the person of 
commanders of higher echelons, headquarters, and other command 
and control bodies must be able to analyze what is more 
beneficial to the Navy: For example, purchase five new 
destroyers or modernize 10 that are in service. Lay a new 
nuclear-powered submarine or modernize that which has proven 
itself well. Order a new cruiser or invest money in development 
of the infrastructure and life support of existing ships... 
  Of course, to do this, we in the armed forces must have 
strong economic services, and one of our most important tasks is 
to instill in commanders of all levels a taste for careful 
analysis of the monetary resources which we possess and the 
combat effectiveness of those arms which we purchase for this 
money. 
  [Vodopyanov] To do this, however, commanders must clearly 
know what the Russia's Ministry of Defense and you, as first 
deputy minister of defense, see as the Navy's role today. What 
is its concept of organizational development? It is no secret 
that in Russia's past and, the impression is forming, the 
present military doctrine, insufficient attention was and is 
being devoted to the Navy. 
  [Kokoshin] There always was a double attitude towards the 
Navy. On the one hand, it was loved in a special way. And 
Russians, I would say, have a certain subconscious craving for 
the sea. It is no wonder that the periods of Russia's isolation 
concluded with departure for the seas that wash the present-day 
Russia, initially in the west and south (Baltic, Black, and 
Caspian seas) and then in the east (Pacific Ocean). On the other 
hand, due to our geostrategic position, we have traditionally 
been more of a land power than a sea power, and Russia's 
military fate was usually determined on land. Of course, there 
were critical moments and sea battles, such as Tsushima, which 
also determined the future foreign policy and the domestic 
situation of the Russian state. Nevertheless, the outcome of 
wars--the Patriotic War of 1812, World War I and II--were 
predetermined deep in Russian territory. This happened not only 
due to Russia's natural geographic position but also, it seems 
to me, due to the ambivalent attitude towards the Navy. It 
experienced periods of a great upsurge and deep crises. And such 
alternation was repeated over and over in Russia's history--we 
must not forget this. Remember that after Peter the Great, the 
Navy was very quickly brought to a deep decline by his 
successors. Then things were corrected somewhat under Elizabeth 
Petrovna, but it still cannot be said that the Navy was in a 
magnificent position. During the rule of Catherine the Great, 
the Navy flourished. It was during this period that the entire 
world heard the names Senyavin, Greyg, and Ushakov, whose glory 
was comparable to that of Rumyantsev and Suvorov. Under Paul I 
the Navy still held its place, but under Alexander I it again 
ended up in a difficult situation and was not used very much. 
Paradoxical as it may seem, the most hated name for seamen of 
that time was the name of the naval minister, Marquis de 
Traverse. However, he did not decide everything; he merely acted 
as an instrument of the top. Although the role of personality in 
the Navy was always great, its revival, at least of the Black 
Sea Fleet, in the first half of the 19th century was associated 
primarily with the name Admiral Lazarev. Later came the Crimean 
War, when the Navy was powerless against the enemy's armored 
steam-powered ships, and the Russian admirals, officers, and 
sailors became heroes of the land defense of Sevastopol. We also 
remember the already mentioned Tsushima and 1918, when a large 
part of the Black Sea Fleet was actually sunk... Overall, the 
Russian Navy had a majestic and sometimes tragic history, one 
that was more complex than that of the armed forces as a whole. 
In the recent past, at the turn of the 1960's, the Navy was 
subjected to a severe blow when nearly new ships that were far 
from exhausting their combat capabilities were scrapped. 
  [Vodopyanov] Andrey Afanasyevich, you absolutely justly 
noted 
that we must not forget history, including that of the Navy. Is 
this taken into account in the new shipbuilding program? 
  [Kokoshin] I would not say that we have a new shipbuilding 
program in the traditional sense. I think there should be a 
program of developing arms as a whole, of which the Navy would 
be a component. And this would include not only ships but also 
shore-based missile systems, naval aviation, and naval 
infantry... But the most important thing, I repeat, is to 
improve the basing system and the repair system. It is precisely 
such a program that we need--without a one-sided slant towards 
shipbuilding. This is especially dictated by the situation, 
resulting from the breakup of the Soviet Union, in the Black, 
Baltic, and Caspian Seas. As far as ships are concerned, I 
believe the idea of creating a relatively small number of 
aircraft-carrying ships merits very close attention. Overall, we 
need new inspiring ideas whose implementation can help us keep 
what we have for years. The young people of the Navy will have 
their say here... 
  [Vodopyanov] But in order to advance, as you say, "ideas," 
those young people of the Navy need to know what criteria will 
determine the quantitative and qualitative composition of the 
Navy. 
  [Kokoshin] Absolutely, Russia needs a powerful, modern navy 
without quantitative excesses, but with high indicators of 
combat and operational effectiveness; a navy which would blend 
in with an integrated military doctrine. Today it is especially 
important for all the armed services and combat arms to 
coordinate precisely with one another. Now, of course, there is 
no optimum in this sphere. As far as the missions to be carried 
out by the Navy are concerned, I think they primarily associated 
with safeguarding Russia's security in certain areas and zones 
adjacent to its territory and ensuring, along with the Strategic 
Missile Troops and strategic Long-Range Aviation, reliable 
nuclear deterrence. One of the Navy's most important missions 
will be to preserve according to specific parameters its oceanic 
functions, above all, in the context of reconnaissance, 
collecting data, and studying the hydrological situation. Among 
the combat missions, the primary one is to maintain the 
stability of strategic nuclear-powered submarines and create 
such conditions of combat duty that would enable us in the event 
of political crises and military operations to prevail in the 
near-ocean zones most vulnerable for safeguarding Russia's 
security and also in certain key areas of the world oceans. 
  [Vodopyanov] But what is the basis for carrying out what is 
planned? After all, it seems to us that today much is 
justifiably being said about the insufficient thought given to 
the policy of conversion of the defense industry, which led to 
the collapse of our military-industrial complex and its loss of 
advanced positions. 
  [Kokoshin] It must be recognized that we really did not have 
a conversion policy, although efforts were made to convert the 
military-industrial complex to producing peacetime products. But 
such a program should have been implemented over the course of 
10-15 years and certainly on the condition of the stability of 
state administration. The conversion program proposed within the 
framework of the old system can only be considered a conversion 
palliative. When weakened "civilian" plants "hooked onto" 
enterprises of the military-industrial complex, it was able to 
work only in the presence of a directive force. And, of course, 
the conversion policy had to have powerful market stimuli and be 
built into an overall strategy of reformation of the economy and 
independent of directions from above. 
  [Vodopyanov] Andrey Afanasyevich, how can you now 
characterize the condition of the industrial complex meeting the 
needs of the Navy? 
  [Kokoshin] It is very difficult. Essentially, we are now 
fighting for the survival of the armed forces, including the 
Navy, and for the preservation of industry, if only in those 
volumes which would ensure maintaining the Army and Navy at the 
necessary combat readiness. This is an extremely difficult task. 
The director corps of defense enterprises agrees when you say 
that it is necessary to reduce military orders and the number of 
plants. But as soon as it affects the directors directly, they 
begin to take it back: They say, let us reduce others' orders, 
but not mine. Incidentally, we were also forced to curtail many 
developments to the limit and, figuratively speaking, will have 
to cut to the quick. 
  For example, we determined Severodvinsk and the 
Sevmashpredpriyatiye [Severodvinsk Machine Building Enterprise] 
to be the center of nuclear-powered submarine building. Now all 
orders will go only there. But we must bring to readiness those 
submarines which we have in the Far East. Some are being 
completed at Nizhniy Novgorod, and large surface ships at 
Kaliningrad and St. Petersburg... 
  [Vodopyanov] Again, it turns out that it is the Navy that is 
suffering the greatest damage of all the armed services? 
  [Kokoshin] This is taking place due to its specific nature: 
The duration of the shipbuilding cycle, the fact that they are 
entire floating cities which combine much of what the Air Force, 
Missile Troops, and Air Defense Troops have... Therefore, such 
super powerful weapons systems are now suffering the most. The 
specific nature of today's industrial production and the fact 
that there are no strict rules governing behavior of first and 
second-level cooperating enterprises, which are very quickly 
switching to the production of civilian products that are in 
demand. Military orders have become unprofitable due to not 
being provided financial resources... 
  [Vodopyanov] ...As a result, whereas before seamen often 
complained about a number of low tactical and technical 
parameters of newly built ships and the insufficient 
standardization of weapons and combat equipment with which they 
were equipped, today the Navy is more concerned about the 
discontinuance of deliveries not only of new and modern weapons 
but even series-produced weapons. Will it not turn out that the 
Russian Navy will celebrate its 300th anniversary not only 
without new ships but also with armament from "the Ochakov times 
and the conquest of Crimea?" 
  [Kokoshin] You pose an absolutely valid question. I believe 
that we need to maintain the course of keeping a small number of 
warships in commission, but the most modern and really 
combat-ready, as they say, first-line ships. Such requirements, 
of course, also pertain to both aviation and to the other armed 
services, but especially to the Navy. We must be sure that if a 
ship flies the flag of the Navy and is in commission, it can be 
counted upon. In addition, there should be reserve ships with 
lower levels of combat readiness and a lower level of manning 
than first-line ships. Of course, both must be equipped with 
modern weapons. But there are a mass of obstacles here. 
  [Vodopyanov] Can you dwell on this important aspect in more 
detail? 
  [Kokoshin] In the former USSR, the expenditure mechanism of 
the entire life cycle of armament was dominant--from development 
to utilization. Often, reporting on the development of a 
project, say, for a new ship was the main thing, for which they 
handed out awards and prizes. Ships, weapons systems, 
life-support systems, and rescue and survival equipment, as it 
later turned out, were far from perfect in a number of cases due 
to such "reporting mania." Moreover, the vast majority of 
armament models were created without expectation of 
modernization. We are suffering from this to this day, since it 
is impossible to place new electronics, sonar equipment, and 
modern types of antennas on ship of most projects. 
  But the main shortcoming in domestic shipbuilding, it seems, 
was the lack of a macro-system approach to construction and 
development of the Navy, including basing infrastructure, when 
the drive for quantitative and qualitative composition of the 
Navy under obviously overstated requirements of naval strategy 
(let us recall the "ocean strategy" of Admiral Gorshkov) was 
accomplished by painful decisions often dictated not by the Navy 
but by the military-industrial complex. There was nothing that 
defined the strategy of military shipbuilding--a state program 
coordinated by objectives, deadlines, and engineering tasks and 
unified for all scientific research institutes and design 
bureaus, shipyards, and docks. But those same Americans and 
Germans, far richer than us, built ships with a long-range 
sight. The Iowa-class battleships are a classic example of a 
proprietary attitude toward ships. But where are our Project 
68-bis gun cruisers today, which were distinguished by 
outstanding naval architecture and fair seagoing qualities?! 
  [Vodopyanov] Today the Navy has also lost (basically due to 
a 
poorly developed shore-basing infrastructure) newer ships; for 
example, the heavy aircraft-carrying cruisers Kiev, Minsk, and 
Novorossiysk, each of which served less than 20 years... 
  [Kokoshin] That is because, as I already said above, we 
always pursued quantity, ignoring the qualitative 
characteristics of the Fleet and paying no attention to costs, 
which especially increase when operating less-than-perfect ships 
and basing points. Today we are forced to count every ruble; 
funds are catastrophically short. How in such conditions to 
optimize expenditures for the purchase of equipment and 
armament, shipbuilding and repair, and scientific research and 
experimental design work? Therefore, in the immediate future we 
must not count on any new grandiose projects, but we must solve 
more practical problems in order to preserve the maximum of what 
we have in the Fleet today. The Navy's main task for the next 
2-3 years is survival. I will note that it is not vegetation, 
but survival with the evolutionary accumulation of combat might, 
structural and operational reorganization, being inspired by the 
lofty idea of the historical greatness of the homeland, and 
realization of its need for armed forces, and the Navy in 
particular. We must not forget that the Navy is still a special 
instrument of the state which can be used not only for purely 
military but also political tasks. I have in mind showing the 
Russian flag. I am convinced that we must accomplish the latter 
constantly, and there is no room for a bookkeeping approach 
here. A warship, especially a beautiful one (and Soviet, now 
Russian, ships are famous for their architecture), evokes 
admiration and respect. We must work out a kind of philosophy of 
using the Fleet, when it serves as a powerful factor of 
deterring an aggressor, without entering into combat operations 
but simply cruising back and forth off the coast or even beyond 
the horizon, and influences political "solitaire" along with 
other means and measures. 
  [Vodopyanov] Especially since the Russian and Soviet Navy 
has 
such experience... 
  [Kokoshin] I have talked a lot with veterans of the Navy who 
have more than once sailed the Mediterranean Sea, Indian Ocean, 
and Pacific Ocean. In a number of cases, our Navy played a very 
important role, when the situation was stabilized at a 
comparatively low level of escalation of some or other conflict 
by the sending of a detachment of our ships. No one guarantees 
that military threats in the world to the security of Russia 
will come to naught completely. So, we must be realists--we 
cannot get along without a Navy worthy of Russia. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61057 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary on 1975 U.S. Operation to Raise Submarine PL-574 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0157A Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA in Russian 30 Dec 93 p 
7 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0157A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Anatoliy Dokuchayev: "The Secret of the Loss of </F>
PL-574: Only Now Have We Learned That a CIA Deep-Sea Operation 
Was Completed"] 
  [Text] 
<H6>  The CIA Finds Our Submarine </H6>
  In the spring of 1975, the mass media of the United States 
and other Western countries unleashed a rapid stream of articles 
and reports that the CIA had salvaged a portion of a Soviet 
submarine with nuclear missiles. Super-secret details of the 
operation were cited. Let's turn to those articles and reports. 
  THE WASHINGTON POST, March 20, 1975 
  "The wreckage of a Soviet submarine that sank in the Pacific 
Ocean has been detected on the ocean bottom. The U.S. Central 
Intelligence Agency salvaged one third of the submarine in the 
summer of 1974. A ship with drilling equipment that was built by 
Billionaire Howard Hughes was used to do that." 
  DPA Agency, March 21 1975 
  "The U.S. CIA discovered two torpedoes with nuclear warheads 
on board the Soviet submarine that sank in 1968. `Remarkable 
material' was obtained as a result of operations conducted to 
salvage the submarine. Both torpedoes were raised to the surface 
and were loaded into a specially equipped barge to conceal it 
from foreign ships. The operation that was undertaken to salvage 
the submarine will be continued in the future. If it is 
successfully completed, the CIA will have all of the codes, 
ciphers and diagrams of submarine command and control machines." 
  And everything began with a tragedy. 
<H6>  "Your Son Has Been Declared Dead..." </H6>
  On February 24, 1968, the submarine with conning tower 
number 
574 went out on combat patrol from the Mogila basing facility on 
Kamchatka. It was a diesel with three underwater-launch 
ballistic missiles with high-power nuclear warheads and also 
with two nuclear torpedoes. Captain 1st Rank Vladimir Kobzar, 
whom the command authorities characterized as an experienced, 
competent and strong-willed submariner, commanded the submarine. 
  For 12 days, the crew carried out the assigned missions of 
undetected patrolling (the submarine planned to return to base 
on 5 May 1968) but it did not establish communications on March 
8. On that day, PL-574 should have transmitted a radio test 
message -- a short signal, but... 
  Retired Rear Admiral Viktor Dygalo, who in 1968 commanded 
the 
large unit to which PL-574 was assigned, recalls what happened: 
  "In accordance with the combat order, Vladimir Kobzar 
regularly sent reports to headquarters on the course of the 
cruise. But on March 8 we were all alarmed -- the submarine did 
not respond to the radio test message that was transmitted by 
Pacific Ocean Fleet Headquarters as a communications check. 
Indeed, this did not provide grounds to suggest a tragic outcome 
of the cruise -- rarely did those kinds of reasons prevent a 
commander from establishing communications. 
  "But the message did not arrive. This was serious grounds 
for 
alarm. All the more so that, according to intelligence 
information, the American submarine Swordfish, which had 
sustained damage, had arrived at the Japanese port of Yokosuka 
at approximately the same time. During this submarine's entry 
into Yokosuka, the Americans had taken unusual security measures 
and only American personnel were involved with the repair work. 
The thought arose about a collision underwater. We began to 
urgently prepare a search and rescue operation. 
  "Aircraft, surface combatants and auxiliary ships were sent 
out into the ocean. The depth in the search area was 5,000-6,000 
meters and the distance from Kamchatka was approximately 1,230 
miles. However, a two-month search in the area where we assumed 
the submarine could have sunk ended unsuccessfully. An analysis 
of the oil spot that was found indicated that it was solar oil 
and diesel oil. Consequently, the submarine had sunk." 
  Several versions on the loss of PL-574 were advanced and 
exist until the present time. The most well-founded version is 
the one that Admiral Viktor Dygalo has described. The American 
nuclear submarine Swordfish, which was tracking PL-574, had 
unintentionally rammed it. At the time of the collision, PL-574 
was traveling at periscope depth in the "diesel operations 
underwater mode," under RDP as the experts say it, and was 
"deaf" due to the diesel's noise. Swordfish maneuvered to a 
close distance and presumably struck the upper portion of 
PL-574's conning tower when PL-574 was turning to a new course. 
PL-574, with a flooded central compartment, went to the bottom. 
  PL-574 took the lives of 98 Soviet seamen to the ocean 
depths. Moscow was silent about the catastrophe. Killed in 
action notices were sent to the relatives which stated: "Your 
son, husband, or father has been declared dead..." 
  They were silent about the catastrophe. Nevertheless, the 
United States had learned about it, and not only about the fact 
itself, but about the precise location of the submarine's loss. 
They had photographed the sunken submarine. The photographs 
showed: The submarine was lying on the ground on an even keel 
and practically without a list. The Americans had a real 
opportunity to obtain many of the Soviet Navy's secrets -- the 
United States Navy's primary enemy at sea. 
  The cipher machine was of special interest. U.S. 
intelligence 
personnel almost always experienced difficulties with Soviet 
codes and even a seven-year-old machine could be utilized to 
decipher thousands of Soviet messages that had been transmitted 
when the Cold War was in full swing in the 1960's. 
<H6>  Project "Jennifer" </H6>
  Practical realization of the idea to salvage the lost Soviet 
submarine took the form of a CIA operation code named "Project 
Jennifer" which was frequently designated "Project J" at the 
CIA. The operation began to be conducted at the beginning of the 
1970's with the full support of President Richard Nixon and was 
a deep secret. Billionaire Howard Hughes, owner of airlines, 
electronics companies, and oil drilling enterprises, was 
assigned an important role. He partially financed the operation. 
  The technical executors designed two special ships to raise 
PL-574: The Glomar-Explorer ship-platform and the N V-1 
pontoon-floating dock. A characteristic detail: Even during the 
final assembly of the ships, the engineers-builders could not 
understand their function. 
  In October 1970, Soviet intelligence in the United States 
managed to establish that the U.S. intelligence services had 
taken steps to look for the sunken Soviet submarine and had sent 
a special ship to the area where the submarine had been lost. 
<H6>  A Secret Ship </H6>
  Surveillance established that the ship had dropped anchor 
and 
had lowered pipes to a depth of approximately 5,000 meters. 
  The ship, which was being painstakingly observed by Soviet 
seamen, belonged to the firm Glomar and was one of its nine 
specialized ships that were designed to drill shelves in coastal 
areas of the World Ocean. It had been leased by the CIA for 
decoy maneuvering and the firm's managers and crew did not have 
any idea about the true nature of Operation Jennifer. 
  Direct implementation of Project Jennifer began later. The 
Glomar Explorer left the shipyard in July 1973 for ocean tests. 
It was sighted off the coast of Nicaragua, where it was assumed 
Howard Hughes lived at that time, in the autumn of that same 
year. Opinions were expressed in the Western press that the 
"secret ship" was conducting a search for manganese at depths 
from 10,000 to 16,000 feet. And already in the summer of 1974 
the ship was sighted near the Hawaiian Islands in the area where 
the Soviet submarine had been lost. The "secret ship's" crew 
totaled 170 people. All crew members were CIA 
employees-contractors. 
  In June 1974, the crew of the Glomar Explorer undertook the 
first attempt to raise the Soviet submarine. This was witnessed 
by crew members of a Soviet intelligence ship. 
  The "Chazhma" ship measurement system was sent to the 
Hawaiian Islands at the beginning of March 1975. It shadowed the 
Explorer for a week. According to the commander's report, the 
ship was screwing and threading pipes. 
  The fleet intelligence directorate obtained authorization 
from the fleet commander to send the MV-136 Ocean Rescue Tug 
with a surveillance team from Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy to 
organize uninterrupted shadowing of the "secret ship". They 
"observed" the Explorer for ten days -- as before, it was 
involved with "screwing pipes". 
  And suddenly... A sensational explosion in the foreign 
press: 
"The U.S. CIA had raised a sunken Soviet submarine from the 
bottom of the Pacific Ocean". 
  Using the pipes that had been extended to a length of five 
kilometers, the dock-pontoon with claw-shaped underwater 
gripping devices was dropped to the very bottom of the ocean. 
The television cameras that had been installed on it permitted 
the operators to see in detail everything that was occurring in 
the ocean's depths. Soon the most important moment arrived for 
the specialists -- the seizure of the Soviet submarine. It 
occurred successfully. The salvage began, but... 
  When the dock-pontoon had completed 99&percnt; of the 
journey, the 
submarine broke into two parts at the point of the puncture. The 
stern section slipped out of the gripping devices and rushed to 
the bottom of the ocean with the bodies of the majority of those 
who had perished and with the ballistic missiles. 
  The missiles with the nuclear warheads floated away from the 
CIA, however. On that day the agency's experts considered the 
goal to be half-attained. In their hands was the first 
compartment with the torpedoes and the second, commander's 
compartment with the cipher room. 
  The Explorer and the dock-pontoon left the area and headed 
for Honolulu. They planned to raise the stern section with the 
missile compartment later. Near Honolulu, in a range that had 
been closed to ship navigation, the deceased seamen, who had not 
been affected by decay for seven years --there is no oxygen at 
great depths -- were extracted from the nose section of the 
submarine. 
  As the Project Jennifer plan had stipulated, the submariners 
from PL-574 were reburied in the ocean according to the ritual 
that was accepted in the Soviet Navy. 
  They delivered the hull of the submarine, from which the 
dead 
had been removed, to carefully guarded Redwood City Bay (near 
San Francisco). The two nuclear torpedoes, surviving documents 
and other equipment were extracted from it there. The American 
press reported that the submarine's design features were 
painstakingly studied and were assessed as "quite interesting". 
<H6>  The Kremlin and White House Were Silent </H6>
  However, the U.S. intelligence service's primary goal was 
not 
achieved --there were no ciphers. That's how it turned out. 
Let's turn once again to the recollections of Retired Rear 
Admiral Anatoliy Shtyrov: 
  The reason was unexpected both for the Americans and for us 
too: During plant repair and modernization at Dalzavod 
(Vladivostok) in 1967, PL-574 Commander Vladimir Kobzar 
"displayed rational initiative" -- for the appropriate "reward", 
more precisely, for spirits and an awl, as they say it in the 
navy -- and transferred the organic cipher room from the second 
to the fourth compartment, having thereby widened his 
commander's cabin. 
  The press prevented the future continuation of the 
operation. 
The CIA couldn't keep the operation secret. A curious incident 
prevented that. 
  A band of gangsters from Los Angeles learned that there were 
documents in the office of Billionaire Howard Hughes, the 
possession of which would yield millions of dollars. The police 
recorded the raid on the office. A sea of reporters arrived with 
the police. One of the documents ultimately ended up in the 
press. 
  The White House and the Kremlin simply did not react to the 
reports about the Soviet submarine for a long time. The White 
House's silence was understandable. The attempt to salvage the 
Soviet submarine would have involved consequences similar to 
those that had occurred during the incident with the U-2 
aircraft piloted by Powers. 
  As for the Kremlin, the Soviet government never publicly 
reported the submarine's loss. 
  In fulfillment of a CPSU Central Committee decree, the 
commander-in-chief of the Soviet Navy issued an order: Ships 
would conduct combat alert duty in the area of the loss of 
PL-574 and would prevent salvaging of its remaining portion from 
the bottom of the ocean, even if they had to bomb the area. That 
type of combat alert duty was conducted for six months. 
  The measures undertaken played their role. To avoid 
complicating relations with Moscow, Washington rejected further 
submarine salvage operations and the appropriate instructions 
were issued to the CIA leadership. Operation Project Jennifer, 
an operation which still has many secrets, came to an end. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61058 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   State of Military Trade Directorate Under Market Conditions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0149A Moscow ARMIYA in Russian No 18, 1993 (signed to 
press 25 Aug 93) pp 36-40 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0149A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ARMIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major-General Viktor Ivanovich Tsarkov, </F>
chief of the Main Military Trade Directorate of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Defense, by Colonel V. Ukolov: "Better 
Times Will also Come for Military Trade..."] 
  [Text] The chief of the Main Military Trade 
Directorate of the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense 
answers questions from readers and the editorial staff of the 
journal ARMIYA. 
  [Ukolov] Viktor Ivanovich, will military trade really 
survive 
in market conditions? 
  [Tsarkov] It is obvious to me that the future of military 
trade is directly dependent on the very existence of the armed 
forces themselves. Officers, warrant officers, and 
representatives of other categories of servicemen serve in the 
troops, and their families live in military camps--which means 
military trade is to provide people with all the necessities. 
  About the ability to survive... According to forecasts of 
the 
Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation, a further 
reduction in the production of consumer goods is expected, food 
products in particular--products from animal husbandry, sugar, 
tea, vegetable oil. The same goes for nonfood consumer items. 
Wholesale trade fairs held recently have shown that compared to 
the average level of 1992, it is still possible to purchase the 
following: Sewn goods--40 percent; knitted wear and hosiery--70 
percent; leather footwear--65 percent; fabric--50 percent; and 
household goods--80 percent. Nevertheless, today military trade 
must not only survive but must also become a system of 
guaranteed trade and consumer support for service members. And I 
am convinced that during the course of reforming the armed 
forces, better times will also come for military trade. 
  [Ukolov] I would like to share your optimism. But judging 
from the letters to the editor, military trade, especially 
recently, is the object of constant criticism and people's 
dissatisfaction. How did you yourself assess the work of 
military trade prior to your appointment and how do you assess 
it now, having plunged directly into the maelstrom of its 
problems? 
  [Tsarkov] Of course, before I was involved with military 
trade as a consumer; nevertheless, I felt its difficulties and 
problems. But having plunged into the maelstrom, as you say, I 
certainly should begin my work in the new field of endeavor not 
with a simple assessment of excellent, good, or bad, but, I am 
confident, with the fact that I am obligated to understand the 
situation and find ways of solving the numerous problems and 
improving this important and necessary matter. The consumers of 
the numerous garrisons will grade us. 
  [Ukolov] Readers write to us, and this is noticeable in 
Moscow, that with each day the showcases and shelves of military 
trade stores are becoming increasingly empty. Okay, one can buy 
something in the cities and large populated areas, turning to 
merchants. But what are the families of servicemen to do in 
remote garrisons, where military trade is the only supplier of 
goods and products? 
  [Tsarkov] I understand it is particularly difficult in 
remote 
areas now... But what can you say here? Today the commercial 
work of the military trade stores (like in the country's trade 
as a whole) is being impeded by their unsatisfactory financial 
condition. It is associated with the shortage of their own 
working capital, the extremely long time it takes money to pass 
through banks, and the limited nature of credit resources 
compared to the incredibly high interest rates. Here there are 
constant demands from suppliers for prepayment of deliveries and 
many other things. 
  Nevertheless, not everything is so miserably bad. In just 
four months of this year, military trade bodies sold goods 
amounting to more than 79 billion rubles [R]. But the most 
important thing is that the main task of military trade to 
supply servicemen and their family members in closed and remote 
garrisons and "hot spots," in general and on the whole, is being 
accomplished positively. Naturally, this did not come about 
simply. The leadership of the Ministry of Defense was forced to 
ask the government of Russia to allocate manufactured goods from 
the country's federal reserves. 
  [Ukolov] What is the situation in military trade with 
furniture, televisions, and refrigerators? For example, prices 
for them have risen considerably, but the demand has not 
decreased... 
  [Tsarkov] In conditions of a market economy, many 
enterprises 
that are manufacturers of furniture, televisions, and 
refrigerators prefer to sell their products through company 
trade or commercial structures. And they place almost enslaving 
delivery terms on military trade bodies. However, thanks to 
long-term economic ties with suppliers and the persistence of 
our commercial workers, already in the first quarter of this 
year military trade bodies received furniture amounting to more 
than R1.9 billion, 15,000 televisions, and 9,000 refrigerators. 
Of course, this does not fully satisfy consumers' needs, but I 
can assure you that we are constantly working to find resources 
for these goods. 
  [Ukolov] Judging from letters to the editor, the prices for 
certain food products are higher in military trade stores than 
in civilian stores. What is the reason for this? 
  [Tsarkov] You correctly noted that they are for certain 
products. This concerns confectionery products (candy, 
chocolate, caramels, cookies), alcoholic beverages, and other 
goods that are not primary necessities, purchased by military 
trade, as a rule, not from federal reserves, but through 
commercial and other structures. Naturally, the remoteness of 
the regions (the Far North, the Arctic) and additional 
expenditures associated with this are taken into account when 
forming retail prices for these goods. 
  Primary necessities received from the state's federal 
reserves in volumes approved by the government of the Russian 
Federation are sold by military trade enterprises at prices 
below those in civilian trade. 
  [Ukolov] Our readers also complain that despite the price 
increases, as before, many goods at military trade stores remain 
under the counters and in warehouses. Before, bodies of people's 
and public control fought this, and shop commissions were sort 
of regulators of social justice. How are distribution and 
control accomplished now? 
  [Tsarkov] The work of military trade enterprises at military 
camps and garrisons, as before, is monitored by commissions 
(groups) of public control created according to the April 1990 
Minister of Defense Order No 135 "On Workers' Control of Trade 
Unions and Public Control of the Work of Military Trade 
Enterprises in the Soviet Army and Navy" that is still in force 
today. Distribution of goods coming into military trade stores 
is also done by public control commissions. 
  [Ukolov] "There are frequent instances of military trade 
having no products and goods, but the plan is fulfilled from 
month to month." These lines are from a letter from a 
serviceman's wife (Kartaly, Strategic Missile Troops). How would 
you comment on this fact, considering that it is far from 
isolated? 
  [Tsarkov] In conditions of market relations, the "plan" 
concept, for known reasons (to be discussed later), has lost its 
former importance. Today, trade enterprises independently 
compile forecasts of retail trade turnover volumes and increase 
or decrease these volumes themselves. 
  Still, there exists some kind of plan in military trade 
stores which is fulfilled even in the absence of goods. How do 
you account for this? On the one hand, if the plan is fulfilled, 
this indicates the volume of services provided to military 
consumers in the form of some kind of goods sold. But here is 
the other side... Here there is a mirror reflection of the real 
results of the financial and economic activity of military trade 
enterprises. 
  I will use figures to clarify this somewhat. During the 
period January-April of this year, military trade turnover was 
R86.3 billion and increased 6.7-fold compared to the 
corresponding period last year. But this is only appearance. For 
if a shirt, let's say, costs 25-35 times more now, this in no 
way means that more of these shirts were sold in the period 
January-April 1993. 
  [Ukolov] I would like to single out a question about the 
Western Group of Forces, from where many letters are received 
asking to tell in detail about the cheating of the Military 
Trade Directorate "abroad," headed by its chief. What can you 
say about the abuses here? 
  [Tsarkov] Recently, articles have appeared in the German and 
Russian press about negative activities of the military trade 
directorate of the Western Group of Forces. It must be noted 
that individual miscalculations and oversights, at times 
bordering on criminally punishable acts, indeed took place in 
the work of the Military Trade Directorate of the Western Group 
of Forces. In particular, in conditions of a market economy, in 
the pursuit for cheap goods by specialists of this directorate, 
the volumes of goods being purchased were incorrectly defined, 
and many of the firms selected for cooperation later proved to 
be unreliable suppliers. "Reliable" suppliers, including foreign 
firms, trying to line their pockets, offered goods that were not 
in demand and were of low quality, but...at fairly high prices. 
Some managers of the Trade Directorate of the Western Group of 
Forces, in contacts with the latter, and these are the first 
"Rekond," "Inova," "Moseniko-Invest" (incidentally, as an 
investigation showed, at one time they were recommended to the 
leadership of the Trade Directorate of the Western Group of 
Forces by higher chief--former leaders of the Main Military 
Trade Directorate from Moscow), violations and abuses were 
committed, for which they were held liable. Thus, 10 managers 
from military trade bodies of this group of forces have already 
been discharged, including four servicemen. 
  In 1992, work was terminated with these firms. By order of 
the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, the chief of 
the Military Trade Directorate of the Western Group of Forces, 
Colonel F. Rezyapov, was removed from the position and 
discharged into the reserve. The chief of the trade office of 
this directorate, B. Yenenkov, was also fired. Details of all 
these abuses and violations of the law will be discussed only 
after completion of the investigation being conducted by the 
General Procuracy of the Russian Federation. 
  [Ukolov] Another thing about this group of forces. In 
garrison military trade stores, prices for many goods, including 
vodka, confectionery products, and tobacco products, are lower 
than in German stores. As a result, military trade workers make 
deals with the local population, sometimes emptying the shelves 
of their stores, selling off goods in whole batches. How will 
your directorate fight this? 
  [Tsarkov] In accordance with the agreement concluded between 
the command of the Western Group of Forces and the Federal 
Ministry for Economics of the FRG "On Supplying the Soviet 
Forces and Organizing Cooperation," goods purchased by the Trade 
Directorate of the Western Group of Forces from foreign firms 
are exempt from the turnover tax and also from duty. This is the 
first reason for the lower prices for goods at military trade 
enterprises of the Western Group of Forces. The second reason 
for the comparatively low prices for goods at military trade 
stores is that the Military Trade Directorate has an economic 
incentive to establish prices that are more accessible for all 
categories of purchasers. That is because the main contingent of 
these purchasers is compulsory-service soldiers and sergeants, 
warrant officers, and lieutenants, whose wages are considerably 
lower than those of the lowest-paid German civilians, and this 
does not enable them to purchase goods in the German trade 
network, where prices for foodstuffs and manufactured goods are 
considerably higher. 
  Goods being sold in military trade stores at lower prices do 
not lie around unsold. Their trade turnover rate is accelerated, 
and the profit received increases accordingly--a direct 
advantage to both the purchasers and trade. 
  Of course, there are infringements of the law here. But they 
are isolated, because there is strict monitoring of the purchase 
volumes of tobacco products and alcoholic beverages. In 
addition, a limit has been set on purchases of these goods, 
taking into account the buyer demand in our garrisons and camps. 
Where access to the camps is possible for persons not belonging 
to the Western Group of Forces, trade in tobacco products and 
alcoholic beverages is forbidden. 
  [Ukolov] How is military trade set up in Russian Army units 
located on the territory of former republics of the USSR? What 
problems are arising there, and how are they being resolved? 
  [Tsarkov] Military trade enterprises have been deployed to 
service military contingents located in the former republics of 
the USSR. Goods are delivered to these regions, as a rule, in a 
centralized manner. Some of them, especially perishables such as 
fruits and vegetables, are acquired locally or obtained from 
reserves of the corresponding CIS countries. 
  A few words in this context. In accordance with a bilateral 
agreement (Russia-Kazakhstan), Baykonur with all its 
infrastructure has been transferred to the jurisdiction of 
Russia. It has a trade directorate with military trade stores 
subordinate to it, which provide trade and consumer services to 
the garrisons. 
  The most critical problems have emerged in Tajikistan and in 
the countries of Transcaucasia. As a result of the unstable 
political situation, the absence of order, and the presence of 
armed groupings, the system of supply and delivery of goods is 
constantly disrupted, and there are instances of robbery and 
attacks... In short, military trade is suffering large losses, 
but the most important thing is that sometimes people suffer 
without goods and food products. 
  [Ukolov] Will traveling trade develop, including mobile post 
exchanges visiting remote garrisons? The same for the system of 
orders--will it expand? 
  [Tsarkov] Traveling trade and visits by mobile post 
exchanges 
to remote and small garrisons, primarily to border guard 
outposts and air defense subunits--all this will continue. 
But...on the condition (after all, this is a market!) that this 
work will not be unprofitable for military trade enterprises. 
  As far as the sale of foodstuffs by orders is concerned, it 
will be expanded, primarily for privileged categories of 
buyers--veterans of war and labor, large families... 
  [Ukolov] What do you think about the development of new, 
progressive forms and methods of military trade? What prospects 
do you see here? 
  [Tsarkov] Unfortunately, recently the pace of development of 
progressive forms and methods of trade has decreased somewhat. I 
consider this a temporary phenomenon. Progressive methods and 
forms of trade in military trade stores will develop and improve 
with stabilization of a market in the country. This primarily 
concerns self-service, sale of goods by sample, and introduction 
of forward commodity movement using containers and equipment. 
  [Ukolov] Much hope is being placed on marketing today. Does 
it apply to military trade? 
  [Tsarkov] The demand of military contingents being serviced 
by military trade is constantly being studied. In parallel, we 
are taking steps to supply the necessary goods and services. In 
conditions of the transition to market relations and their 
stabilization, marketing will develop further, which will make 
it possible to conduct more systematically measures for studying 
the market and to influence consumer demand in a systematic 
manner in order both to speed up trade turnover and increase the 
volume of trade turnover. 
  [Ukolov] In your view, what must be done to put an end to 
the 
cheating in weighing and shortchanging in stores that exists in 
military trade and the rudeness and boorishness of salesmen? 
  [Tsarkov] As in any other system, say, the house-maintenance 
office, militia, or public catering, military trade also has its 
own moral canons, which some people will always want to violate. 
Here it must be said that this is not widespread. We do not 
ignore those same isolated cases that still take place. We also 
are breaking the stereotype among buyers: They say, if there is 
trade, there are all kinds of cheating in weighing, 
shortchanging, and deception. That is not so! Because most of 
our personnel are honest and conscientious workers who take 
pride in their vocation. In short, we are working both with our 
contingent and with purchasers. We are educating people... Yes, 
even if someone can say that this is not entirely our job. 
  [Ukolov] There is much talk concerning the fact that, 
beginning with Moscow, there exists a separate trade service for 
higher authorities. Does this still exist? 
  [Tsarkov] A straightforward question... I will also give you 
a straightforward answer. It does not! 
  [Ukolov] Has the practice of having open military trade 
stores in cities and populated areas proved to be worthwhile? 
After all, the vast majority of purchasers in them are people 
who have nothing to do with the Army. 
  [Tsarkov] There are virtually no stores located on open 
territory and trading in foodstuffs and manufactured goods, more 
precisely, primary necessities in our system. However, we must 
have a base, or more precisely so-called base enterprises, for 
trade and domestic support of remote and small garrisons, where 
the trade network is poorly developed or lacking entirely, by 
the method of traveling trade to service field measures and 
accomplish other tasks. And we have them. They include trade and 
purchasing bases, refrigerators, district and garrison military 
general-purpose stores, military book stores, cafes and 
cafeterias at officer's clubs and hotels, tailor shops, 
barbershops... I do not think I need to say how important this 
network of enterprises is to servicemen, war veterans, 
soldier-internationalists, and military commissariat workers. 
Thus, the circle of people coming to them is expanding 
considerably, which, as we understand it, is not hurting anyone. 
  [Ukolov] What are you personally most concerned about in 
military trade now? 
  [Tsarkov] As was already stated, we are most concerned about 
the problem of providing enterprises in military trade with 
working capital. I will develop this thought somewhat. In 
conditions of the economic reform being conducted, as a result 
of price and rate increases, the change in the procedure for 
forming working capital, crediting and the increase in interest 
rates for credit, and high taxation, military trade enterprises 
have essentially found themselves without working capital. Can 
this situation be corrected using our own profit? Alas... It is 
not so significant. Then what about bank credits? Here, too, 
everything is not the way I would like it to be. Using 
commercial bank credits is not possible due to high interest 
rates and again the shortage of profit at our enterprises to 
repay them. 
  This most critical problem reflects on the development of 
military trade enterprises, worsens trade and consumer support 
for servicemen and their family members, and evokes justified 
complaints. Something must be done... We are striving to use 
more effective forms and methods of selling that promote an 
increase in trade turnover, and we are taking steps toward 
effective specific-purpose use of working capital. Enterprises 
accomplishing advance delivery of foodstuffs and goods into 
areas of the Far North and equivalent areas by decision of the 
government of the Russian Federation also must do their part 
here. They receive preferential credits from the government for 
this. In response, efficiency and obligatoriness must follow. 
  [Ukolov] How do you feel about the directorate personnel you 
"inherited?" Do you plan to make some changes? 
  [Tsarkov] Most in our directorate are highly qualified 
specialists who have much practical experience in working in 
military trade, and I have nothing special against them. One 
thing I will say is that there is not always enough dynamic 
quality or view into the future. But that is in general and on 
the whole. 
  [Ukolov] Viktor Ivanovich, how did you end up in military 
trade, putting it in the words of a well-known song--"willingly 
or unwillingly?" 
  [Tsarkov] Neither. It is the classic pattern--if you as an 
officer are trusted and offered a higher position, you have no 
right to refuse it. And if, moreover, the future work is to your 
liking, you can even consider yourself a lucky person. 
  [Ukolov] A new, higher position involves new concerns and a 
chronic shortage of time. Friends, old comrades, and passions 
are relegated to the background, or...? 
  [Tsarkov] This always happens. A new position requires 
complete devotion of effort and time. Our system is throughout 
Russia, and we must examine everything in the localities in 
order to make the correct decisions. 
  I try not to draw back from friends and comrades. As far as 
passions are concerned, I like books and good music. Both are my 
rest and relaxation. 
  [Ukolov] Tell me, what role does your family play in your 
difficult service today 
  [Tsarkov] There is a well-known expression with profound 
meaning: "A good, strong family is a reliable support." Military 
people sense and value this like no one else. I am no exception, 
because I have precisely such strong support. 
  From the Bibliography: 
  Viktor Ivanovich Tsarkov was born 8 July 1946 to the 
family of a white-collar worker in the city of Karaganda. He is 
Russian. After graduating from secondary school in 1964, he 
entered the Volsk Higher Rear Services Military School, where he 
graduated with honors. He graduated from the engineering 
department of the Military Academy of Rear Services and 
Transportation in 1974. 
  He was regimental chief of clothing service from 1967 
until he entered the academy. Beginning in 1974, he was in the 
Far East Military District in positions of chief of clothing 
service of a large unit, formation, and district. In 1987 he was 
deputy chief of the orders office of the Central Clothing 
Directorate. In 1988 he became chief of the office and then 
deputy chief of this directorate. He has been in his current 
position since September 1992. 
  He was promoted to the rank of major-general in April 
1993. 
  His family includes his wife Galina Nikolayevna, 
daughter Irina, and son Vitaliy. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Armiya", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61059 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Lt-Gen Marchuk Interview on Road Construction Directorate </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0158B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 4 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0158B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA Correspondent Petr Altunin, </F>
under the rubric: "Timely Topic": "Roads -- For Russia"] 
  [Text] From the KRASNAYA ZVEZDA Dossier: 
Lieutenant-General Ivan Dmitriyevich Marchuk was born in 1944. 
He graduated from Leningrad Military Transport Communications 
Command School and the Military Academy of Rear Services and 
Transportation. He passed through all of the levels in the 
railroad troops from platoon commander to rail corps deputy 
commander. From 1988 -- he was deputy chief of the Central Road 
Construction Directorate and then its first deputy. He has been 
chief of the Federal Road Construction Directorate under the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Defense since December 1992. 
  He is married. His son is an officer. 
  In 1988, a state road construction and reconstruction 
program in the RSFSR Non-Chernozem Zone was adopted. The Central 
Road Construction Directorate was created at that time. On 8 
December 1992, a Russian Federation Presidential Edict 
reorganized it into the Federal Road Construction Directorate 
under the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense. And, finally, 
the Statute that regulates its activities, legal bases, and the 
obligations of officials was approved by a Russian government 
decree on 10 August 1993. 
  The editorial staff asked Lieutenant-General Ivan 
Marchuk, chief of the Federal Road Construction Directorate 
under the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense, to discuss the 
new structure's affairs and plans. 
  [Marchuk] Based upon the big picture, you can't call our 
road 
structure new. The general-wagon master service that consisted 
of subunits to prepare and maintain the roads needed by the 
troops had already been created in the era of Peter I. Later, 
staging troops subordinate to the military communications organs 
existed for the operation of military roads. And the road 
service worked along the entire front from the Barents to the 
Black Seas in the Great Patriotic War. The song "Ekh, dorogi..." 
[Ah, the roads] was certainly about it. As in the infantry, they 
experienced cold, alerts, and bombing each day. According to a 
State Committee for Defense decision, dozens of road troops 
formations were formed at that time and their mission consisted 
of the restoration of highway lines of communications. After the 
war, the military road builders turned over to the national 
economy 5,500 kilometers of restored, very important roads and 
hundreds of high-water bridges that had been built. Today many 
people, when they drive along the Moscow-Simferopol, 
Moscow-Leningrad, and Irkutsk-Ulan-Ude main highways and around 
Moscow's ring road, do not even suspect that the military road 
builders made a decisive contribution to their construction. 
  [Altunin] 1988 was, of course, an event for military road 
builders? 
  [Marchuk] Yes, as a matter of fact, a qualitatively new 
military organization appeared that was directed toward the 
fulfillment of a purely civilian task. And I think that it was 
then and is now an extremely important task. There are still no 
roads in the depth of Russia. After the rain, there is 
impassable mud and motor vehicles have to ford small rivers. A 
third of the harvest is lost and agricultural equipment is 
ruined because of this. 
  [Altunin] And what have you managed to do in five years? 
  [Marchuk] Quite a bit. We have built 3,320 kilometers of 
highways (2,555 under the plan) and also 115 military garrisons, 
75 asphalt-concrete plants, 19 rail dead-end sidings and 
open-pits, and more than 500 cultural and consumer-services 
facilities. During the first ten months of this year alone, 
1,584 million rubles worth of construction-erection work has 
been completed. I need to say that a kray is transformed after a 
road is laid. Residents return to previously abandoned villages 
from the cities and refugees from the CIS countries arrive to 
bring the earth "back to life". 
  [Altunin] Ivan Dmitriyevich, how would you sort out your 
current status? You are not part of the Armed Forces but at the 
same time you are "under the Ministry of Defense"? 
  [Marchuk] Yes, we are not part of the army's strength. The 
Presidential Edict and the Russian Federation Council of 
Ministers decree state that the Federal Road Building 
Directorate (FDSU) functions as a state institution. The 
Ministry of the Economy allocates a separate line of investment 
to us that is financed at the expense of the Russian Federation 
budget. And at the same time the Ministry of Defense has been 
tasked to supply the Federal Road Building Directorate with all 
types of allowances and services in accordance with and based 
upon the standards that are in effect in the Russian Federation 
Armed Forces but for payment. We are guided by presidential 
edicts, military regulations and minister of defense orders. 
Units and subunits have both daily routines, details, reveille, 
taps and liberty. Indeed, weapons are used only to guard 
facilities. 
  [Altunin] Right now, what is the geography of the work being 
conducted by you? 
  [Marchuk] Previously, we were concentrated in the 
Non-Chernozem Zone. In Nizhniy Novgorod, Ryazan, Vologda, Kirov, 
Orel, Perm and other oblasts and in Udmurtiya. We have had "our 
own people" in these areas for a long time now. Many former 
10th-form girls have long ago become the wives of our officers 
and warrant officers and they have given birth to children... 
After the formation of the Federal Road Building Directorate, 
new oblasts -- Tula, Tambov, Chita, and Amur oblasts and 
Khabarovsk Kray -- are summoning us to them. Right now we are 
going there not only according to orders as we did before but 
while concluding economic contracts beforehand where both the 
time periods, salaries and the quality of the subcontracted work 
are stipulated. 
  Cost-accounting and cost recovery are penetrating into all 
of 
our activities. By way of illustration, we are building housing 
for ourselves, we are selling real estate ourselves during 
moves, and our salary depends on output. 
  [Altunin] Incidentally, how much are your road builders 
paid? 
  [Marchuk] Everything depends on the fulfillment of 
standards, 
on the quality of work and even on initiative. For example, in 
current money, a private road builder receives a minimum of 
R30,000. But such specialists as excavator and crane operators 
receive R100,000 each or more. There are also bonuses. Officers 
receive them when a facility is turned over. 
  During the time of their service at training combines, 
soldiers obtain and later reinforce in practice "hard" 
specialties: Bulldozer operators, electro-gas welders, asphalt 
layers and others that are highly valued in the civilian sector 
today. We also have quite a few civilian personnel. We have 
4,500 women -- skilled specialists. Among them are kindergarten 
workers, general education and music school teachers, doctors 
and nurses. 
  [Altunin] Ivan Dmitriyevich, today officers certainly go 
unwillingly to their duty locations at the other end of the 
earth? 
  [Marchuk] Imagine, the situation is poor with officer cadre 
manning. It seems to me that even the romantic appeal has not 
disappeared. Of course, there are difficulties. Approximately 
60&percnt; of the officers have been provided apartments and the 
rest 
are in hotels, in the private sector and, like we in our youth, 
in trailers... But at the same time there is a change in those 
areas where it is appropriate and there is a bonus and years 
served coefficient in the salary. Pensions are the same as for 
all servicemen. Compulsory service personnel manning is worse. 
We receive augmentation according to the what's left principle. 
We hope that the law on alternative service will be adopted. We 
are also beginning to conclude contracts. 
  But for the time being -- we are looking for manpower. Here 
are the latest examples. Several months ago, we began 
construction of the uncompleted 1,200 kilometer sector of the 
Chita-Khabarovsk-Nakhodka super highway. According to another 
agreement, Federal Road Building Directorate subunits will 
participate in the program to conquer Tyumen Oblast's gas-oil 
producing regions. This is a large mission of state importance 
and we have a backbone of specialists to resolve it. But we will 
hire workers locally in those regions. There are civilian 
personnel and extended service military personnel there. 
  [Altunin] But what can you say about the military road 
building equipment that you need? Has it been adapted for 
construction of "civilian" roads? Is anything being imported? 
  [Marchuk] We are utilizing our own, domestically-produced, 
military road building equipment in our formations and units. Of 
course, it is reliable but, since it was obtained from the 
military districts after prolonged storage or after major 
overhaul, it requires large expenditures for maintenance and 
repair. 
  As for imported equipment, simply speaking, we don't have 
any 
yet. The primary reason is the absence of hard currency to 
acquire it. And the need is increasing to equip them with 
imported equipment with the withdrawal of our formations to the 
Far East, to the Transbaykal Region and to Tyumen Oblast. The 
work there is in rocky and frozen ground and at low 
temperatures. I think that we need to resolve this problem 
immediately. The end result of our work in these regions is many 
times more valuable than the expenditures on equipment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61060 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Central Fuel Directorate: Steps to Salvage POL Reserve </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0161A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 10 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0161A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA correspondent Petr Altunin under </F>
the rubric "Continuing the Subject": "In the Empty Tank, 
Billions... But Only A Real Manager Can Extract It From There"] 
  [Text] It is an indisputable fact, as they say, that the 
fuel service base in the army and navy has come to a halt in its 
development. Most of it was built more than 30 years ago, during 
the missile-fuel boom, when the fuel service provided full 
support for the launching of missiles into space, the emergence 
of the navy onto the world ocean and increased motorization of 
the army. The base has recently become fairly obsolete, however, 
and since the collapse of the Union it has found itself in an 
altogether critical state. 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA raised the need to renew this very important 
material base at the beginning of last year. The report was 
titled "Where Are We to Get Two and a Half Billion?" Today, in 
view of the fact that we have not managed to solve the problem 
and that prices have spiraled to hundreds of times what they 
were, a trillion would not be enough. Just what can be done? 
  Necessity, as they say, is the mother of invention. The 
solution was made easier by the fact that the interests of the 
fuel service coincided with the nation's economic interests. 
More precisely, those of the Ministry of Fuel and Energy, which 
has recently begun experiencing a shortage of containers and 
pumping equipment, and simply of space. In the armed forces, on 
the contrary, due to a shortage of fuel and lubricants (caused 
by inadequate financing), fuel bases and depots are idle, and 
everything is being off-loaded directly into the military units 
and onto the ships. Incidentally, empty containers corrode more 
rapidly.... So why not help the Ministry of Fuel and Energy with 
the transfer, storage and distribution of petroleum products, 
and thereby earn some money for improving and renovating the 
materials and equipment base? 
  The Central Missile Fuel Directorate came out with an 
initiative to this effect. And it was supported by the Rear 
Services of the Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defense, and 
then by higher authorities. Decree No. 219, "On the Construction 
of and the Renovation of Operating Petroleum Transshipment 
Facilities," issued by the government on 14 March 1993, 
specifically authorized the Fuel Service of the Armed Forces to 
take part in this undertaking. In other words, the military 
bases and depots were given the opportunity to provide services 
for outside, civilian organizations for a charge and without 
detriment to the combat training. 
  In accordance with this decree, the Minister of Defense of 
the Russian Federation issued Order No. 355 on 15 July of last 
year, with an appendix listing the bases and depots authorized 
to provide services, and also containing complete regulations on 
their activities. 
  What do these documents say? I took this question to 
Major-General P. Gorupay, chief of the Central Missile Fuel 
Directorate of the Ministry of Defense. 
  "These documents are extremely important to us," Pavel 
Ivanovich said. "They are based on an agreement between the base 
and an outside organization. They include a list of services, 
diverse services: The transfer of liquid petroleum products from 
reinforced concrete tanks to the reservoirs of bases and depots, 
the unloading of apportioned fuel into storage facilities and at 
open sites, the chemical analysis of oil, technical assistance 
with the accounting, the allocation of vehicles for hauling the 
fuel, the provision of depot sites and containers for storing 
various materials, and so forth. The charges for the services 
are open but no lower than the current market prices in the 
given area. Rigid monitoring is specified to prevent possible 
violations." 
  I was told at the Central Directorate that there is rapid 
development of the fuel service for the Moscow, Volga and 
Leningrad districts, the Northern and Baltic Fleets. The 
military fuel base located at Murmansk, for example, concluded a 
one-year agreement with the Murmansk Maritime Shipping Line on 
the transferring of petroleum products. Payments under the 
agreement should amount to more than one million dollars. 
  For six months now a Baltic Fleet fuel base has been 
transferring fuel belonging to a large joint enterprise--under 
an agreement permitting this, of course--with visible results. A 
major overhaul of the railroad platform and the pipeline have 
been carried out with the several million dollars earned, 
several pumping units have been installed with the assistance of 
the Swedes, and the installation of standing tanks is underway. 
  Even a service on a lesser scale is profitable. The central 
base located at Naro-Fominsk has concluded an agreement with one 
of the enterprises whereby incoming motor transport equipment is 
off-loaded and stored on the latter's tracks. The amount 
involved is 600,000 rubles per day. The base at which A. Kustov 
is chief does not have much space, but it is within the Moscow 
city limits. He said that an agreement has been reached on the 
storage of expensive assemblies and devices, for which the 
charge is considerably greater.... 
  In short, the minister's order has opened up extensive 
possibilities. Some people have taken it the wrong way, however. 
Some of them are in no rush to execute it. There is plenty of 
time, they say, and have not taken the initiative to look for 
customers. There have also been overly clever "executives." 
Colonel V. Basalayev, chief of a fuel dump, conducted operations 
involving petroleum products for a joint-stock company not at 
the market price, as should have been the case, but at a 
preferential price. There would have to be some abuses, of 
course. This incident was rapidly halted, and all of the fuel 
services were apprised of it. 
  Additional problems arose for the fuel service. Additional 
personnel are needed for organizing the services and for strict, 
universal monitoring: Financial experts, economists, legal 
experts and others. This was taken into account in the order 
issued by the Minister of Defense. A group consisting of three 
officers and two civilian employees is being added to the T/O of 
the Central Directorate, to be maintained out of income from the 
services provided. The group exists only on paper for now, to be 
sure. It has been impossible thus far to arrange all of the 
necessary formalities. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61061 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Civil Defense Committee Upgraded to Ministry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0161B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 13 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0161B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Ivan Sergeyev: "The GKChS Has Been Upgraded to a </F>
Ministry"] 
  [Text] Under an ukase signed by the 
President of Russia, "On the Structure of Federal Executive 
Agencies," the State Committee of the Russian Federation for 
Civil Defense, Emergencies and Disaster Amelioration has been 
transformed into a ministry. 
  At the signing of the ukase the new ministry took over the 
functions of the abolished State Committee of the Russian 
Federation for the Social Protection of Citizens and the 
Rehabilitation of Areas Which Suffered From the Chernobyl and 
other Radiation Disasters and the Committee for Special-Purpose 
Underwater Work. The Russian Federal Air and Space Search and 
Rescue Service is also transferred to the jurisdiction of the 
new ministry with the status of a state establishment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61062 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> PEACEKEEPING FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Col-Gen Pyankov on Collective Peacekeeping Forces </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM2101113194 Moscow PRAVDA in Russian 18 Jan 94 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> PM2101113194 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow PRAVDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel-General Boris Pyankov, commander of </F>
the CIS coalition peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan, by unnamed 
correspondent; date and place of interview not given: "We Are 
Performing Difficult Service Today. Far From Russia...." -- 
first two paragraphs are introduction] 
  [Text] Colonel General Boris Pyankov was born in 
1935 in Sverdlovsk. He is a Russian. He has been in the armed 
forces since 1954. He graduated from the Far Eastern tank 
school in 1959, the military academy of armored troops in 1969, 
and the General Staff military academy in 1979. He has 
commanded an armored platoon, an armored company, an armored 
battalion, an armored regiment, a motorized rifle division, an 
army corps, an army, and the Siberian Military District. Since 
1991 he has been chief of the USSR Civil Defense and USSR deputy 
defense minister. Since 6 July 1992 he has been deputy 
commander in chief of the CIS joint armed forces. Since 
September 1993 he has been commander of the coalition 
peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan. He is married with a son and 
a daughter. 
  Colonel General Boris Pyankov, commander of the CIS 
coalition 
peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan, answers PRAVDA's questions. 
  [PRAVDA] Boris Yevgenyevich, today many people are naturally 
asking: Why was it necessary at all to create this armed 
formation on the territory of an independent state? 
  [Pyankov] To answer your question objectively one must first 
of all assess the existing military-political situation in the 
world. A brief conclusion is that despite the fact that the 
world community has found the strength in itself to push back 
the threat of nuclear danger and to consign the Cold War to 
oblivion, today we have all been faced with a "new generation" 
of local conflicts and wars caused by national and religious 
intolerance. 
  Today we must clearly note that the fact of aggression 
against sovereign Tajikistan is taking place. Literally every 
day armed gangs and groups from the Islamic State of Afghanistan 
try to penetrate its territory in various regions. This has 
required the CIS to adopt necessary relevant steps to render aid 
to Tajikistan and to safeguard its state integrity and security. 
  All peoples of the former USSR are linked not only by firm 
economic ties. Their friendship, which has deep roots, has been 
preserved. A large number of citizens of other CIS countries, 
those whom quite recently we proudly called "the Soviet people," 
live on Tajikistan's territory. This naturally imposes 
obligations on the supreme powers of these states to protect 
human honor and dignity. 
  There is one more aspect of the problem. If the political 
power, economic potential, and armed forces have been more or 
less divided up, dividing up joint security into the security of 
each individual states has been not only hard but virtually 
impossible. 
  I must say that the creation of the collective peacekeeping 
forces was preceeded by lengthy, painstaking work. Favorable 
prospects for ensuring national and collective security were 
opened up by the treaty on collective security signed in 
Tashkent in May 1992 by six states of the CIS. In accordance 
with this treaty's articles, the 24 September 1993 session of 
the council of CIS heads in Moscow adopted a decision on the 
formation of collective peacekeeping forces and the start of 
their functioning and also an agreement on the coalition 
peacekeeping forces and joint measures for their material and 
technical backup. These documents meet all requirements of the 
UN Charter. 
  [PRAVDA] Which CIS countries' military subunits belong 
directly to the coalition peacekeeping forces and what functions 
do they really perform? 
  [Pyankov] The coalition peacekeeping forces include military 
units from Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, 
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan with their arms, military vehicles, 
and property. 
  Unfortunately, it must be noted that not all states have 
fulfilled the terms of the agreement in their entirety. Thus, 
for instance, the question of the allocation of the Kazakhstan 
armed forces' efforts and funds to the coalition peacekeeping 
forces remains open. The Kazakhstan border troops and internal 
troops units on Tajikistan's territory arrived here under the 
bilateral May 1993 agreement. 
  The operational use of one subunit of the Kyrgyz contingent 
has been complicated. This has been caused by the fact that it 
is based on its own territory and is a long way from the main 
regions where the conflicting sides are deployed. 
  A separate motorized rifle battalion with authorized means 
of 
reinforcement has been assigned from the Uzbekistan armed 
forces. With the arrival of this battalion's last company the 
tasks set it in its zone of responsibility will be fulfilled in 
their entirety. 
  Thus, only Russia and Tajikistan have wholly fulfilled their 
duties to earmark the necessary number of forces and facilities. 
Russia has transferred to the coalition peacekeeping forces 
joint command the 201st motorized rifle division and several 
other units. We are helping the Republic of Tajikistan Defense 
Ministry in resolving organizational questions connected with 
the use of subunits and units of the republican armed forces 
assigned to the coalition peacekeeping forces. 
  We are worried by one further problem: Financing the 
activity of the coalition peacekeeping forces joint command. 
Because of the lack of a mechanism for settling accounts 
between the states which have signed the agreement, money has 
still not been paid into the joint account by Uzbekistan and 
Kazakhstan. 
  [PRAVDA] A few words about the coalition peacekeeping 
forces' tasks in Tajikistan. 
  [Pyankov] They include an analysis of the military-political 
situation in the region, the submission of reports to the states 
involved, collaboration with the management organs of the states 
involved, participation in the negotiations process, the 
protection of the humanitarian aid convoys route and 
participation in the aid's distribution, and also the 
operational use of forces in combat in the event of dire 
necessity. 
  [PRAVDA] Please cite examples of specific actions. 
  [Pyankov] In late October and early November convoys with 
necessities and fuel was escorted to Gornyy Badakhshan with the 
aid of the coalition peacekeeping forces and from there the 
evacuation of refugees to central regions of the republic was 
organized. A group of generals and officers were at the same 
time holding talks with leaders of the Gorno-Badakhshan 
Autonomous Oblast [GBAO] and commanders of field detachments 
operating on the oblast's territory, which helped to remove 
tension in this region and improve dialogue between the Gornyy 
Badakhshan leadership and the central authorities. Now, at the 
request of the republic's leadership the protection of 
enterprises producing bread articles and their delivery to the 
stores has been organized. 
  I want to note that the joint command is doing everything to 
ensure that the coalition peacekeeping forces' role consists 
primarily in conducting preventive diplomatic actions and 
peacekeeping activity as a whole. This would be helped by 
granting our coalition forces the status of UN troops with all 
ensuing consequences. The implementation of this proposal would 
press the opposition leaders to sit down at the conference table 
with the central authorities in Dushanbe. 
  [PRAVDA] As far as we know this question was examined at a 
CSCE session but the proposal did not get through. Those who 
voted against it included several representatives of republics 
of the former USSR, in particular Ukraine, Moldova, and the 
Baltic states. They explained their position by fear that 
Russia's imperial ambitions would be strengthened. 
  [Pyankov] In this case I must draw attention to several 
important factors. First, we must seriously consider the fact 
that if the coalition peacekeeping forces leave Tajikistan and 
open up the borders, the influx of weapons and drugs will be a 
scourge for many CIS countries. And they could include the 
above-mentioned countries. Second, because of the 
destabilization of the situation there will be a mortal danger 
to citizens of all nationalities living in this region. 
  As for talk of Russia's imperial ambitions, that is the 
wrong 
way of putting the question. That becomes understandable if you 
study the agreement attentively. Yes, I am a citizen of Russia. 
But I was appointed to this post by the decision of the council 
of heads of state. In my activity I am subordinate to the heads 
and defense ministers of the states which signed the agreement. 
All planned peacekeeping operations are coordinated with the 
defense ministers of the signatory countries and are implemented 
only with their approval. And only in an emergency situation 
does the commander have the right to make decisions 
independently on conducting combat operations, subsequently 
reporting to the heads of state and defense ministers. For the 
practical organization of collaboration the joint command staff 
includes one defense ministry representative from each signatory 
state with the rights of deputy chief of staff of the coalition 
peacekeeping forces joint command. Highly professional officers 
of the republics involved work in all the main directorates and 
departments of the joint command. Thus our command is a fully 
coalition one. And one more detail of some importance: Article 
13 of the agreement reads that it is open to any CIS country and 
also to other states which share the agreement's aims. 
  Russia's interests? Yes, they do exist. Some of them I have 
already enumerated. In addition even a nonprofessional can 
understand that the transfer of Russian border troops from the 
Southern borders to the border with Kazakhstan, which at the 
same time includes the creation of a completely new system for 
guarding a border many thousands of kilometers long, will 
require a colossal investment of material assets. In today's 
economic situation such expenditure is beyond Russia's means. 
In addition, the activity of the Islamic fundamentalists will 
increase in dangerous proximity to Russian territory. It is no 
accident that a number of Islamic organizations have proclaimed 
their ultimate goal to be the creation of a single Islamic state 
including the former Central Asian republics of the USSR and 
even some regions of Russia! 
  [PRAVDA] Boris Yevgenyevich, do you believe that the 
introduction of the coalition peacekeeping forces contingent in 
Tajikistan has had any positive effect on the stabilization of 
the situation in the republic and on the Tajik-Afghan border? 
  [Pyankov] Yes, without any doubt. For that you only have to 
go out onto the streets of Dushanbe and other cities and talk 
with the local citizens. The overwhelming majority of the 
republic's population welcomed our forces' arrival with great 
enthusiasm and hope. And we shall strive to justify this hope. 
  As for the border, here the situation is far more complex. 
Yes, the number of overt armed conflicts has declined somewhat. 
But that is connected not only with the intensification of the 
guard on the border but also with factors like the change in the 
tactics of the opposition armed formations' actions, their 
transfer to guerrilla warfare methods using the experience of 
the Afghan mujahedin. That is also confirmed by recent events: 
The blowing up of the railroad bed on the Termez-Kurgan-Tyube 
sector, acts of sabotage on highways, and the murder of 
civilians. 
  In Tajikistan there is one more distinguishing feature: In 
winter combat operations usually die down here. Forces are 
built up, strongholds and arms and food depots are prepared. 
But with the advent of spring the opposition forces will try to 
switch to active operation with a view to seizing power. 
  We are particularly worried by the activity of the well 
known 
thug and drugs baron Rezvon, who has been declared by the 
so-called "government in exile" to be the commander of all the 
opposition armed forces. Naturally we are losing no time: We 
are reinforcing our borders, engaging in planned combat training 
activity, and taking preventive measures. 
  The visit to Tajikistan by B. Rabbani, the head of the 
Islamic State of Afghanistan, and the treaties and agreements 
concluded at interstate level instill some optimism. 
Unfortunately, the central authorities of that state do not 
control many of the border regions, which makes it impossible to 
pin all hopes on the stabilization of the situation in the very 
near future. 
  We will use the temporary respite which has been formed to 
continue dialogue with the opposition and to find joint points 
of contact and mutual advantage. 
  [PRAVDA] Boris Yevgenyevich, the meeting of heads of state 
and defense ministers of the CIS countries ended in Ashgabat 
recently. Could you share your impression of its results 
regarding the position of the collective peacekeeping forces in 
Tajikistan? 
  [Pyankov] The Ashgabat meeting paid great attention to 
questions of the consolidation of the Tajik-Afghan border. The 
heads of state decided on additional measures to stabilize the 
situation on Tajikistan's border with Afghanistan. In 
accordance with these decisions, the 22 January 1993 decision of 
the council of heads of state which we have already mentioned 
has been extended to the end of 1994. 
  [PRAVDA] The New Year has arrived. What wishes do you send 
to the parents of the boys fulfilling their duty far from Russia? 
  [Pyankov] To the mothers and families of the Russians whose 
sons and relations are serving on Tajikistan's territory I wish 
that the need for Russian military units to be here may 
disappear as soon as possible and that your relations and close 
ones, having honorably fulfilled their military duty, will 
return alive and well to the Motherland. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61063 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officers Union Head Favors Nuclear Status </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU2001072494 Lvov ZA VILNU UKRAYINU in Ukrainian 14 Jan 94 p 
3 </F>

<F P=103> AU2001072494 </F>
<F P=104>  Lvov ZA VILNU UKRAYINU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major General Oleksandr Rol, chairman of </F>
Ukraine's Officers Union, SOU, by Mariya Bazelyuk; place and 
date not given: "The Defense of Ukraine Cannot be Guaranteed by 
Other States" -- first paragraph published in boldface] 
  [Text] The Fifth Congress of the Ukraine's Officers Union 
[SOU] held in Kiev on 18 December 1993 elected Major General 
Oleksandr Rol as the SOU chairman. Rol was born in Kiev, where 
he completed high school and received training at an aviation 
club. He studied at the Chernihiv Aviation School and later 
graduated from the Military Aviation Academy. He was a fighter 
pilot, a bomber pilot, and also did staff work. For three 
years, he was adviser to the commander of the Vietnamese Air 
Force. Even though Rol's military service was almost entirely 
outside Ukraine, he speaks very good idiomatic Ukrainian and 
this points to his family's healthy roots. 
  [Bazelyuk] General, what is, in your opinion, the role of 
SOU in the state building? 
  [Rol] The union's main task is to promote the building of 
the armed forces and, thereby, to strengthen the Ukrainian 
state, since the army is one of the institutions in charge of 
its defense. The SOU is a public organization, which unites 
both officers on active service and those in the reserves and in 
retirement. The union has lived through difficult times owing 
to the uncertain attitude toward it on the part of the Defense 
Ministry. Of course, the leadership of the union did make 
certain mistakes, for which I am also responsible, since I was 
within the leadership. One of these mistakes was the excessive 
preoccupation with political activity, because, after all, the 
main task of the SOU is the building of the armed forces, and it 
is hardly expedient to come out with criticisms of the commander 
in chief in the form of various statements. This, of course, 
gave rise to a negative reaction on the part of leading figures. 
  It goes without saying that the SOU does not need any 
assistance from the armed forces. It even assists the army in 
its difficult material situation and gives our servicemen moral 
support. In what way? We find it our duty to indoctrinate the 
army personnel in the spirit of Ukrainian patriotism and 
glorious traditions of the Ukrainian Army. It is difficult to 
overestimate the SOU's activity in this direction, since it has 
close ties with other public organizations and participants in 
the national liberation struggle who can have a significant 
influence upon the training and indoctrination of the personnel. 
  Yet another aspect of our activity is the social protection 
of servicemen and their families and the assistance to the 
command in maintaining strict discipline in military units and 
subunits. 
  Today, we must clearly determine and regulate ways for 
reviving the SOU, and this is precisely the goal of its 
leadership. On the eve of the last meeting held in 1993, the 
SOU leadership had a meeting with Lieutenant General Kobzar, 
chief of the Ministry of Defense's Main Administration for 
Educational Work and Socio- Psychological Services. In the 
course of conversation, we found out that our positions 
regarding the tasks and place of the SOU in the building and 
strengthening of the Ukrainian Armed Forces coincided. General 
Kobzar asserted that the Ministry of Defense would support all 
those organizations that will contribute to raising the combat 
readiness of the Ukrainian Army and expressed a desire to 
increase the SOU's role in indoctrinating officers and in 
introducing the best traditions of the Ukrainian Army. He also 
drew our attention to the need to establish new traditions. We 
agreed that it is necessary to have amateur artistic groups, as 
well as professional actors, perform in the military units more 
often; meetings with interesting people must also be organized. 
  In short, we had a constructive conversation with General 
Kobzar, and he promised to pass its contents on to the minister 
of defense. I believe that, in the very near future, we will 
meet [with the defense minister]. The Officers Union must work 
in close contact with the Ministry of Defense and with all those 
state structures, which are in charge of defending our state's 
independence. Both the SOU and the Ministry of Defense are 
doing the same work for the state. 
  [Bazelyuk] Did you take part in elaborating the Ukrainian 
Military Doctrine? What is your opinion about it? 
  [Rol] It is centered on defense. The doctrine adopted by 
the Supreme Council in October 1993 has become a state document, 
which soldiers must adhere to rather than assess. 
  [Bazelyuk] However, it is written in the doctrine that 
"Ukraine must become, in the future, a nonnuclear state if other 
nuclear powers undertake similar actions." After it became a 
state document, some people in the upper echelons of power 
rushed to transfer nuclear weapons immediately to Russia. What 
is your position with regard to our state's nuclear status? 
  [Rol] Starting from 1991, I made many statements for the 
press and spoke from various rostrums. I said that Ukraine must 
have atomic weapons as a means of deterrence. Our state must 
possess nuclear weapons as long as at least one country, which 
may become our adversary and lead to a military confrontation, 
keeps its nuclear weapons. This is my opinion. No matter how 
big our army is, there is nothing like nuclear potential as a 
means for defending Ukraine. 
  The position of our political leadership has led to several 
negative processes. Back on 24 August 1991, Ukraine, for some 
reason, proclaimed to the whole world that it was going to 
become a nonnuclear state. Another example. Why, people are 
asking, does Ukraine need the Black Sea Fleet, if it declared 
that it only needs the Fleet for local needs? This gave rise to 
the problem of the Black Sea Fleet with all its consequences. 
It is a pity that we gave away our tactical weapons so quickly; 
they might defend Ukraine much better than the largest army. It 
is impossible to guarantee national security without modern 
weapons. 
  Ukraine must proceed from the fact that it is impossible to 
ensure the defense of our state if we only rely upon guarantees 
offered by other states. In questions of Ukraine's defense 
capability and national security we may only rely upon our own 
forces. 
  Why does the West help Russia in every way? Simply because 
it has a powerful nuclear potential and is, in this respect, a 
strong power. 
  [Bazelyuk] What are Ukraine's real possibilities for 
maintaining its nuclear status? 
  [Rol] First and foremost, it is up to our president. We 
might conduct a nationwide referendum on Ukraine's nuclear or 
nonnuclear status. You know, I am very annoyed when some state 
tells us didactically: "You must give up your nuclear weapons." 
Who would dare make such claims upon China, Great Britain, or 
France? 
  [Bazelyuk] How do you assess that the personnel of the 43d 
Rocket Army has not, to this day, taken the oath of allegiance 
to Ukraine? 
  [Rol] I will investigate this situation as chairman of the 
SOU. 
  [Bazelyuk] You have been nominated as a candidate as 
Ukraine's people's deputy. Do you agree to stand for this post 
and why? 
  [Rol] I agree, because I have a clear picture of my work in 
the Ukrainian Parliament. 
  [Bazelyuk] Thank you for the interview, from which I have 
become convinced that, despite the enormous pressure exerted 
upon Ukraine both from the West and from the East, Ukraine will 
be able to create a reliable defensive shield with all those 
types of weapons necessary for this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61064 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> BALTIC STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Latvia, Lithuania, Denmark Sign Military Agreement </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0162A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 11 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0162A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Valeriy Gromak under the rubric "Yesterday": </F>
"Denmark Expands Military Cooperation With Latvia and 
Lithuania"] 
  [Text] Vilnius--On 4 January Latvian Minister of Defense 
Valdis Pavlovskis and Danish Minister of Defense Hans Haekkerup 
signed an agreement on cooperation in the military area. The 
document calls for reciprocal consultations in matters of 
security, defense planning and strategy. It calls for the 
exchange of know-how and information, and visits by officials 
and officers. The DETA agency reports that the two countries 
will develop programs for the education and practical training 
of servicemen and work out other matters jointly. 
  Denmark is the first NATO country with which Latvia has 
signed such an agreement, but 32 Lithuanian officers have 
already begun training in officer courses at a Danish military 
school. Representatives of the main subdivisions of the national 
defense service--the field army, state border guard service, 
naval forces and civil defense department--have been sent to 
attend the courses. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61065 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Azerbaijan's Progress in Establishing `Regular Army' Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0574A Moscow NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA in Russian 4 
Jan 94 p 2 </F>

<F P=103> 944K0574A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eldar Zeynalov: "The Partisans Are Coming Down </F>
From the Hills: Azerbaijan En Route to a Regular Army"] 
  [Text] An obligatory attribute of any state laying 
claim to independence, especially one with hostile neighbors, is 
a regular army. It has to be acknowledged that Azerbaijan lacks 
this attribute as yet. Its armed forces are helpless before the 
sallies of the Karabakh separatists and their allies, who have 
occupied a good one-fourth of the territory of the republic. And 
all this despite the fact that the area is not short of 
resources and that Azerbaijan obtained an entirely sufficient 
inheritance from the former Soviet Army. 
  What, then, is the problem? The fact that unlearned lessons 
of history condemn a society to repeat them. Did not the history 
of the Bolsheviks show that neither internal sedition nor 
outside intervention can be overcome with a volunteer, 
semi-partisan army? Did not the military campaign of 1941 show 
that only iron discipline turns a mob into an army? Should the 
future of the state have been endangered for truisms to be put 
to the test all over again? But the Azerbaijan Popular Front, 
whose position has in recent years largely determined the 
political climate in the republic, regarded the army primarily 
as an instrument of the winning of political power and made 
efforts to get hold of weapons. 
  The first appeal for the formation of volunteer squads was 
heard in Baku at a demonstration in Baku on 13 January 1990, 
when, in the period of heavy fighting in Khanlarskiy Rayon, the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front formed the National Defense Committee 
headed by Elchibey. I recall how in the academy institute where 
I was working at that time the registration of volunteers, which 
was earnestly supported by the Communist Party organization and 
even the chief of the Special Department (a KGB man, that is), 
began. This immediately put me on my guard, especially since no 
one was given weapons, and the lists of the most active and 
resolute members of the opposition who had registered were not 
kept secret. The underlying motives for the provocation became 
clear when, a week later, Soviet forces entered the city under 
the cover of a furor concerning "thousands of Popular Front 
combatants." 
  The volunteer movement subsequently once again made its 
presence known following Azerbaijan's proclamation of 
independence in the fall of 1991. Under the conditions of the 
disintegration of the USSR and the Soviet Army and the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front's uncompromising campaign to oust the 
Communists it was a matter of fundamental importance into whose 
hands the weapons being sold off by the "father-commanders" of 
the 4th Army would fall. President Ayaz Mutalibov, who 
recognized this danger, adopted an edict on the depoliticization 
of the power structures even before the official commencement of 
the formation of an army and prior to the self-dissolution of 
the local Communist Party. 
  Both then and, at times, now also Mutalibov is reproached 
with being reluctant to form a national army. I believe, 
however, that he did want to, but by no means just any army. 
Thus the "Fronter" Fakhmin Gadzhiyev, whom he had appointed 
deputy minister of defense, pulled back one unit from its 
positions in Karabakh in January 1992 and brought it to 
Baku--"the boys need to wash, they say." And in March the 
"Fronter" Ragim Gaziyev, commandant of Shusha, whom the 
opposition had strenuously pushed as defense minister, 
threatened from the parliamentary rostrum, with a portable radio 
in his hand, that he would bring his fighters from Shusha and 
arrange a repetition of the Tbilisi events in Baku. The defense 
measures of the "red" government, weakened by the loss of the 
"flower" of the presidential team in the helicopter shot down 
over Karabakh in November 1991, were censured in the opposition 
press. The exploits of the leaders of the volunteer campaign, 
among whom the above-mentioned Ragim Gaziyev (a mathematician by 
education) had progressed particularly, were simultaneously 
being lauded to the skies. After all this, is it any wonder that 
the army of sovereign Azerbaijan officially numbered by the 
spring of 1992 some 150 fighters--half as many as the members of 
parliament? The rest of the fighting force consisted of 
volunteers--members of the Azerbaijan Popular Front or those in 
sympathy with this organization. 
  The surrender to the Armenians, scandalous and bordering on 
treachery and still not thoroughly investigated, of the cities 
of Khodzhaly--in February 1992 (under Tair Aliyev)--and Shusha 
and Lachin--in May 1992 (under Ragim Gaziyev)--occurred at the 
time of Azerbaijan Popular Front member defense ministers. 
  Attempting to find the "culprit," the guilty party, the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front regime took punitive action against 
many of yesterday's "heroes" of the volunteer campaign (Gatyr 
Mamed in Agdam, Mekhraliyev in Agdash, Bakhramov in Dzhalilabad, 
Alyamshakh in Badra, S. Guseynov in Ganja, and others), 
simultaneously attempting to do some things in respect to the 
formation of a regular army. Thus illegal armed formations were 
banned, and a draft spanning 10 successive draft-year age groups 
was announced also (reduced to nothing by the corruption of the 
military registration and recruitment offices). 
  But time had already been lost, and the growing opposition 
was scoring points with each new defeat at the front. What was 
most dangerous was that the army also, in which by the end of 
their rule the "Fronters" had repressed six out of 10 generals 
and one-eighth of the officer corps, had slipped out of control. 
And the Azerbaijan Popular Front then turned once again to the 
tried-and-tested weapon--volunteer squads, whose formation was 
announced, with the tacit approval of President Elchibey (and in 
violation of his edict) at a meeting of the Azerbaijan Popular 
Front in February 1993 in Baku. A state of emergency was imposed 
in April, and it was announced that the Azerbaijan Popular Front 
was "prepared not to shrink from bloodshed." This was 
demonstrated at the time of the events of June 1993 in Ganja, 
which culminated, however, unexpectedly for the organizers in 
the victory of a leader of the volunteer campaign who had 
suffered repression--Suret Guseynov. The circle was thus closed, 
and the regime fell apart in a clash with its own creation. 
  The struggle against the volunteer anarchist chaos was a 
principal direction of the activity of Geydar Aliyev, who came 
to power. The unprofessional proteges of the Popular Front were 
methodically "smoked out" of their positions in the power 
ministries, approximately 30 battalions, composed of 50 percent 
"dead souls" and 50 percent former volunteers, were disbanded, 
and Ragim Gaziyev and a number of other Azerbaijan Popular Front 
figures, against whom charges of the negligent discharge of 
their official duties in the army, theft of property, and such 
were brought, were arrested. The press was given the "go-ahead" 
for descriptions of the gangster adventures of a number of 
"chieftains," which had earlier been shamefully hushed up from 
patriotic considerations. 
  At the present time the volunteer squads persist only in the 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, where several areas remain 
under the control of the Azerbaijan Popular Front. They are 
headed here by one T. Guseynov, who proposed in August the 
formation of a Nakhichevan Defense Council to confront possible 
Armenian aggression against this Azerbaijani autonomy. 
  The ring around the fugitive ex-President Elchibey is 
tightening. The detachment of interior forces loyal to him has 
been disarmed, and 12 officers and the chief himself (lacking, 
according to the tradition of recent times, special education) 
have been dismissed from the district police department in his 
native Ordubadskiy Rayon. An attempt to seize the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous Republic MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs] on 29 
October was foiled and led to the arrest of the most active 
"Fronters." Elchibey's cousin--Aydyn Gasymov, against whom a 
Turkish fanatic, a "gray wolf," arrested on 1 October 
testified--was arrested and charged with preparing an act of 
terrorism. 
  G. Aliyev has left his predecessor two ways out--to fully 
disarm (physically and ideologically) and submit to him as 
president or, relying on the volunteer-combatants, to continue 
the desperate, but doomed struggle to the end. In the first case 
Elchibey would be left without even the illusory hope of once 
again seating himself in the presidential chair. In the second 
there is a chance that he could escape to friends in Turkey 
wearing a martyr's crown and even form a "government in exile" 
from the CIS-devant of his circle. 
  Whatever the case, it is obvious that Azerbaijan has gotten 
over the volunteer campaign. Individual squads or terrorists are 
no longer calling the tune in policy, and the formation of a 
regular army has been the priority concern of domestic policy 
and serves as the basis of the mutual understanding in the 
President Aliyev-Prime Minister Guseynov tandem. Following the 
punishment of several military commissars, mobilization is 
finally under way. Deserters are being caught, and military 
tribunals, who have in the year examined hundreds of cases, are 
operating. The day when quantity switches to quality is not far 
off. Especially since following the failure of the efforts of 
the CSCE and the four UN Security Council resolutions on the 
liberation of the occupied territories, which have been ignored 
by the Armenians, the Azerbaijani leadership is left with no 
choice, evidently. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61066 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Risk of Internationalization of Karabakh War Grows </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM1901152794 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 19 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> PM1901152794 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Lieutenant Colonel Kirill Petrov "Military Review": "At a </F>
Turning Point. The Conflict in Karabakh Could Escalate into a 
Large-Scale Regional War"] 
  [Text] The December-January offensive by Azerbaijani 
troops is a logical continuation of the events of last summer, 
as a result of which defense detachments of the NKR 
[Nagorno-Karabakh Republic] (according to Baku's version, an 
Armenian expeditionary corps) took several strategically 
important Azerbaijani population centers outside 
Nagorno-Karabakh (Agdam, Fizuli, Kubatly), while in Baku the 
political crisis had reached its peak and subsequently resolved 
itself in another change of leader in the republic. Back then, 
even before he had "legalized" his ascent of the Mount Olympus 
of state power by means of a general election, Geydar Aliyev had 
promised to resolve the Karabakh problem. 
  At that time NKR defense detachments had occupied 724 
Azerbaijani population centers, and only 215 of them were on 
Karabakh territory. Approximately 1 million refugees were 
homeless.... 
  The "summer campaign" of 1993 in Karabakh ended in total 
triumph for some and a nightmare rout for others. Never before 
in five years of war had NKR defense detachments "sunk their 
teeth" so deep into Azerbaijan: Occupying 25 percent of its 
territory, they set up several so-called "security zones" around 
the NKR and took control of a 170-km section of the 
Azerbaijani-Iranian border. 
  Never before had the Azerbaijani Army suffered such a 
crushing defeat as in last year's "summer campaign." Agdam, 
Fizuli, and Kubatly surrendered virtually without a fight -- 
cities for which, proceeding from strategic considerations, the 
army should have fought to the last bullet, but it withdrew 
essentially without firing a single shot, having evacuated the 
population in advance. 
  This circumstance gave certain observers grounds for calling 
the war in Karabakh "strange" and assuming, not without reason, 
in my view, that at the height of the power crisis the military 
thus assisted "the departure of Abulfaz Elchibey," then the 
Azerbaijani president. If this is really so and if precisely 
this was the strategic task of the Azerbaijani Army, then it 
should be recognized that it coped with it brilliantly. In any 
event Elchibey "departed" (true, this also required a thrust 
from Ganja to Baku by detachments of the rebel Colonel Surret 
Guseynov, who in the recent past, incidentally, was commander of 
an Azerbaijani corps in Northern Karabakh), Geydar Aliyev became 
president, and the army itself, despite claims to the contrary, 
has not only preserved but also augmented its potential during 
the four months of the truce. There remained, and remains, just 
one thing for Geydar Aliyev to do -- to carry out his election 
promise.... 
  If anyone had any hope that the third president of 
Azerbaijan 
would reject a strong-arm solution to the problem, it was 
dispelled in December, with the first shots on the Karabakh 
front. There is, of course, an explanation for this. It is 
difficult to hope for success in talks with an opponent who has 
occupied one-fourth of the country's territory and utterly 
ruined approximately 1 million of your fellow citizens. Yes, 
Aliyev, like his predecessors, has gambled on force, but it is 
appropriate to point out that neither Mutalibov nor Elchibey 
found themselves in such difficult conditions as he does. 
  So the guns started up in Karabakh once again in December. 
Never before had the front line of the Azerbaijani Army's 
offensive been so broad: from the north to the south of the 
republic. The fighting was fierce, and there were big losses on 
both sides. At the time these lines are being written, the 
Azeris have taken the border settlement of Goradiz near Iran and 
won back 40 of the 170 km of the border with that state 
controlled by Karabakhis. According to information from some 
sources, Azerbaijani detachments are advancing toward the 
enemy's rear from Iranian territory. 
  The attackers' strategic plan has become apparent during the 
recent days of fighting in the zone of conflict: with 
simultaneous strikes in the north of the NKR's Mardakertskiy 
Rayon and in the east -- against the cities of Askeran, Agdam, 
and Fizuli -- to develop an offensive against Kelbadzhar and 
Kubatly and cut the Lachin corridor. 
  In turn it has to be thought that the Karabakh defense 
detachments will not give up the "security zone" around the NKR 
just like that. A great deal in the winter campaign will, in my 
view, depend on whether the Azerbaijani Army has been able to 
reinstate itself sufficiently to endure a large-scale offensive 
over the entire front. Will it not be become a spent force when 
drawn into static fighting (the Karabakhis are hurriedly 
creating a second defense echelon in certain sections of the 
confrontation)? 
  However.... The conflict in Karabakh has approached the 
stage where it is no longer so important who will emerge the 
winner from the "winter campaign": There is no military 
solution to the Karabakh problem, and the mechanism of a 
peaceful settlement has not been worked out. The most the 
opponents are capable of, even then not without the assistance 
of intermediaries, is reaching agreement on a truce, which is 
used, as a rule, under cover of diplomatic maneuvers and 
blocking of the peace initiatives of those same intermediaries, 
to restore combat potential and prepare for a counterstrike. 
  But the more profound the Karabakh impasse, the more likely 
the threat of the conflict's internationalization. 
Incidentally, Afghan mojahedin, citizens of Turkey, Syria, and 
Lebanon, and "volunteers" from CIS countries are already 
fighting here. But something else is far more alarming. While 
war was being waged at a respectable distance from their 
borders, Tehran and Ankara admitted purely hypothetically the 
possibility of their direct participation in the conflict. But 
attitudes toward it have been under revision for some time. 
  When as many as several tens of thousands of refugees 
gathered on adjacent territory last summer, Iran held the 
largest combined-arms exercises involving aircraft on the border 
for 15 years. 
  According to data from various sources, during those 
exercises Iranian Army subunits crossed the border and guarded a 
reservoir near the village of Goradiz. Several more subunits 
were ready to cross the border. After this -- how tightly 
everything here is intertwined -- Ankara voiced alarm "in 
connection with the concentration of Iranian subunits near the 
Azerbaijani border," and on 6 September the head of a Turkish 
parliamentary delegation spoke in Baku of "his government's 
readiness to give Azerbaijan military aid in the event of a 
further escalation of hostilities by Armenia." Turkey's resolve 
was confirmed in Moscow last fall by Prime Minister Tansu 
Ciller, and former Premier Bulent Ecevit has called for air 
strikes against the Armenians. 
  It would not be out of place to remind you that, in the 
opinion of experts, the Turkish Army is the strongest in the 
region. Approximately 1,000 tanks, 1,100 armored vehicles, 2,500 
artillery pieces and mortars, 150 combat helicopters, and 300 
aircraft of the 2d Tactical Command are concentrated on 
territory bordering on Armenia. The "North" group of Iranian 
troops constitutes roughly the same striking force on the border 
with Azerbaijan. 
  Whereas just a few months ago movements of Iranian and 
Turkish units and subunits on the borders could be regarded as a 
final warning, today.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61067 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DEFENSE INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ongoing Conversion Problems at `Almaz' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0163B Moscow TRUD in Russian 6 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0163B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow TRUD </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vsevolod Sikelnikov, Yuliya Andrianova, Sergey </F>
Knyazkov, and Boris Kudryavtsev: "`Almaz' Almost Invisible"] 
  [Text] They say that Isaac Newton learned to "evaporate" 
the diamonds by focusing sunlight on them with a large 
magnifying glass. When Newton demonstrated his experiment to the 
English queen, she was immediately stunned: Right before her 
eyes the diamond grew red hot and disappeared. But then at once 
she ordered that the destructive experiments be stopped. 
  It would seem that today the same sort of destructive 
experiment is being carried out with one of the largest defense 
enterprises of the fatherland, the "Almaz" [diamond] plant. No 
one would deny that military expenditures and the defense 
industry of Russia must be optimized. Unfortunately, we have 
always lacked a sense of moderation, especially during the "Cold 
War." But in the years of perestroyka and the development of 
democracy, on the contrary we began to "uproot" the defense 
sector ruthlessly, as we did with the vintners in the course of 
the anti-alcoholism campaign. Today, conversion here is a drug 
for populists in a political struggle, rather than a state 
program to optimize the restructuring of the defense industry 
with maximal advantage to Russia. It is too bad that to this 
point only those who decide nothing understand this. And 
irreversible processes are taking place in this time, doing 
enormous harm to the country. 
  Indisputably each person who works at "Almaz" is a patriot 
of 
this enterprise. But this does not at all mean that only 
corporate interests impel us. "Almaz," which develops air 
defense systems, is known throughout the world and is the 
strongest competitor of an American company of similar profile, 
Raytheon. For decades there was an unpublicized competition 
between "Almaz" and "Raytheon," and in recent years a publicized 
one, in developing air defense systems. "Almaz" has never lagged 
behind its rival, and to a great has extent surpassed it, as it 
does today. 
  On 1 May 1960, an American U-2 spy plane piloted by the 
pilot 
Powers was shot down by an air defense system which was 
developed by "Almaz." The missile hit the target at an altitude 
of more than 20 km, a complete surprise to the American 
military, who were confident of the impunity of these flights. 
Just this single successful launch then plunged the air forces 
of the world into extremely high spending to achieve safe flight 
altitudes close to the ground. Then, when the Americans deemed 
themselves invulnerable at extremely low altitudes, a new SAM 
system from "Almaz" dispelled that confidence. 
  But before that there were long years of other competitions 
in the air, including combat ones, as in the skies of Vietnam. 
The then ultra-modern American Phantoms, B-52s and other planes 
felt themselves practically untouchable, covering the earth of 
North Vietnam with "carpet" bombing of unheard-of density. The 
very first day our SAM systems were used there, the American Air 
Force suffered enormous losses. In the skies of Vietnam a total 
of several thousand American planes were shot down, and a large 
portion of them fell to missiles of our system. 
  Then the world understood that SAM systems were one of the 
necessary components of defense, safeguarding the security of 
the state. They began to be actively purchased, basically from 
us and from the U.S. The profit amounted to many billions of 
dollars. And even without detailed calculations, one can say 
that the "Almaz" paid back the public funds which were invested 
in the creation of new systems. Incidentally, people remember 
that time. The money earned by us in the international market 
was returned to the country in the form of bananas, oranges, 
lemons, different foods, and scarce consumer items, accessible 
to all because of their low prices. 
  And no one could chide "Almaz" that these monies were earned 
from weapons which brought death and destruction. On the 
contrary, SAM systems are extremely defensive weapons. 
  These days SAM systems have become a generally accepted 
means 
of defense and have begun to be shown at international 
exhibitions. It has turned out that modern all-altitude 
multipurpose SAM systems with a long range of action can be 
developed only by two countries in the world, Russia and the U.S. 
  At international exhibitions at Le Bourget (France), 
Abu-Dhabi (United Arab Emirates), the Zhukovskiy Aerospace Show 
(Russia) and others, specialists were able to vividly compare 
the characteristics of the American Patriot air defense system 
and our S-300 PMU1 and see that the Russian system surpasses the 
American both in range of action and in minimal altitude of 
downed targets. 
  It must be said that here in Russia, too, specialists 
understand that the S-300 PMU1 system is quite competitive, and 
that in the current difficult economic situation enormous 
amounts of money can be earned with it. But what are they doing 
with "Almaz" today in Russia? Perhaps this is a somewhat 
subjective opinion, but the impression is that they simply want 
to destroy us. But you know, "Almaz" is not the property of 
political figures, but a treasure of the people. 
  The average pay at "Almaz" today is 30 to 40 thousand 
rubles. 
There are world-class specialists: Chiefs of scientific 
departments and sectors, doctors and candidates of science, and 
leading specialists receive 50 to 70 thousand rubles a month, 
while experienced engineers with years of work behind them, just 
as young specialists, receive 20 to 30 thousand rubles. 
  One young cooperative owner, earning a half-million a month 
serving Russian millionaires, burst out laughing when he heard 
the pay at "Almaz," and then "wisely" noted that probably we 
just had a collection of loafers, if that was all they could 
earn. It would be better if they fixed imported audio and video 
equipment. . . The worst thing is that the young man did not 
think this up himself, but was only repeating what some 
ideologues of market relations are saying, believing the market 
to be a goal in itself. 
  For now the approach of the state to the fatherland's 
enterprises, which determines the level of science and 
technology in the country and the world is surprisingly 
uniformly destructive: The hammer of high taxes against the 
forge of miserable wages will leave not a single industrial 
giant standing. Of course, our state has long been in agony, 
choking from the shortages of resources. But then, no one 
besides our leaders is guilty of this. Well fine, one can still 
understand these difficulties. But when the state itself slows 
export deliveries of goods permitted for sale, and from what is 
sold, it gives almost nothing to the enterprises, the impression 
is that temporary people are making some temporary deals. 
  "Almaz" did not escape this fate either. It received nothing 
from recent deliveries from a foreign contract, and even worse, 
further export deliveries are starting to be slowed under 
various pretexts. But you know, this amounts to hundreds of 
millions of dollars, which Russia urgently needs. 
  "Almaz" itself is being enveloped quite energetically in a 
web of commercial and banking structures, which judging by their 
behavior are not at all concerned with developing the science, 
technology and industry of the fatherland, but are parasitically 
interested, for example, in acquiring a prestigious building 
which 20 minutes' drive from the center of Moscow. 
  Thus "Almaz" finds itself in a trap. The government, using 
high taxes and pay restrictions, is driving the still-powerful 
enterprise into the nets of indebtedness set up by commercial 
structures. 
  And what of the people at "Almaz"? Yes, our unique 
specialists, by breaking into consumer goods and commercia 
activity, can more than feed themselves. And some of them are 
doing this. But overall the collective continues to work on the 
main programs and to develop new and extremely complex systems, 
because "Raytheon" is making such systems, because the world 
will never give them up. 
  Of course we understand that this drama is only for those 
who 
worry about the state. You see, if matters go on like this, then 
in a few years the country will begin to pay hard currency for 
worse systems (no one will ever sell better ones that those of 
Russia) from foreign companies. And then many bureaucrats and 
merchants as middlemen will get those profits which they are 
promised by the destruction of "Almaz." And since nothing comes 
from nowhere or goes anywhere, the loser will be our people, who 
have already expended a lot of manpower and resources on 
creating high-tech enterprises of the "Almaz" type and, if they 
are destroyed, will be forced to correct the state's mistakes 
out of their own pockets. 
  How can we not recall the English queen here? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61068 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DEFENSE INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Conversion: Trials of Komsomolsk-Na-Amure SU-27 Plant </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0163A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 13 Jan 93 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0163A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anatoliy Mikhaylovich Petrov, genearal </F>
director of the Komsomolsk-na-Amure aviation plant by Aleksandr 
Andryushkov, place and date not indicated: "We Make the Best 
Interceptor in the World."] 
  [Text] Visitor's card: Anatoliy Mikhaylovich Petrov, 
general director of the Komsomolsk-na-Amure Aviation Production 
Association [KnAAPO]. Born in 1941 at the Parfin station of the 
Leningrad oblast. In 1965 he graduated from the Novosibirsk 
Electrotechnical Institute, and was sent to the aviation plant 
im. Yu.A. Gagarin at Komsomolsk-na-Amure. Today the Su-27, the 
pride of Russia, is built there. 
  He is married and has two children, a daughter who is 
an aviation engineer, and a son in the tenth grade. 
  [Andryushkov] Anatoliy Mikhaylovich! It is more than two 
years since our last talk about the fate of the plant. What has 
changed in this time, and how goes it with one of the leading 
giants of the defense industry, which produces the 
world-renowned multipurpose Su-27 fighter? 
  [Petrov] How have we been doing these two years? I should 
say 
at once that we have not suffered particularly. The plant had 
orders from the Defense Ministry for some modifications of the 
Su-27 (naval variant), plus there was the sale of some fighters 
to China. Owing to the Chinese order, we met our plan last year, 
and we have the chance to keep on making planes. 
  Still, in 1993 we were forced to change over to a four-day 
work week. The reason for this was the lack of a firm state plan 
for the coming year. The plant could not waste electricity, 
material, and manpower and there was no assurance that our labor 
would be utilized. The plant cannot run idly. But this did not 
have an effect on the pay of our people. With the switch to the 
four-day work week, we raised their pay rates by 25 percent. 
  But since everything can change tomorrow, we are looking for 
untapped reserves, so to speak, in getting out of the crisis. 
  [Andryushkov] You mean production of consumer goods within 
the framework of conversion? 
  [Petrov] Yes. We have contacted the "Lucky Goldstar" which 
specializes in the production of household electronic items. We 
purchased an assembly line for the production of "Goldstar" 
televisions and the component parts for 25,000 sets. In all we 
will produce 50,000 televisions with foreign technology. We have 
already made around 200. 
  The second direction is the production of electric motors. 
In 
Russia today we produce hardly any vacuum cleaners or washing 
machines. There are no electric motors. We have studied the 
foreign technology for their production, and it suits us. 
Electrical steel is scarce in our country, but this technology 
allows us to make electric motors out of ordinary steel. We are 
looking for a serious supplier of electrical wire and are 
opening an assembly shop. 
  [Andryushkov] I have heard that they have mastered the 
production of complex medical equipment at your plant. 
  [Petrov] We are ready to begin production of medical 
pressure 
chambers of our own design. Our pressure chamber was rated as 
one of the best models at a medical exhibition in Novosibirsk. 
  We are involved in the production of yet another medical 
device, a Reich's chamber. This makes it possible to protect a 
person from the action of solar radiation, and has undergone 
testing at our medical center. 
  We are forced to struggle for survival under the conditions 
of conversion and the market. But whatever secondary production 
we get for the plant, the main product must always be there. It 
is practically impossible to fully support our plant with orders 
without producing the Su-27 aircraft. But the directorate of the 
Defense Ministry from which we get our orders has already warned 
us that there is no money for a single modification of the Su-27. 
  [Andryushkov] How will the cruiser "Admiral Kuznetsov" be 
supplied with carrier planes then? 
  [Petrov] We have already delivered the first lot of fighters 
for naval pilots, although it is not much. This was a good job 
for the plant, and we relied upon it, but who knows what lies 
ahead? We will try to get a clearer picture from the naval 
command. 
  Here is something else that is a heavy burden on the plant. 
In 1991, the Defense Ministry ordered one lot of Su-27s. A 
plane, like a human being, takes about a year to be "born." The 
plant has practically filled the order. The fighters are on its 
grounds, in various stages of finishing touches. They remain 
unclaimed. Their prices are still the old ones, the stipulated 
ones, but this apparently does not interest the client. In order 
to keep the engines from rusting and to make sure the aggregates 
did not become unusable, I was forced to issue instruction that 
they be removed from finished aircraft and be mounted for 
testing on newly produced ones, those which are being sold to 
China, for instance. This is not the state approach, but it 
isn't my fault. Let the Defense Ministry think about how to 
solve this problem, my job is to preserve the plant. 
  [Andryushkov] But as a state official, what would you 
propose 
as a way out of this situation? 
  [Petrov] They could have found different ways of paying for 
the order. For example, by government decision, they could make 
a 50 percent prepayment without assessing tax from the plant. 
And the Defense Ministry could pay off the remainder in a year. 
We would make planes for the army on credit, so to speak. And 
this would suit the plant. The Russian flyers would have Su-27 
fighters in their armament, and the plant would have money for 
their further production and a carefree existence. And in this 
way state resources would only be immobilized. 
  [Andryushkov] Tell me, were many Su-27s sent to the line 
units in 1993? 
  [Petrov] This year not a single plane, except for the 
carrier 
variant, went to the units. The people at the plant ask in 
puzzlement: Why are we working, for whom are we accumulating 
this stockpile of planes? But I know there is a need for new 
fighters, and even more so for spare parts for them. If the 
state had decided to disarm in this way, then it would be better 
to close down our plant all at once. 
  [Andryushkov] But if planes like these, which any state 
would 
be proud to have, are not needed by Russia now, why don't we 
sell them to other countries? Not only China is interested in 
acquiring the Su-27. 
  [Petrov] For me the hardest thing to understand is why the 
Russian "Oboroneksport" [Defense Export office], with offers 
from some countries, perhaps non-traditional buyers of our 
weapons, is not showing any initiative. These countries are 
prepared to order our planes and to pay immediately. But the 
solution to this question depends on the impenetrable wall of 
bureaucrats from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They offer 
unconvincing arguments that America objects to the sale of this 
plane to one country, England objects [to the sale] to another. 
It is irritating that Russia recently has virtually been living 
by foreign dictate, and does not have its own opinion. I fear 
where this might lead, if we are so afraid of breaking our ties 
with our new "friends." 
  [Andryushkov] Also, we must remember that if Russia does not 
take its place in the international aircraft market today, 
tomorrow will be too late. They won't let anyone else in. 
  [Petrov] Quite right. You can't escape economic laws in any 
form, whatever their "ism." For instance, when I talk with 
American businessmen, this is what I hear from them: "Do you 
really think we are interested in the Russian worker working, 
being employed in production? We are interested in the American 
worker having constant work." 
  Today, a battle for markets is being fought. And we have to 
admit that the Americans are driving us out everywhere. For 
example, I have heard that the U.S. vetoed the sale of the Su-27 
aircraft to Libya, although we had already established contacts 
with it, and the signing of the contracts would have saved 
several Russian defense plants from crisis. So Russia is not 
allowed, and the Americans themselves are holding talks with 
Libya to provide it with F-16 fighters. 
  Here is what I think. Since we have reached the market 
economy mode, we must earn money without a feeling of false 
shame. The market must be the market. A real one, and not one 
made from pleasant dreams. 
  [Andryushkov] Anatoliy Mikhaylovich, your pain for your 
native fatherland is understandable. It is even more intense 
when you think about the fate of the plant. Still, while 
constantly pondering how to survive under current conditions, 
you still retain optimism and faith in better days. . . 
  [Petrov] You know, Russians have an inborn capacity to stand 
up under difficulties. This year, for instance, I took no 
credits from the state. It is slavery to take credit at 200 or 
more percent! The plant will soon be stripped naked, excuse the 
expression. We owe our suppliers a lot of money because of this, 
and you don't build a machine like the Su-27 without partners. 
  [Andryushkov] How much freedom of action does the general 
director have, or does everything still depend on higher 
authorities? 
  [Petrov] I would answer that the attitude that the Committee 
for the Defense Sectors has toward to us is quite realistic. Let 
us say that twenty years ago, the force ministries dictated work 
conditions to the plant. Today the picture is different. There 
is a group of central ministries which determine all economic 
policy, including in the defense industry. The plant is the 
executor. Relations must be organized like this: Give me an 
order and I will work. There is no need to tell me how to do it. 
In the years of perestroyka and conversion, we have learned how 
to get by. The plant itself can organize relations with 
subcontractors and other republics as well as the bureaucrats 
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can. Today we are 
successfully working with "Azovstal," Belarusian enterprises, 
and Tajikistan, and to this point still have ties with Moldova. 
Thus, the "assistance" of the ministries has been reduced to a 
minimum. 
  But here is a problem -- a lot of our planes are in Ukraine 
and Belarus. They sit on the airfields without spare parts. I 
see potential work for the plant in this, and the air force 
commands of the republics come to us for assistance. Alas, we 
are forced to refuse. There is no government permission. I don't 
think that Ukraine or Belarus will ever use their planes against 
Russia, but we can't see beyond our own noses. 
  [Andryushkov] Your production association is also working 
hard inside the country, and is a member of the Russian 
"Aviabank." What is the benefit from this? 
  [Petrov] We have come up against the following problem: When 
we have money, we don't get it for 2 or 3 months from Moscow, 
and then the same amount goes back to the capital. But our 
suppliers say you can't work like that, high and dry. 
  Knowing that the "Aviabank" had been formed and that all the 
aviation enterprises of Russia were participating in it, we 
requested membership. This allowed us to efficiently settle up 
with the entire western zone of the county: Moscow, St. 
Petersburg, Samara, and Nizhgorod plants, as well as others. 
  Besides that, we have very limited credit resources in the 
Far East. There was a time when we did not have any ready cash 
at all. Our people did not get paid for three months. In such a 
situation, the plant goes to the "Aviabank," a plane is sent to 
Moscow, and within a day or two we have sacks of money. So the 
benefit is obvious. 
  [Andryushkov] Recently we have not had the sort of mass 
media 
to agitate among the Russians for privatization of anything. 
Your opinion about this? 
  [Petrov] A privatization commission has been formed at the 
plant, to figure out all the pluses and minuses of this measure. 
My personal opinion is that if there is a stable state order, 
then a privatized plant would operate smoothly, would make a 
profit, would share it with all stockholders, and everything 
would be fine. 
  But when a plant is on the brink of collapse due to a lack 
of 
orders, and if the state simply abandons it to its fate, then 
privatization would lead to utter collapse of production. Thus, 
I am very cautious about privatization. I am not against it, for 
I acknowledge all forms of ownership, but I would not rush 
headlong into it. 
  I would proceed like this. I would try out this 
privatization 
in small enterprises, say in our "Metallist" plant, where they 
make cups and spoons and employ around 200 people, rather than 
several tens of thousands. Accumulate around five years of 
experience, study the successes and failures, acquaint all the 
country's enterprises with them, and give them the chance to 
decide to privatize or not. Those who want to can. But what are 
we doing now? They're just about driving us into privatization, 
as they once drove us into the collective farms. 
  [Andryushkov] Perhaps the government wants to avoid 
responsibility for the state of the country's economy in this 
way? 
  [Petrov] Perhaps. If it works, hurrah. If not, then excuse 
me, you yourself wanted to privatize. Enough experimenting with 
the country. Today there is no worker who does not want to work. 
Life itself forces us to work and earn money, otherwise it's 
chaos for a person. 
  [Andryushkov] What is the pay at the plant? 
  [Petrov] The average is a little more than 100,000 (rubles). 
This is with allowance for the coefficient and the northern 
supplements. An experienced specialist earns up to 170,000. 
  [Andryushkov] Anatoliy Mikhaylovich, what do you see as your 
most urgent task today? 
  [Petrov] To supply the plant with work. During my vacation, 
my first since 1988, I have already flown three times to Moscow 
to resolve this question. Why did I have to go myself? Because 
the government for some reason doesn't want to speak with anyone 
but the head man. So I have turned over the leadership of the 
plant to my assistants, and I myself am on the go. Luckily, my 
assistants are able and reliable. I feel the responsibility for 
the fate of our collective constantly, and for that reason I am 
firmly resolved to see it through to the end. There can be two 
outcomes: Either we taste the joy of victory, for which we are 
struggling today, or we learn the bitterness of defeat. But 
everyone else will too. 
  P.S. When the material was prepared for press it was 
learned that the Amur aircraft builders had decided to reject 
privatization of the KnAAPO. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61069 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DEFENSE INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Sector a Field of `Partisan Warfare' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM2101152794 Moscow PRAVDA in Russian 19 Jan 94 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> PM2101152794 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow PRAVDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksey Shulunov, president of the League of </F>
Defense Enterprises, by Anatoliy Pokrovskiy and Igor Saltykov, 
date and place not given: "Defense Sector Has Become a Partisan 
Fighter: Acrid Is the Smoke of Financial Conflagrations" -- 
first five paragraphs are introduction] 
  [Text] It was not until just before dawn that I managed to 
meet with Aleksey Shulunov, president of the League of Defense 
Enterprises. That was the only time available. After all, 
conversion has become disorderly partisan warfare. Not only 
does it not have a strategy or tactics, it does not even know 
whether to advance or retreat, trapped in the pincers of the 
disorder in the state. Acrid is the smoke of financial 
conflagrations and the doused bonfires of the way stations of 
the helpless. Is the Russian Government really indifferent to 
the destruction of the military-industrial complex? 
  First and foremost we no longer have a military-industrial 
complex as such, Aleksey Nikolayevich explained. There are only 
the high-technology sectors left. But so far neither the 
president's entourage nor the government has found the time to 
take a look at them. However, their verbal tirades have been 
simply staggering. 
  At first the president blithely promised that by the first 
fall the military industry would keep the people watered and fed 
with the "harvest" of its conversion projects. But then the 
drought came, reducing the ruble to worthless scraps of paper. 
Then last August the government adopted the alleged armament -- 
but really disarmament -- program; in November it "adjusted" it; 
and at the end of December Chernomyrdin ordered a complete 
review. 
  The results are shameful. Not even from the very first days 
but rather the first hours of the new year the fulfillment of 
the defense orders for 1994 was on the brink of catastrophe. 
This is because in the previous two years the collectives of 
enterprises working on military hardware had suffered damage 
comparable to that caused by a nuclear strike. The most 
specialized sections had come to a complete standstill and 
dropped out of the manufacturing process. To restore them now 
will take nothing less than heroic efforts surpassing even the 
labor exploits of the Great Patriotic War. And even then it 
will take not months or years, but decades. 
  A gloomy but objective forecast. It is based on the colossal 
brain drain of top-class people not just from enterprises but 
also from scientific research institutes and design bureaus. 
The first wave of extreme poverty swept away the most highly 
qualified doctors of sciences, the second wave took candidate 
doctors with it. Today it is the wave of "top specialists." 
Yet each of them is like Saltykov-Shchedrin's peasant whose 
labor keeps two generals fed. What you have left are those 
young kids who detest the idea of running away and those who 
like everything the way it is. 
  [PRAVDA] Aleksey Nikolayevich, are Russia's intellectual 
knights not signing up with subcontractors? Where are they 
going to beat their swords into plowshares? 
  [Shulunov] First of all, quite a few foreign firms have 
absolutely no interest in importing defense staff into their 
countries. Those people are far more necessary over here 
because they possess not only military secrets but also purely 
civilian secrets which are sometimes incomprehensible to foreign 
entrepreneurs. The most talented design staff are being offered 
work not in offices but at home. They are being equipped with 
personal computers, equipment, cars -- work at home rather than 
wasting your time on chaotic public transport. We guarantee 
personal secrecy and a living wage. 
  Very many people are joining commercial structures in this 
country -- small but lively and well-equipped firms -- they are 
designing and taking part in the production of and trade in 
purpose-built instruments, apparatus, technologies, and 
household goods. It is very good that such activity has started 
up in our country. After all, just two years ago such an 
infrastructure did not exist here. 
  But the bright lights also beckoned our talented defense 
specialists from abroad. The U.S. Congress and State Department 
adopted an urgent decision to admit and welcome Russia's best 
minds, especially those from the military-industrial complex. 
They set a generous quota: 11,000 people a year. But it was 
emphasized that they should be from Russia, not Ukraine or 
Belarus. They can expect very considerable financial assistance 
to help them adapt, the promise of the accelerated acquisition 
of American citizenship, and the promise of cost-of-living and 
"training" allowances. At a time when defense specialists are 
publicly becoming impoverished -- in December the "average" wage 
was 35,000 rubles [R] -- the competition among people wanting to 
lead at least a normal life was very great. 
  The demand for the export of rare intellects and talents is 
growing but will mean an irreparable loss for this country. It 
is time to understand clearly that some people would really like 
Russia to cease being a world power with a unique science and a 
mighty scientific and technical and defense potential and be 
transformed into a raw-materials appendage of the West, the 
East, and then Africa, too. There is evidence of this to date: 
Last year the export of technical output fell to 5-6 percent. 
  [PRAVDA] The president has published an edict providing for 
an increase in the level of pay to eight times the minimum wage 
for fulfillment of the state defense order and 10 times that 
figure in the nuclear industry. 
  [Shulunov] This is a two-edged sword. The first is in the 
budget. After all, we do not have the financial results for 
1992 yet. We got through 1993 entirely without a budget, 
papering over the cracks one department at a time and even 
taking each event as it came. It is hard to judge what is in 
store for us now. But the budget is covering at most 65-70 
percent of the planned items and areas of expenditure. 
  And here is the second edge of the financial sword. The 
payment of defense orders is planned to be at last year's level. 
But because prices are rising all the time and wages are trying 
if not to get ahead then at least not to lag behind, the state's 
military finance coffer is becoming a purse for small change. 
  Here is a surprising detail which shows that our present 
authorities are truly in their infancy: No one yet really 
understands what the state defense order is. There is not even 
a single interpretation of the terminology itself. For example, 
we in the defense industry take it to mean the Defense 
Ministry's order paid for by funds issued to it by the state. 
And the Defense Ministry shares our view. But the tax 
inspectorate takes it to mean something completely different. 
The Finance Ministry has its own interpretation and the Economy 
Ministry understands it quite differently. Consequently, at the 
very highest level it is not a financial struggle going on but a 
war of words. But there is no time for that kind of thing. At 
the moment the government is merely plugging the financial gaps: 
First there was the cost of the referendum; then the struggle 
against the Supreme Soviet and the possession of its territory; 
finally there was the cost of the parliamentary elections, the 
ratification of the Constitution, the overhaul of the White 
House, and the move there. Of course, in view of these daily 
costs, losses, and political concerns it has no time to worry 
about providing hauberks, especially those which still jingle 
rather than those which are completely rusted through. 
  [PRAVDA] But the hauberk is a museum piece. Whereas 
conversion and the fulfillment of the defense orders are already 
turning into disorderly partisan warfare. 
  [Shulunov] It may be said that there is financial and 
economic robbery going on. Here is an example. A 
characteristic feature of our defense industry was the 
enterprise which was like a whole city. These enterprises' 
assets included not just an impressive social base but also 
enormous common boiler houses. In midwinter they have been left 
without fuel because of the colossal rise in the cost of coal 
and fuel oil. They have had to ask the banks for enormous 
credits regardless of the interest rate. Meanwhile, they knew in 
advance that these loans would virtually not be repaid. After 
all, in the first three weeks of December alone insolvency debts 
rose from R15 trillion to R19 trillion across the country. At 
the same time we were owed R700 billion by the military who a 
year ago were counting on the state budget when they concluded 
with enterprises what seemed to be modest state defense order 
contracts calculated down to the last cent. But they ceased to 
be able to pay in April, when finance became more like a 
political fiction. 
  Defense workers are now caught in a vicious circle from 
which 
there is no escape. I think that there will be an unprecedented 
explosion in the second half of January, at the latest. After 
all, we no longer have the means to pay for the fuel or 
materials essential to production. And the banks will refuse to 
grant new credits. A financial cataclysm is looming. 
  [PRAVDA] Aleksey Nikolayevich, but only a few months ago 
there were ways for defense industry personnel to make an 
organized withdrawal from the cycle of financial crises and 
massacres, by exporting and selling arms on the world market. 
  [Shulunov] Yes, for two years Russia's most progressive 
forces worked in harmony on the creation of a new and very 
flexible structure to ensure the success of arms exports on the 
market front. The Defense Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, and the State Committee 
for the Defense Industry were among our active allies. We all 
tried to at least restore what had been lost in the potholes of 
perestroyka. Nor did we avoid mistakes either. The Commission 
for Military-Technical Cooperation was set up to prevent them, 
and it began working on a regular basis, virtually every week. 
  But then came a bolt from the blue. In line with the 18 
November edict of the president we totally reorganized the 
existing system without, however, creating a parallel structure, 
hastily destroying everything that had been tried and tested. 
De facto, without any analysis, without knowing what other 
shortcomings were "looming" around the corner, without 
formulating a new strategy, perestroyka was once again 
undertaken, and in an utterly unqualified and incompetent 
manner. It is hard even to calculate the tremendous damage. I 
think 1994 will be a write-off for military-technical 
cooperation, because we have been driven back to where we 
started in late 1991 or early 1992. But it's a hopeless 
lament.... 
  [PRAVDA] Maybe those on high have become aware of the awful 
experience of abortive conversion and military readaptations 
[voyennyye perelitsovki] in the world's major powers? And the 
solution? 
  [Shulunov] The solution is already known in all its detail. 
The U.S. military industry conducted the first experiment in 
conversion in the late seventies-early eighties. It was 
extremely unsuccessful. But it is thanks to this experiment 
that the most rational way has been found. When major 
corporations own the number one or number two-ranked 
manufacturers of recognized categories of arms, they buy out 
their weaker competitors and carry out either horizontal or 
vertical integration, keeping weapons production wholly to 
themselves. Their former rivals, rid of the burden of competing 
in military production, acquire civilian firms with the profits 
they derive from this situation and continue to lead a peaceful, 
tranquil life. 
  The result was that both the corporations and the state 
benefit. The U.S. Defense Department's considerable reduction 
in arms purchases has not meant a drop in the production of 
military hardware. And last year 15 percent of the output 
produced "captured" its own sectors of the world market. In 
1995 it is planned to export around 30 percent of the arms 
produced. 
  The competition, needless to say, is very tough. But the 
Russian leadership is, regrettably, somehow too busy to 
formulate a foreign economic strategy on military-technical 
matters. We do not yet have the right to dream of an 
expansionist policy. But it is high time we reconquered those 
positions we hastily surrendered on our traditional markets. 
  A start has been made. The thing is that over the past two 
decades we have exported arms worth $120 billion. The bulk of 
them -- complex equipment -- with a long service life, around 30 
years. What is more, there is more Russian military aviation 
equipment in the world than anyone else's -- there are more than 
5,000 of our combat aircraft in the arsenals of various 
countries in the Near East, India, China, and Africa. But, in 
accordance with past tradition, government licenses were needed 
for annual repairs and deliveries of expendable material and 
spare parts. And the government's distraction with domestic 
affairs made it very hard to organize this. We finally 
succeeded, quite recently, in winning round our leaders and 
obtained permission to supply spare parts direct, earning around 
$4-5 billion a year. Even at the present crazy ruble-dollar 
exchange rates, manufacturers will make profits of 300 to 1,000 
percent. 
  Profitable or what! But I don't know how this will develop. 
We agreed with the former minister of foreign economic 
relations to abolish altogether as of 1994 furtive taxes on 
military exports. But it is hard to tell the future now 
following the 18 November edict. 
  [PRAVDA] Yet we do also have experience of conversion. 
After the Great Patriotic War conversion on a Soviet scale was 
indeed a total affair. And urgent at that! Leningrad's Kirov 
Plant switched in a matter of months from producing tanks to 
producing the world's first skidding tractor. The same thing 
happened at thousands of other enterprises. 
  [Shulunov] Yes. But, first, you had the powerful state 
planning system of the time. Today, as well, conversion should 
be unified and planned. Second, it rested on iron labor 
discipline, which is now being eroded from above. Third, the 
stable financial position of the state was strengthening. 
Despite outside attempts at interference the state increased 
production year after year and the budget grew steadily, rather 
than waning as is happening now. 
  Well, we must go on fighting. This is not, regrettably, the 
postwar period. The Battle of the Kursk Bulge lies ahead, not 
just for defense personnel but for all industry. Enough of 
partisan warfare. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61070 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Use of Artillery in Persian Gulf </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0132A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 8, Aug 93 
(signed to press 16 Jul 93) pp 52-59 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0132A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article based on foreign military press materials by </F>
Colonel Yu. Fesenko, doctor of technical sciences, and Major S. 
Zhuravlev, under rubric "Foreign Military Affairs": "Artillery 
in the Persian Gulf"] 
  [Text] The Persian Gulf war has become the property 
of history, but interest in features of combat operations in the 
"Kuwait Desert" is not abating inasmuch as outlines of the "war 
of new technologies," which will determine the development of 
military affairs over the next decades to a significant extent, 
showed up clearly here. 
  Despite repeated statements abroad about artillery's reduced 
role in modern war, in the "Kuwait Desert" both sides 
concentrated such an amount that it conceded nothing to the 
overall strength level of groupings in a number of the largest 
World War II operations such as the Balaton Operation of 3rd 
Ukrainian Front. Even by Pentagon estimates, there was a small 
quantitative superiority on the side of the international forces 
directly in the combat operations zone. Technical outfitting was 
another matter. The difference in it, like the difference in 
conditions for performing combat missions, turned out to be much 
more significant. 
  U.S. 155-mm M109A2 and 203.2-mm CF M110A2 self-propelled 
[SP] 
howitzers, M198 and TR 155-mm towed howitzers, and also MLRS 
multiple-launch rocket systems made up the basis of 
multinational forces [MNF] artillery. The majority of artillery 
systems were self-propelled and over 80 percent were armored. 
U.S. formations also had several models of the ATACMS tactical 
missile system (based on the MLRS) equipped with a missile with 
cluster warhead (100 submunitions with hollow 
charge-fragmentation effect) with a launch range up to 200 km. 
  Artillery subunits and a considerable number of MNF 
formations had automated artillery fire control systems and 
digital data transmission equipment. AN/USQ-70 survey 
instruments, the PLRS position finding, identification and data 
transmission system, and a NAVSTAR space navigation system 
ground receiver were used for topogeodetic support to combat 
operations. 
  OH-58 reconnaissance helicopters and Pioneer drones were 
employed to collect data on the enemy and terrain along with 
radar and sound-ranging reconnaissance equipment as well as 
artillery forward observers' opto-electronic equipment. In 
addition, MNF formations were outfitted with mobile stations for 
receiving data from the J-STARS radar system for aerial 
reconnaissance of ground targets and control of strikes, which 
gave a good account of itself when tracking the movement of 
reserves and the maneuver of enemy artillery at ranges exceeding 
capabilities of formation reconnaissance equipment. In necessary 
instances artillery could obtain aerial and space reconnaissance 
data in planning fires. 
  With respect to Iraq, it had only a limited number of SP 
armored guns (French-made GCT and Austrian-made GHN-45 155-mm 
howitzers, 2C3 152-mm howitzers and 2C1 122-mm howitzers). True, 
this shortcoming was made up to a certain extent by the 
considerable number of highly mobile MLRS--the BM-21 system and 
the Brazilian Astros system. Mounted on the base of a vehicle 
with good cross-country capability, Astros was equipped with 
transport-launch containers loaded with projectiles of three 
calibers--127, 180 and 300 mm--with a maximum range of fire of 
30, 35 and 60 km respectively. It is noteworthy that the system 
surpassed the U.S. MLRS in a number of its characteristics. A 
large number of Iraqi artillery pieces were towed. Approximately 
half consisted of M-46 130-mm guns, but South African 155-mm 
guns were also present (G-5 howitzers, which western military 
specialists placed among the best models of towed systems in the 
world). The predominance of artillery pieces superior to the 
majority of similar MNF systems in range of fire (Table 1) 
permitted the Iraqis to locate firing positions at a 
considerable distance (10-20 km) from the sides' line of contact 
while retaining the capability to effectively pressure enemy 
artillery deployed near the Kuwait border. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-004C-51A>           Table 1 - Comparative Range Assessment of MNF and Iraqi Artillery Systems </FIG>





    At the same time, the great diversity of systems of calibers 
in Iraqi artillery substantially complicated its combat 
employment and logistic support. There also was a most negative 
effect from the outfitting of Iraqi artillery with obsolete 
communications equipment, the personnel's total inability to use 
it under communications jamming conditions, and the poor state 
of supply of automated command and control equipment, especially 
at echelons above the artillery battalion. Finally, the shortage 
of radar equipment and absence of aerial and space 
reconnaissance assets cannot be discounted. In the opinion of 
western military specialists, Iraqi artillerymen "proved 
incapable of looking behind the nearest sandhills." The 
conclusion from what has been said is quite obvious: as a whole, 
Iraqi artillery was seriously inferior to MNF artillery in its 
technical level. 
  Meanwhile, the Iraqi command's defensive concept gave 
artillery a deciding role in destroying tanks and motorized 
infantry. The concept of the defense envisaged drawing attackers 
onto minefields of the "Saddam Hussein line," with their 
subsequent destruction by massed, concentrated artillery fire 
from indirect firing positions. 
  Thus, a serious miscalculation was contained in the very 
sense of the defense; blindly following the chosen operating 
tactics and passively waiting for an attack by enemy ground 
troops could not, of course, bring success. 
  Let us briefly examine the conditions for mission 
accomplishment by the sides' artillery. In deploying at firing 
positions without engineer preparation within range of Iraqi 
artillery, MNF artillerymen correctly feared its return fire. 
Therefore at first they changed positions immediately after 
executing fire missions, but after seeing that as a rule there 
was no return fire, they subsequently gave up the fire-evasion 
maneuver. 
  Division counterbattery fire systems deployed near the state 
border with Kuwait and operated in a "waiting" mode. The fire of 
individual batteries against command and control facilities and 
other important targets on the "Saddam Hussein line" was used 
widely to uncover the makeup of Iraqi artillery groupings. In 
case of return fire, the counterbattery fire systems would open 
up fire for effect. 
  In raiding operations one artillery battalion most often was 
attached to battalion task forces for direct fire support and 
one or two radars and an MLRS platoon were attached for 
counterbattery activities. Their radios were in the same radio 
net and, on deploying into combat formation, supported the 
transmission of data on detected targets directly to the 
latter's fire control station. This permitted significantly 
reducing time for preparing return fire. 
  An MLRS platoon or howitzer artillery battalion usually is 
used to engage one battery. The MLRS conducted fire for effect 
with cluster projectiles with submunitions having hollow 
charge-fragmentation effect, and artillery pieces fired 
HE-fragmentation projectiles with impact or time fuze. 
  It must be said that the MNF command regarded Iraqi 
artillery 
as a serious threat to operations of its ground troops. It also 
saw it as the primary means of employing chemical weapons if the 
Iraqi leadership decided to use them, for Iraqi artillerymen 
were well trained and it was of no small importance that they 
had combat experience of eight years of war with Iran. Therefore 
artillery at positions was included among very important 
targets. It was engaged by fighter-bombers, A-6 and A-10 attack 
aircraft, AH-64 Apache combat helicopters and, in the second 
stage of Operation Desert Storm, by division counterbattery fire 
systems and ship guns, including 406-mm main battery guns of the 
battleships Wisconsin and Missouri. 
  Aviation employed precision and conventional bombs and 
combat 
helicopters employed the Hellfire ATGM. Attempts to use fuel-air 
explosive munitions, which had given a good account of 
themselves in engaging large targets, proved insufficiently 
effective in combating small targets. 
  During Operation Desert Storm MNF artillery supported the 
deployment of friendly ground troop formations in operational 
tasking areas and their redeployment in accordance with the 
concept of subsequent offensive operations, delivered fires on 
the "Saddam Hussein line," conducted counterbattery fire, 
demolished engineer works, carried out fire support to raiding 
operations of battalion task forces, used fire to cover the 
breaching of obstacles, and took part in repelling assaults by 
Iraqi troops. 
  As a rule, separate artillery battalions were used to 
perform 
those missions. Observed targets were registered by battery and 
battalion volleys. Depending on the size of targets, batteries 
conducted fire for effect at several range settings and several 
deflection settings (from one to three), expending two rounds 
per gun per setting. Engagement was accomplished by brief fire 
assaults usually not lasting longer than 10 minutes. 
  As the beginning of Operation Desert Sword approached, the 
intensity of MNF artillery combat operations increased. Its 
deployment was completed three days before the beginning of the 
offensive. The most powerful fire assault was at this time. It 
was conducted against Iraqi troop positions on 21 February 1991, 
and over 10 battalions from the UK 1st Armored Division and a 
number of U.S. units were used for it. In addition to 12 MLRS 
launchers, 72 artillery pieces took part in the fire assault 
from the British side. In the assessment of a command 
representative, the weight of their volley was 50 tonnes, i.e., 
quadruple that of the 882 guns of the UK 9th Army in the Battle 
of El Alamein in 1942. 
  Individual ATACMS missile system launchers were used to 
engage targets in the depth (SAM and artillery positions, 
command and control facilities, logistic installations and so 
on). According to press data, a number of important targets were 
engaged by single missile strikes. 
  Shifting to Iraqi artillery operations, it should be noted 
that they were complicated also by the special desert 
conditions, where each position and each vehicle was clearly 
observed from the air with the contrast of daylight 
illumination. The movement of military columns was visible at 
great distances due to long dust plumes, which hampered the 
daytime maneuver of artillery under conditions of absolute 
superiority of MNF aviation. And at night it became easy prey to 
aircraft employing bombs with thermal-imaging and infrared 
homing heads. 
  Despite the significant extent of maskirovka [lit. 
"camouflage," however, includes "concealment" and "deception"] 
measures performed by Iraqi artillerymen, they did not always 
achieve the goal inasmuch as firing positions were easily 
detected from the air from the characteristic disposition of 
guns in a line. One firing position was the absolute copy of 
another, which facilitated their detection by aerial 
reconnaissance. 
  As the epicenter of Operation Desert Storm shifted to troop 
groupings disposed at the southern border of Kuwait, strikes 
against Iraqi artillery became more and more fierce, as attested 
by data of Table 2. While 55 Iraqi guns were knocked out during 
the first two weeks of the operation, 385 were knocked out right 
away during the last week. In other words, the intensity of 
Iraqi artillery losses had increased almost 14 times by the end 
of Operation Desert Storm. 


Table 2 - Dynamics of Iraqi Artillery Losses by Days of Operation Desert Storm 


Days of Operation                      14th          30th          38th 

Amount of losses    Artillery pieces   55            1100          1485 


As a percentage     2                  35            48 


  It is also evident from the table that by the beginning of 
the ground troop offensive the MNF succeeded in knocking out 
around half of Iraqi artillery through the comprehensive effect 
of all weapons. This permitted bringing the artillery force 
ratio to 2:1 in favor of the MNF. And the ratio turned out to be 
even greater considering the fact that in attempting to preserve 
the latest equipment the Iraqi command decided to withdraw G-5 
and GHN-45 155-mm howitzers, the Astros MLRS and a number of 
other artillery pieces to the rear ahead of time. 
  Significant losses also were inflicted on Iraqi artillery 
personnel. Survivors ended up considerably demoralized. 
  Employment of artillery in the battle of Ras Khafji (on the 
night of 28/29 January 1991), when several tank and motorized 
infantry battalions of the 1st and 5th motorized infantry 
divisions assaulted subunit positions of the U.S. 1st Marine 
Division and Saudi troops, was the most indicative with respect 
to the Iraqis. The assault was supported by the fire of several 
artillery battalions and salvos of Astros MLRS. This probably 
was the only case of mass employment of Iraqi artillery. Taking 
advantage of the effect of surprise and the powerful fire 
support, the attackers took Ras Khafji but were unable to 
exploit the success achieved without reliable air cover and soon 
were forced to withdraw to the initial positions. 
  It also should be noted that Iraqi artillery fire, whose 
strong psychological effect is beyond doubt, was not very 
effective since it was conducted not against specific targets, 
but against presumed disposition areas of MNF subunits. 
  Thus, MNF artillery was able to perform fire missions 
without 
fear of enemy artillery return fire. The technical capabilities 
for realizing the concept of "fire strike/firing position 
change" ("shoot and scoot") were not called for. 
  Operation Desert Sword began with a powerful fire assault 
against Iraqi troop positions, reserves, command and control 
facilities and weapons; and with electronic jamming. The length 
of fire preparation of the assault in regiments [and] of 
formation operations varied. It did not exceed 20 minutes in 
Marine divisions, but it was 45 minutes in the UK 4th Armored 
Brigade. MNF artillery managed to inflict telling personnel and 
equipment losses on the enemy during fire preparation of the 
assault. 
  During the offensive MNF artillery supported the friendly 
troop assault, supported the landing and operations of 
helicopter and amphibious assault forces, supported operations 
of attackers in taking Al Kuwait, took part in repelling 
counterattacks by Iraqi troops and in consolidating captured 
lines and objectives, and continued counterbattery activities. 
In operating as part of an enveloping grouping, organic and 
attached artillery (from three to seven artillery battalions) of 
formations moved at the head of main body columns in readiness 
for immediate deployment. An assault on Republican Guard 
positions near Basra was preceded by a 30-minute fire 
preparation, which facilitated MNF formations' capture of 
crossings over the Euphrates River. 
  When individual Iraqi batteries and battalions attempted to 
prevent the attackers' advance, they immediately came under 
bombardment. Thus, one MLRS subunit and two 203.2-mm howitzer 
battalions destroyed 97 out of 100 artillery pieces of one Iraqi 
division with their fire, i.e., the fire of artillery and 
especially of MLRS proved more effective than air strikes. 
  Persian Gulf war experience confirmed that under present 
conditions the role of aerial reconnaissance operating in 
support of the delivery of fires is growing considerably. The 
possibility of using the J-STARS system for planning MNF field 
artillery fire substantially increased the latter's capabilities 
of engaging highly mobile, unobserved targets, and this 
contributed to no small extent to its success in opposing Iraqi 
artillery. 
  Division counterbattery fire systems demonstrated high 
combat 
capabilities dictated by the deep integration of reconnaissance 
assets, command and control assets and weapons. Centralized use 
of radars of the Firefinder radar system, which permitted 
creating a radar field with overlapping of two to four times in 
areas of enemy artillery firing positions and maintaining it for 
the entire battle and which provided reliable detection of enemy 
firing batteries, proved justified. Automated processing and 
transmission of data to weapon fire control stations using the 
TACFIRE automated command and control system (which has a high 
degree of automation of fire preparation processes and short 
volley duration) permitted substantially reducing systems' 
reaction time to the detection of targets. 
  Iraqi artillery could win the fight with counterbattery fire 
systems only with adequate technical outfitting, which it did 
not have. That which fully justified itself in the Iran-Iraq 
military conflict proved unsuitable in the "war of new 
technologies." Slow-moving subunits of towed pieces became easy 
prey for modern automated systems, which managed to open fire 
for effect before the shells of detected enemy batteries burst. 
  The effectiveness of counterbattery fire systems was 
determined to a considerable extent by good performance 
characteristics of the MLRS. Along with a high degree of 
automation, its important feature was canister loading. The use 
of transport-launch canisters noticeably accelerated the loading 
of launchers and permitted considerably increasing their 
readiness for performing fire missions in the course of battle. 
  According to prisoners' statements, surprise MLRS salvos 
were 
a very effective means of engaging Iraqi towed artillery. This 
was determined both by the high destructive capacity of hollow 
charge-fragmentation submunitions and by the stunning effect of 
salvo fire on the personnel's minds. With the missile warhead 
filled with 644 (according to other data 688) submunitions, the 
salvo of one combat vehicle numbered around 8,000 submunitions 
dispersing in a 400x400 m area. According to assessments of 
foreign military specialists, achieving a similar effect 
required using 22 M109 155-mm howitzers for firing with an 
expenditure of four rounds per piece. It was no accident that 
MLRS salvos were nicknamed "steel rain" by the Iraqis. Over 
10,000 missiles with cluster warheads and 30 ATACMS missiles 
were expended during combat operations. 
  Along with this, it is impossible not to recognize that the 
Iraqi artillery command underestimated the importance of 
counterbattery fire in our time, had nothing with which to 
counter U.S. tactics of conducting it, and did not promptly make 
necessary changes in methods by which artillery performed fire 
missions. It also must be recognized that successful operations 
of artillery are impossible today without reliable air cover. 
Persian Gulf war experience shows that its absence is fraught 
with serious human and material losses. 
  Outfitting troops with NAVSTAR space navigation system 
ground 
equipment considerably simplified topogeodetic support to their 
combat operations on terrain that was poor in contour points 
(reference points). Its wide use accelerated the determination 
of firing position coordinates during deployment in unsurveyed 
areas. It played a role of no less importance in the course of 
the multikilometer desert march by MNF troops in executing an 
enveloping maneuver. 
  At the same time, the experience of employing the above 
equipment in artillery combat operations showed that its 
potential capabilities can be realized to the full extent if 
each battery and the battalion staff are outfitted with two sets 
of navigation system receivers at the very least. This will 
enable determining not only rectangular coordinates and the 
absolute height of artillery combat formation elements, but also 
grid azimuths of directions of orientation, which will ensure 
high autonomy of each artillery subunit, including when 
realizing the "shoot and scoot" concept. 
  The M190A2 SP and M198 towed 155-mm howitzers earned a 
differing evaluation. The former showed high mobility in the 
course of marches of many hours over rugged and often difficult 
terrain. Like other equipment on a wheeled base, the latter 
demanded special attention. In addition to tire pressure 
adjustment, ensuring its successful movement in the desert 
required advance distribution of repair, overhaul and rebuilding 
assets along movement routes, especially in places where it was 
possible to expect a delay in column movement. 
  Nevertheless, U.S. military specialists admit that both the 
M190A2 and M110A2 SP howitzers are considerably obsolete. The 
former in particular was substantially inferior to the French 
GCT 155-mm howitzer. This piece, mounted on the AMK-30 tank 
chassis and with a barrel 40 calibers long, is capable of firing 
rocket-assisted projectiles to ranges up to 30 km. It also 
considerably surpasses the U.S. howitzer in rate of fire (thanks 
to an automatic loader) and in the number of rounds in battle 
stowage. 
  In the process of the howitzer's projected modernization, it 
is planned to install the M2284 long-barrel gun, which will 
permit increasing the maximum range of fire from 23.5 km to 30 
km. It is also proposed to outfit the gun with a more advanced 
fire control system, a more advanced night sight, new 
communications equipment and a system for protection against 
mass destruction weapons. 
  It is characteristic that as a result of the brevity of fire 
preparation of the assault on axes of operations of some MNF 
formations, Operation Desert Sword essentially began immediately 
with fire support. This evidently is explained by the fact that 
it was preceded by the lengthy period of the "electronic-fire" 
phase of the war, during which considerable damage was done to 
the enemy, command and control was disorganized, and his will to 
resist was undermined. 
  In the course of fire support, the system of its 
coordination 
adopted in the U.S. Army gave a positive account of itself on 
the whole. Fire support coordination elements at all command and 
control echelons down to and including the infantry (tank) 
company, artillery forward observers in platoons, and high 
personnel training ensured close coordination of field artillery 
with combined arms units and subunits in the course of the 
offensive and timely requests for fire against newly detected 
targets; and the presence of forward air controllers and shore 
parties for spotting ship gunfire in the fire support 
coordination teams of motorized infantry (tank) companies 
ensured precise coordination of the fire of field artillery and 
ship guns with air strikes. 
  In the course of combat operations, however, the 
insufficient 
technical outfitting of artillery forward observers and 
imperfection of the accepted scheme for passing their fire 
support requests were revealed. The increased range of effective 
fire of combined arms subunit weapons, above all tanks and ATGM 
systems, considerably increased their capabilities to destroy 
observed targets, i.e., targets which previously were engaged 
based on requests of artillery forward observers. The forward 
observers themselves, moving in combat formations of motorized 
infantry platoons, were not always able to be disposed in places 
where a special threat to combined arms subunits was possible. 
At the same time the number and importance of weapons taking 
part in close combat but unobserved from ground observation 
posts (mortars, FOG ATGM systems and so on) sharply increased. 
Consequently, in the course of combat operations a contradiction 
was revealed between the increased number of targets determining 
the course and outcome of close combat and the capabilities of 
artillery forward observers to detect them. 
  In the opinion of foreign military specialists, its solution 
should be sought on the one hand along paths of improving the 
outfitting of artillery forward observers, particularly the 
creation of devices with variable observation height and 
disposed on telescopic masts (or underground platforms), and on 
the other hand in a change in the procedure for passing fire 
support requests from artillery forward observers. In a number 
of cases in the course of Operation Desert Sword the requests 
did not go directly to weapon fire control stations or to 
company fire support coordination teams as required by U.S. 
Field Manual FM 6-20, but to fire support coordination officers 
in battalions. This enabled determining the priority of requests 
based on interests not of the platoon (company), but of the 
battalion as a whole, and using the entire arsenal of weapons at 
its commander's disposal for fulfilling them. The latter 
evidently is the main thing inasmuch as it reflects a general 
trend manifested during the Persian Gulf war--using the maximum 
number of weapons for performing fire delivery missions that 
arise suddenly. This permits not only performing unscheduled 
missions in the shortest time and thereby freeing up weapons 
faster for performing other fire missions, but also making 
maximum use of the psychological effect of concentrated fire on 
personnel. 
  It also is impossible to ignore the conclusion drawn by 
western specialists based on a generalization of artillery 
combat employment in the Persian Gulf. Despite the fact that 
formation commanders had a considerable amount of general 
support assets, which if necessary were capable of having a 
decisive effect on the course of combat operations, commanders 
of subunits participating in the battle must have a sufficient 
amount of artillery for direct fire support. Only this gives 
them necessary tactical mobility and independence in performing 
combat missions. 
  Consequently, the serious results achieved by MNF aviation 
during Operation Desert Storm did not shake the joint command's 
views on the role and importance of artillery in performing 
missions of direct fire support to troop combat operations. 
  Meanwhile, as shown by experience of MNF artillery combat 
operations, there was nothing new that appeared in their 
organization and conduct which would have differed substantially 
from known provisions of field manuals of countries which 
participated in the Persian Gulf war. Moreover, in the course of 
combat operations numerous deviations were allowed from demands 
of field manuals: firing subunits conducted fire from one and 
the same firing positions for a long time, artillery pieces at 
positions were disposed in the open and not camouflaged, field 
artillery radars as a rule operated in a continuous mode and so 
on. With an adequate enemy reaction, such violations could have 
led to serious personnel and equipment losses. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 8 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61071 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Chinese ICBM Noted </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0162B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 12 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0162B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "China Is Creating a New ICBM"] </F>
  [Text] The Japanese newspaper SANKEI SHIMBUN states that 
China is producing its first intercontinental ballistic missile 
capable of reaching the USA. According to American military 
sources, its Washington correspondent reported today that last 
year's testing of a nuclear devise in the PRC was directly 
linked to this work being carried out by Chinese missile 
experts, which has allegedly entered the final stage. 
  The experts believe that the Soviet-built SS-24 and SS-25 
strategic missiles, which have an operating range on the order 
10,000 kilometers, served as the prototype for a new type of 
delivery vehicle. It is their opinion that the nuclear device 
exploded at the Chinese test range near Lob Nor lake in October 
1993 was nothing other than one of the warheads which make up 
the missile's multiple reentry vehicle, and that it had a force 
on the order of 90 kilotons. The newspaper reports that the 
product of the Chinese missile experts may be capable of 
carrying 8-10 nuclear warheads aimed at various targets. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61072 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> SECURITY SERVICES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Creation of Russian Federation Border Service </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0158A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 31 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0158A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Russian Federation Border Troops Press Bureau: </F>
"A Federal Border Service Has Been Created"] 
  [Text] As a result of the abolition of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Security and to ensure continuity of 
leadership of the Russian Border Troops, Russian Federation 
President Boris Yeltsin signed the Edict "On the Creation of the 
Federal Border Service -- Russian Federation Border Troops High 
Command" on 30 December 1993. 
  In accordance with this edict, the new structure that is 
functioning in the capacity of a federal ministry is directly 
subordinate to the Russian Federation President and Government. 
  Colonel-General Andrey Ivanovich Nikolayev has been 
appointed 
Russian Federation Border Troops Commander-in-Chief. 
  The President's Edict will permit the Russian Border Troops 
to carry out their missions for the protection of the State 
Border with maximum effectiveness under current conditions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61073 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> SECURITY SERVICES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commander-in-Chief of Border Guards Nikolayev Interviewed </TI></H3>
<H4>   Role of Border Guards in CIS Context Viewed </H4>
<F P=102> PM1401113594 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 13 Jan 94 First 
Edition p 5 </F>

<F P=103> PM1401113594 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel General Andrey Nikolayev, commander </F>
in chief of Border Guards, by Boris Vinogradov; place, date not 
given: "Russians in Green Service Caps Will Guard Their 
Neighbors. Cost To Be Split Equally" -- first three paragraphs 
are introduction] 
  [Text] Russia is the only state which considers it 
necessary to guard its boundaries hundreds and thousands of 
kilometers away from its own territory. Russian border guards 
are guarding the borders of other independent states as well as 
their own. 
  The actual length of Russia's land borders is 22,125 km. 
Bearing in mind that Russia keeps border detachments in some CIS 
countries, it turns out that Russia has been obliged to ensure 
the security of another 3,600 km of border. Meanwhile, the 
number of border guards remains unchanged. 
  Under an edict issued by Boris Yeltsin, the border guards 
have been transferred from the disbanded Ministry of Security to 
a special federal service, which basically means an increase in 
status to ministry level. Colonel General Andrey Nikolayev, 
commander in chief of the Border Guards, who replaced Vladimir 
Shlyakhtin in this post after the tragic events on the 
Tajik-Afghan border in summer 1993, answers IZVESTIYA's 
questions: 
  [Vinogradov] Why send our border guards to serve at other 
states' border posts, states that are friendly but nevertheless 
independent? After all, they do not send us their soldiers to 
guard Russia's borders with China or Finland, for example. 
  [Nikolayev] Russia and the former USSR republics are 
separated by a state border. But Commonwealth states cannot 
successfully resolve their border problems separately from one 
another. This is at odds with our economic interests and our 
national security. Russian units and subunits are guarding the 
borders of Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan on 
contractual terms. Appropriate documents have also been signed 
with Turkmenistan. The service performed by our border guards 
in these places is also to Russia's benefit. Belarus, Ukraine, 
Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan are guarding their own borders. But 
Russia believes it has a duty to help them build border 
installations and train cadres. 
  [Vinogradov] The Russian Federation border currently runs 
along the symbolic line which used to separate the RSFSR from 
the other union republics. In most cases it is not monitored. 
Uninvited guests can easily enter Russia via CIS countries. 
What might the consequences of this situation be? 
  [Nikolayev] Could we erect an unbroken fence, for example, 
along our border with Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Ukraine...? But 
the sections of the new border which, if left open, could pose a 
serious threat to Russia's security have been or are being 
covered by our troops. Take our border with the Baltic 
countries: Last year we prevented the export from Russia of many 
thousands of tonnes of nonferrous and rare earth metals, fuel 
and lubricants, and other contraband worth over 2 billion rubles. 
  [Vinogradov] A memorandum has been signed in Ashgabat on 
cooperation in guarding the external borders of the CIS in 
Central Asia. On what terms will this cooperation be 
implemented? Who will pay and how much? What will be the 
status of the Russian border guards? 
  [Nikolayev] The memorandum states that guarding external 
borders is a joint concern and should be implemented through 
joint efforts. The terms for cooperation are being defined by 
multilateral and bilateral agreements which should be concluded 
within three months. The status of Russian servicemen 
performing their military service in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and 
Turkmenistan has already been defined. Our border guards' 
rights have been protected in legal terms. 
  With regard to costs, we favor sharing the burden. Our 
approach is to split costs down the middle. The sum involved is 
immeasurably less than the amount it would cost the taxpayer to 
equip a new border with CIS states. 
  [Vinogradov] An insuperable craving for economic integration 
coexists with a desire for full independence. Will it not be 
the case that in 5-10 years' time Russia will be guarding 
neighboring states' borders while leaving its own unsupervised? 
  [Nikolayev] The ties that bind us are too numerous to permit 
us to fence ourselves off from each other with barbed wire. I 
am sure that none of these countries will object to open borders 
with their Commonwealth neighbors if nothing threatens their 
sovereignty and national security. Among other things, this is 
ensured by reliable guarding of the Commonwealth's external 
borders. Surely Russia, by guarding its border with Finland, is 
thereby ensuring Ukrainian national security? On the other 
hand, are not Ukrainian border guards protecting Russia's 
economic interests by foiling smugglers' activities on the 
Ukrainian-Polish border? 
  [Vinogradov] Azerbaijan recently insisted that Russian 
border guards should quit its territory. They left Nakhichevan, 
for example, leaving behind all their property and weapons. 
Geydar Aliyev is now complaining that 170 km of the border with 
Iran has been seized by Armenian troops, and all the indications 
are that he will not object to inviting the Russians back. What 
response will Russia make to this invitation? 
  [Nikolayev] Russian Federation border troops do not intend 
to intervene in the internal affairs of any state or assume the 
role of peacekeeper in regional conflicts. I visited Azerbaijan 
at the beginning of January. We need to find mutually 
acceptable forms of cooperation for guarding Azerbaijan's border 
with Iran and Turkey. The units withdrawn from Azerbaijan are 
now guarding the border on Russia's new boundaries. They are 
monitoring international routes in the Makhachkala region, 
keeping the shores of the Caspian under observation, and 
guarding the high mountainous section of the border with Georgia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61074 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> SECURITY SERVICES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commander-in-Chief of Border Guards Nikolayev Interviewed </TI></H3>
<H4>   Minister Nikolayev on Border Forces Reform </H4>
<F P=102> PM2001163594 Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA in Russian 20 Jan 94 
First Edition pp 1-2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2001163594 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel General Andrey Ivanovich Nikolayev, </F>
newly appointed minister and commander-in-chief of the Border 
Forces, by military observer Vladimir Klimov; date, place not 
given: "We Are All Border Workers" -- first paragraph is 
ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA introduction] 
  [Text] The new minister, Colonel General Andrey Ivanovich 
Nikolayev, commander in chief of the Border Forces, is a 
third-generation soldier who has passed through all the trials 
of service to achieve the big stars on his shoulder boards: 
From being a platoon commander, he proceeded up each rung of 
the command ladder. Industriousness and efficiency, knowledge 
and an unconventional way of thinking -- resulting in not just 
reprimands, but early promotions and two academies behind him. 
He accepted as his destiny the move from the General Staff to 
the Border Forces. A new stage in the border guards' life began 
with the presidential Edict on the Creation of the Federal 
Border Service (FBS). We offer for your attention an interview 
by our military observer Vladimir Klimov with Col. Gen. A. 
Nikolayev. 
<H5>  How To Equip the Border </H5>
  [Klimov] What is fundamentally new in the Border Forces' 
tasks and functions? 
  [Nikolayev] First and foremost the separation of the Border 
Forces into an independent structure with the rights of a 
ministry can in no way be regarded as a repetition of the story 
of the creation of the Committee for the Protection of State 
Borders, which left the KGB. The amorphousness of that 
committee and the fact that is belonged to everyone and no one 
predetermined its failure. The subordination of the present FBS 
is clear -- it is subordinate to the president and the 
government. The Border Forces are henceforth implementers of 
Russian foreign policy. In subordinating a number of structures 
in the state security system to himself and introducing the post 
of assistant for national security, the Russian Federation 
president is creating a well-integrated system for safeguarding 
the country's security in which each of the structures has a 
clearly prescribed role. 
  This not only raises the border forces' status. We are 
moving away, as it were, from the notion that we are purely 
military people. From an international viewpoint this is a very 
important fact. The edict encapsulates the reality dictated by 
life. The future may possibly be different. But today we have 
a clear awareNess of our role and place in the country's 
security system. 
  [Klimov] Protecting the border remains one of the main 
tasks. Andrey Ivanovich, when will the Russian border be 
equipped, and how? 
  [Nikolayev] Our border with Kazakhstan, for example, 
stretches for 7,500 km. If we started equipping it we would 
spend so much money that we would be left not only without 
jackets on our backs, but even without pants. Why should the 
Russian people be deprived of shoes if we are in a position to 
safeguard their interests in not only political but purely 
practical border-protection terms on Turkmenistan's border with 
Iran, Kyrgyzstan's border with China, and so forth. It is along 
these borders that Russia's strategic interests lie. 
Politicians in the Commonwealth countries have now come close 
to understanding that the border of their state is the border of 
the entire CIS. That is the first point. The second is that it 
is economically much more advantageous to protect the former 
Union borders: Russia's share of the cost is 50-50 in terms of 
money and 50-50 in terms of personnel. 
  It is a different matter if some people in the CIS disagree 
with our approach or if Russia is not confident about the 
safeguarding of its security or the protection of its interests. 
This would spark a counter-reaction, and Russia would get 
involved in equipping the border. At the first stage this would 
mean border checks, at the second stage -- searches, at the 
third stage -- protection involving troops. But we will not be 
the initiators of this kind of approach. Our states' peoples 
wish to move freely around the territory of the Commonwealth. 
If we build fences on our national borders there can be no 
question of such free movement. 
  [Klimov] Andrey Ivanovich, you were in Azerbaijan recently. 
You cannot talk about a reliably protected border there. 
Mojahedin are coming in via Iran and participating in the 
fighting against Armenian troops. Arms and drugs come from 
there, and our border with Azerbaijan is transparent. How is 
this? 
  [Nikolayev] We have a special approach to the Caucasus 
region. Border protection in the Caucasus is built along two 
boundaries. The first, the former USSR border, coincides with 
CIS countries' borders with Iran and Turkey. The second is the 
line of the Russian state border. It is necessary to guard this 
border and at the same time to create a protection system and 
build housing for officers, barracks, parks, stables, and so 
forth. 
  By no means everything has gone smoothly. A particularly 
difficult situation developed in the Dagestan sector and on the 
territory of Karachayevo-Cherkessia on the border with Georgia. 
The arrival of border troop units here met with active 
resistance both from certain local residents and also from power 
structures. Around 150 criminal acts have been committed against 
North Caucasus District border troops on Georgian territory 
alone; three border troopers have been killed and over 20 
wounded. 
  However I can say that on the second border we are ensuring 
the protection of our interests. Let me cite a few figures. 
Around 700 intruders were detained and dozens of weapons and 
large quantities of ammunition were confiscated on Russia's 
border with Georgia and Azerbaijan last year. 
  In Azerbaijan we said: If Russia can be confident that its 
interests are reliably protected on the Azerbaijan-Iran and 
Azerbaijan-Turkey borders, protection of Russia's borders in the 
Dagestan sector can be carried out jointly -- that is, the 
border posts are all in one line and Russians and Azerbaijanis 
serve together. This represents a special degree of trust. 
  We have the same approach with Belarus and Ukraine. They and 
Russia are three independent states, but they cannot be divided 
by a border. Therefore we are proposing to Ukraine, for 
example: We will operate in the Bryansk sector and Ukrainian 
border troopers will operate in the Kursk sector. This is a 
fundamentally new attitude stemming from Russian foreign policy. 
<H5>  Border Post Lessons </H5>
  [Klimov] Your first trip as head of the Border Forces, 
Andrey Ivanovich, was to the Tajik-Afghan border. What lessons 
have been learned from the fighting in that distant border post 
sector, where Russian border troopers have died? 
  [Nikolayev] The Tajik-Afghan border is an acid test of the 
Commonwealth's solidity. The fighting on the border marked the 
beginning of efforts by the Commonwealth countries to safeguard 
their security. This is most probably the main lesson of that 
fighting in the border post sector. 
  On the other hand, there is no problem with the border 
there. 
What we have there is bandits who break through the border. 
There is no military solution to the problems of the 
Tajik-Afghan border. Its stability can be safeguarded only by 
peaceful means involving negotiations between the country's 
leadership and the opposition. 
  [Klimov] In times past the border sometimes "spawned" new 
weapons. The Damanskiy island incident was followed by the 
appearance of automatic grenade launchers among the troops. Is 
the experience of hostilities in border post sectors still 
heeded now? 
  [Nikolayev] The Border Forces have specific weapons, of 
course. Our aircraft and helicopters differ from military ones 
and carry the identifier "P." There is also other combat 
equipment intended solely for border protection. Nevertheless 
the Border Forces need to change. Not to copy the Armed Forces 
but to be powerful and capable enough, when required, to fulfill 
a task involving the use of weapons. 
  What we should be is the subject of great research. The next 
two or maybe three years will be a period of transition for the 
creation of virtually new Russian border forces. As we 
determine the Border Forces' role and place in the country's 
security system we are also determining its specific operational 
methods. Combat equipment and weapons must be produced to suit 
these methods. 
<H5>  Dispensing Apartments With a Lordly Gesture </H5>
  [Klimov] Border Force officers have a difficult, nomadic 
life. What is being done for their social protection, Andrey 
Ivanovich? Have you personally helped any border trooper's 
family? 
  [Nikolayev] In terms of "personally" I'm not going to 
answer. If I say "no," you won't believe me. If I say "yes," 
you'll demand that I give their name. But why is this 
necessary? I get many letters asking for help with an apartment. 
This is probably best quiet, but let me say that never in my 
life have I personally tried to solve a housing issue. Although 
many people have approached me both now and when I was serving 
with the troops. The conversation would start: "Comrade 
commander, you are such a good commander to us...." And it 
would end: "Give me an apartment." 
  I know some commanders have responded to blandishments and 
indulged their charges: "There, have one." But I am neither 
lord nor king. I cannot hand out apartments with a lordly 
gesture. We have a system that provides people with housing. 
If I see someone who is really in need, I can instruct the 
housing commission to examine the matter. It is up to the 
commission what it decides. Any other approach would destroy the 
entire system of social justice. 
  We have 7,000 people without accommodation at the moment. We 
will be building 2,200 apartments this year. In the next 
three-four years we can provide housing for all. But only with 
specific support from state structures. It is time it was 
recognized that the servicemen should not have to face a housing 
problem. 
  I believe too that incentives in service must only be given 
for specific deeds. And what do we do: Holiday coming up -- 
draw up a detail. An unhealthy approach that has corrupted us 
all. If a man does something good, say to him: "Well done." 
If you cannot decorate him, give him 10,000 rubles [R]. Not 
much money, but a concrete incentive that works. Write about 
the soldier in the district newspaper and he will remember it 
the rest of his life. Because all of us -- from commander in 
chief to common soldier -- are normal people with normal 
reactions. 
  I once asked our officers: What do you get more of in a 
border unit -- military or family ethos? I must say that many 
found it an incredible question. In the Army the barracks are 
the model, the motorized rifle company in which everything is by 
the book. But you have a quite different, family atmosphere in 
a border unit. The commander is not figuratively, but literally 
like a father. He is always there for his charges to see and 
can instill in them only what he himself exemplifies. 
  And they do not want to rely on directives from Moscow. We 
have around 1,000 border units and no two are the same. How can 
someone in Moscow decide how one is to work with people in a 
border unit. All that is rubbish. We have made a mess of this 
work so far. Many people are scratching their heads now and 
wondering how to rectify matters. 
  We have lost our points of reference, they say. Hang on, did 
a state leader ever say that patriotism was obsolete? Or that 
internationalism does not exist? We are not building ethnic 
Russian border forces, we are building the Border Forces of 
Russia. If I were in charge, I would abolish paragraph five on 
nationality [in Russian passports] today. What is needed is 
citizenship, not nationality. We are the people of Russia, the 
most multinational people. We will destroy Russia if we do not 
raise internationalists. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61075 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma004___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   26 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> SECURITY SERVICES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commander-in-Chief of Border Guards Nikolayev Interviewed </TI></H3>
<H4>   Col-Gen Nikolayev Meets with Aliyev </H4>
<F P=102> PM2101180194 Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 21 Jan 94 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2101180194 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Rybakov article under the "Geopolitics" rubric: </F>
"Andrey Nikolayev, Commander-in-Chief of Russia's Border Troops: 
We Strengthen Economic Union by Opening Up Internal Borders"] 
  [Text] Azerbaijan is still opposed to the use of Russian 
Border Troops to protect the external borders of the CIS. But 
the meeting between Colonel-General Andrey Nikolayev, 
Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Border Troops, and Azerbaijani 
President Geydar Aliyev introduced some new nuances. 
  When we were driving into Kaspiysk I read the following 
slogan in a prominent place: "The friendship of the USSR's 
peoples is inviolable!" And nearby, in a tourist center, the 
41st Makhachkala Border Detachment was settling in. 
  That's a sign of the times, G. Gereykhanov, the detachment's 
Acting Deputy Commander, sighed; we used to guard the border 
with Turkey and Iran in Nakhichevan, but the local branch of the 
Azerbaijani People's Front [APF] made our job intolerable. 
Bloodshed was just a step away -- officers were barely able to 
restrain their subordinates in the face of the constant threats 
and insults directed at them. In October 1992 the detachment 
was withdrawn from there, but without hardware and ammunition, 
with just its uniforms. The APF members did not even allow the 
Border Troops to conduct a military ritual, that is, leave with 
a color platoon. "Take your flag and beat it," they were told. 
Now the border with Turkey and Iran is virtually open here. 
  Nor did other regions treat the Russian Border Troops with 
excessive consideration during the sovereignty bandwagon. Last 
February a border detachment was withdrawn from Lenkoran to 
Vladikavkaz. Again with just their passports, you know. But 
let us go back to the Makhachkala detachment. There is no 
heating at the tourist center and it is damp. The local 
population gave the strangers in green a cool reception. That 
may be why there is still less than half the full complement of 
officers here. The Lezgins' "Sadval" national-patriotic 
movement is campaigning to set up an independent state of 
Lezgistan in the area of Dagestan where they have compact 
communities and opposes the erection of internal borders between 
Russia and Azerbaijan. Recently a sentry was killed right at 
his post in the detachment. I saw from conversations with the 
Border Troops that they are impatient for a final political 
decision from Moscow on whether there should or should not be an 
internal border. However, that decision cannot be adopted 
without the sides' mutual participation. 
  Col-Gen Andrey Nikolayev, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian 
Federation Border Troops, met with Azerbaijani President Geydar 
Aliyev in Baku on 3 January. He spoke briefly about the results 
of the meeting: 
  "For two years there had been no serious contacts with the 
Azerbaijani leadership on border issues. Today the other side 
takes an understanding view of these issues and agrees to 
consider our proposals. I think that we will reach 
agreement...." 
  And agreement is needed. The external border with Turkey and 
Iran is guarded worse now that it was under the Russian Border 
Troops owing to poor technical equipment and inadequate cadre 
training. The upshot is that drugs, contraband, and weapons are 
being smuggled across the border. If you consider that Turks 
can enter this friendly republic without visas and then "pass" 
into Russia, there is no option but to put up a barrier. But 
who benefits from this? 
  Today Azerbaijani leader Geydar Aliyev enjoys great prestige 
among his own people. He is above all respected for his 
commonsense approach to politics. The state's entry into the 
CIS is evidence of that. 
  He is also respected for his firmness. When mass desertion 
from the army began, it is said that the shooting of two 
deserters and a promise not to punish those who voluntarily 
returned to their troop units made people see sense -- lines 
formed up outside military commissariats to return to bases. 
  People in the Republic are now saying that the two power 
ministries -- the Defense Ministry and the National Security 
Committee [NSC] -- are opposing Aliyev. It is said that the 
President is not that young and it is time to share power. And 
a struggle for power has developed between the Defense Ministry 
and the NSC. Their methods include the following: They claim 
that the introduction of Russian Border troops on the external 
border marks a threat to Azerbaijan's sovereignty. The card of 
the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict is also played. 
  During conversations with ordinary Baku people I often heard 
the following: There is nothing for us to share with Armenia, 
no one wants the the war (the surprising thing is that 
Azerbaijan and Armenia have not declared war on one another and 
are members of the CIS and the Commonwealth collective security 
system), it is those people who are fighting for power who want 
it. And one young Azerbaijani officer accompanying us admitted 
frankly that he is still meeting an Armenian girl living in Baku. 
  What about the Russian Border Troops? Should they be in 
Azerbaijan? If so, what kind of presence should it be? Only 
time will provide the answers to these questions. But in our 
view, the role of the Border Troops has sharply increased since 
the Russian Ministry of Security was abolished. Along with 
guarding borders, the Russian Federal Border Service has begun 
implementing Russia's foreign policy in nearby foreign countries. 
  "Russia is the place to which integration forces are looking 
today," Andrey Nikolayev told your ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI 
correspondent. 
  "You might say that the turning point was last September, 
when the CIS economic union was formed. We want to strengthen 
the Commonwealth of Independent States -- states with equal 
rights and duties. By closing external borders, the Border 
troops are helping to open up internal borders for the 
development of economic ties within the CIS." 
  Asked what the Russian Federation will spend on guarding 
external CIS borders, A. Nikolayev replied: 
  "In Armenia, Georgia, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan Russian 
Border Troops operate in conjunction with these states' subunits 
under the combined command of the Russian Federation Border 
Troops. Expenditure is split equally. In Turkmenistan 
expenditure will depend on the extent to which Russian Border 
Troops participate in guarding the border. We will cooperate 
with Kazakhstan and Belarus in providing troops with technical 
equipment and training cadres. The Russian Federation's national 
interests will not be infringed. We espouse the idea that there 
are CIS external borders which must be guarded together. 
  "We must move on from a system of mutual rights to a system 
of mutual obligations." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61076 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> POLITICAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Semipalatinsk Test Site Chief Removed From Duties </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM2812103193 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 28 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 1 </F>

<F P=103> PM2812103193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [ITAR-TASS report: "Chief of Semipalatinsk Nuclear Test </F>
Site Removed from Duties"] 
  [Text] The reports by some Russian mass media that Yuriy 
Konovalenko, chief of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site, has 
been arrested, are not quite accurate. 
  It has been learned from reliable sources that he is still 
free but has been removed from his duties. Yuriy Konovalenko is 
suspected of having committed a series of crimes while in 
office, the most serious among them being the embezzlement and 
resale of especially valuable equipment and nonferrous metals. 
If these charges are confirmed by the official investigation 
now under way, the case of the former chief of the Semipalatinsk 
test site will more than likely be taken over by Russian law 
enforcement organs, since Konovalenko is a Russian citizen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61077 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Vologda Democrats' Poor Showing Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944F0232A Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 21 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 4 </F>

<F P=103> 944F0232A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Viktor Filippov: "State-Minded Speeches, Personal </F>
Goals. The Vologda Governor's Policy in the Election Mirror"] 
  [Text] Vologda--In Vologda Oblast Zhirinovskiy's 
party obtained almost twice as many votes as Russia's Choice. 
Not without the help of local personnel. 
  Nikolay Podgornov, chief of the administration of Vologda 
Oblast, has several biographies for various of life's 
contingencies. In the January issue of the journal VASH VYBOR 
(Yaroslavl) he informed the readers that he had acquired a 
higher legal education and that at the age of 24 he had been 
appointed director of a sovkhoz. On 16 November I learned with 
surprise from the Vologda Oblast newspaper KRASNYY SEVER that 
Nikolay Podgornov had an "incomplete higher education" and that 
he had become a sovkhoz director at the age of 27. And 10 days 
later, on 27 November, I read in the list of candidates for 
deputy of the Federation Council carried by ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA: 
"Nikolay Mikhaylovich Podgornov, born 1949, higher education...." 
  A brief journalistic investigation showed that these facts 
of 
the biography of the Vologda governor are inaccurate, to put it 
mildly. In August 1977 Nikolay Podgornov was dismissed from the 
third year of the All-Union Legal Correspondence Institute for 
unsatisfactory progress. So such education cannot even be called 
"incomplete higher." Other "touch-ups" were discovered in the 
governor's biography also. He maintains that he graduated from 
the Velikoustyugskiy River School (a technical school) and 
worked as a ship's mechanic at the port of Kotlas. But he in 
fact graduated from a vocational-technical school with the 
specialty of "ship's engineer-helmsman-mechanic" and worked as a 
motor mechanic-seaman of the oil station. 
  People's Deputy Nikolay Podgornov was in the Supreme Soviet 
of Russia, incidentally, a member of the Supreme Economic 
Council of the republic. 
<H5>  Look Who Has Come </H5>
  Nikolay Podgornov was appointed chief of the administration 
of the oblast in October 1991 and had prior to this been the 
director of the Avrora sovkhoz. Those who recommended him to the 
president maintain that they had been won over by Podgornov's 
reform activity: He had converted his farm into a 
collective-share enterprise. Simply put, he divided the 
sovkhoz's assets among the employees. Podgornov took for himself 
five hectares of land, a share of the property, and a large 
brick house with all the conveniences, with a private parcel of 
land of 40 hundredths. 
  In March 1992 the tax inspectorate of Gryazovetskiy Rayon 
discovered that the chief of the administration of the oblast 
was continuing to receive his director's pay in Avrora. The 
scandal was hushed up. 
<H5>  Your Money Will Be Ours </H5>
  In May the Vologda leaders proclaimed their oblast some 
"state-territorial formation with the constitutional status of 
republic." The federal authorities, politicians, and the press 
perceived this event with irony--as they had until the recent 
elections perceived Zhirinovskiy. But they should not have. 
  Real power belongs to whoever puts together the budget. 
Having become firmly established in the governor's chair, 
Nikolay Podgornov issued a directive by which he essentially 
brought under his jurisdiction the Vologda Oblast Tax 
Inspectorate. But Veniamin Alekseyev, chief of the inspectorate, 
declined to comply with the directive as being contrary to 
federal laws. The angered governor began to complain regularly 
to the leaders of the state tax office of the Russian Federation 
about Alekseyev, accusing him of antireform activity and 
demanding his immediate dismissal. The latest such report was 
dispatched to Moscow immediately following the elections. 
Judging by this, it is the chief of the tax inspectorate who is 
to blame for the victory of Zhirinovskiy's party in the Vologda 
region. 
  While the capital is investigating these complaints, Nikolay 
Podgornov is doggedly attacking the federal budget. In October 
he suspended on oblast territory the telegram of the Russian 
Ministry of Finance and the Russian Tax Office of 19 August "On 
Transfer of Small-Scale Enterprises to Value-Added Tax Treasury 
Payments Quarterly." 
  Vologda Oblast has not yet refused, like Chechnya, to pay 
federal taxes. But it is chronically short in its payments to 
the Russian Treasury of a large sum. 
<H5>  On a Good Footing With the President </H5>
  Every Monday oblast television shows a half-hour interview 
with Nikolay Podgornov. And whatever the journalist's questions 
he is answering, he unfailingly, at least once, emphasizes his 
closeness to the president of Russia. 
  Business is in a bad way: A reduction of 10,000 employees 
has 
begun at the Cherepovets foundry, and another industrial 
giant--the Vologda Optical-Mechanical Plant--will as of 27 
December come to a halt "for the Christmas holidays." One-third 
of the former sovkhozes and kolkhozes is in fact bankrupt. The 
price of food in Vologda and Cherepovets is the highest in the 
Northwest. But very pleasant happenings have been taking place, 
on the other hand, in the private life of the governor himself. 
On the eve of the elections he had a house-warming party in a 
three-story private residence built at budget expense especially 
for the ruling elite. He himself has taken one 
145.5-square-meter apartment. Another--of 160.4 square 
meters--he has given Nikolay Golovin, chief of the oblast 
militia. In a third he has installed Vologda mayor Boris 
Upadyshev. And a fourth remains empty as yet. 
  Vologda is a small city. And there is nothing surprising in 
Podgornov's having lost the elections for Vologda itself. Yet 
the remote areas, where the governor is known only from his 
television homilies, still elected him to the Federation Council. 
<H5>  Down With the Democrats! </H5>
  A day before the elections, on Friday, the oblast newspaper 
KRASNYY SEVER, a cofounder of which is the administration of the 
oblast, carried an article by the writer Vasiliy Belov, whose 
authority in the Vologda region is simply enormous. Vasiliy 
Ivanovich called on his fellow countrymen under no circumstances 
to vote for Russia's Choice or other democrats. 
  This publication was hardly fortuitous. 
  In the summer Nikolay Podgornov had allocated to KRASNYY 
SEVER from the budget a very large amount of money for the daily 
publication of this newspaper, "to increase the influence of the 
printed word on the readers, explain and propagandize the 
economic policy of the administration of the oblast...," and 
since that time KRASNYY SEVER has criticized only the federal 
authorities, hereby emphasizing, as it were, that the policy of 
the administration of the oblast and the policy of the Russian 
Government are not one and the same thing. At the start of the 
election campaign, the official newspaper of the Vologda 
governor carried an appeal of the communists for a boycott of 
the elections. And concluded it with a call by Vasiliy Belov for 
all democrats to be given a thrashing. Judging by the results of 
the elections, the people of Vologda did not let the words of 
this fellow countryman go unheeded. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61078 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Activities of Perm Liberal Democrats Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944F0238A Moscow PRAVDA in Russian 23 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 944F0238A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow PRAVDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Lebedinskiy: "The Governor May Be </F>
Called Sasha"] 
  [Text] Perm--Marking the "party slates," the inhabitants of 
Perm Oblast cast the majority of votes for Russia's Choice. But 
after the rowdy televised political show, they suddenly went one 
after the other to register as liberal democrats. Whereas in a 
southern city of the oblast--Osa--for example, prior to the 
elections there were just two members of the LDPR [Liberal 
Democratic Party of Russia], this is now a full-fledged primary 
organization that has demanded the authorities allocate premises 
and has begun active propaganda in the local mass media. 
  But, naturally, all cities of the oblast have outdone Perm. 
A 
news conference of the liberal democrats announced the 
appointment by the LDPR Supreme Council as "shadow governor" of 
the Kama region of A. Chulkov, chairman of the party's Perm 
branch, who presented a program declaration which plunged 
journalists into confusion. The province of Perm will, according 
to him, be restored in its prerevolution borders. The people of 
Perm are called upon here to play more than last fiddle in the 
liberal democratic faction of the State Duma also. He sees as 
the paramount task in this organ of power the resignation of the 
government. And "criminal proceedings will be instituted" 
against some present ministers, what is more. 
  The new criminal legislation drawn up by the party expands 
considerably the list of articles providing for the death 
penalty. In the fight against organized crime it is planned to 
impose a state of emergency with a curfew in particular regions. 
Caucasians, Gypsies, and... Chinese will be deported from that 
same Kama region. Not just Perm Oblast, but all of Russia will 
in the future be restored in their prerevolution borders. In 
addition, "an outlet to the Mediterranean will be secured by the 
diplomatic path." 
  The members of the LDPR attending the news conference heard 
the new governor and unexpected leader with certain misgivings: 
garrulous, but too young. 
  Truly, A. Chulkov can as yet be called simply Sasha, he is 
19 
years old and, he says, he is a second-year student at the Perm 
Medical Institute, but is already the author of monographs (!) 
on surgery and medical biology. He hurled himself into politics 
following the president's September edicts on the breakup of the 
Supreme Soviet. But this is what he says. After the news 
conference, A. Odegov, a coordinator of the LDPR in the Kama 
region, contacted Moscow and ascertained that Sasha was not on 
the party slate. He was not a student of the Medical Institute 
either. 
  While the leaders of the LDPR are still confusedly 
ascertaining the personality of their new leader, he has already 
taken a stroll down the corridors of power and has paid an 
official visit to the oblast newspaper ZVEZDA, where he 
announced that his supporters would try to obtain 25-30 of the 
40 seats in the oblast's legislative assembly. "And we will 
surely win!" he said with great confidence here. 
  After this, A. Zaynullin, another coordinator of the LDPR, 
urgently left for Moscow for a consultation with Vladimir 
Volfovich. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61079 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Luzhkov Interview on Peculiarities of Moscow's Privatization </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944F0235A Moscow MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA in Russian 14 Dec 93 pp 
1-2 </F>

<F P=103> 944F0235A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [INTERFAX interview with Mayor of Moscow Yuriy Luzhkov, </F>
special for MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA; place and date not given: 
"Russia Will Not Forgive Our Selling Off Moscow for Peanuts"] 
  [Text] As instructed by President B. Yeltsin, the 
government of Moscow has prepared a draft edict on special 
features of privatization in the capital of Russia. Moscow's 
Mayor, Yuriy Luzhkov, emphasizes the main point of the edict: 
The size of the charter capital and appraisal of entities' 
property on the territory of Moscow are subject to approval by 
the government of Moscow in accordance with the methodology 
developed by it. 
  [INTERFAX] May we say that the preparation of the draft 
edict 
marks the end of the protracted argument about the ways to 
privatize Moscow's property? 
  [Luzhkov] The discussion on the principles of implementing 
privatization in Russia and in its capital city of Moscow is not 
yet over. Speaking about the capital, our opponents accuse us of 
allegedly attempting to secure special status for Moscow in 
matters of privatization. Actually, this is not so. 
  On the other hand, every person, even without being a 
specialist on the subject, understands that the value of capital 
assets in the capital infrastructure should be different than 
the value of, for instance, an identical enterprise in another 
Russian city. A uniform measure cannot be applied to 
privatization rules in this respect. 
  The most important point is that we disagree with the 
purpose 
of privatization and the methodology attached to this process by 
Mr. Chubays et al. 
  [INTERFAX] Have you tried to convince A. Chubays and his 
entourage, attract their attention to your conclusions, in order 
to work out a common point of view? 
  [Luzhkov] Unfortunately, A. Chubays does not even make an 
effort to grasp the substance of our objections. He simply 
replies: We will continue to conduct privatization the same way 
as before. 
  Since discussion is not working out, I would like to explain 
publicly where, precisely, we disagree on substance. First, a 
purpose of privatization is to transfer property that the state 
can no longer manage. I do not see any ways of realizing this 
goal in A. Chubays' privatization program. 
  What that program does is to reduce to a minimum the number 
of enterprises in which the state retains ownership; everything 
else is subject to privatization. I think that a real proprietor 
would try in the current inflationary conditions to hold back on 
selling off real estate. It is easy to sell off everything you 
have accumulated over time. 
  The second purpose of privatization, in my firm opinion, is 
to transfer an enterprises to an owner who will use it better 
and more effectively. We do not see this purpose being realized 
at all. It is no secret that both across the country and in 
Moscow major plants are being sold and purchased as a mere piece 
of real estate. People bet on the fact that the voucher, which 
at this point has low value, once invested in the purchase of, 
for instance, a plant, will eventually produce a 1,000-fold 
return on investment... 
  [INTERFAX] Could you give a specific example? 
  [Luzhkov] Certainly. Take the ZIL [imeni Lenina Plant]. The 
controlling share of this giant's stock has been purchased for 
4.5 billion rubles [R]. This is the price of the vouchers 
purchased earlier on the cheap. As a result, this miserly amount 
bought not only the right to manage, but also the right to 
ownership of a huge ongoing enterprise. 
  Let us look, however, what is R4.5 billion--it is $4.5 
million. There is $300 million worth of imported equipment alone 
installed at the ZIL. And then twice as much worth of 
domestic-made equipment, buildings, and communications. 
  Even all these details are not enough to appraise the full 
value of the enterprise. The ZIL is a functioning system, which 
manufactures a competitive, needed product that is selling well. 
This is far from a mere piece of real estate. 
  Neither can I disregard this aspect: This technological 
structure employs people who know their business, know how to 
develop and improve it. It is a living, promising system, and it 
must be appraised using completely different measures and 
parameters. When we speak of this, we assume that as a final 
result a privatized enterprise must acquire a good master, who 
will manage it better than the old one. Where is the logic in 
the ZIL example? 
  The third purpose of privatization is to earn money on a 
sale 
of an enterprise. The state is poor right now. There is no money 
for social programs, the military, the conversion. There are 
many other pressing needs as well. At the same time, the country 
essentially sits on a fortune in property. Of course, some of it 
should be sold. In our estimation, if this selling is done 
sensibly, Russia may get R200 trillion-R250 trillion, that is, 
several times as much as its annual budget. 
  What are we going to get from privatization "according to 
Chubays"? His program says it straight: R1.5 trillion. What is 
there to gain from such privatization? Political points, 
perhaps? But this aspect is short-lived. Then we will sober up. 
  I am also very concerned with respect to this point: When 
such complex processes are under way in the economy as we have 
now, we have to protect the state from having its property 
bought up by foreign companies and firms. We have to try to 
leave as many key enterprises as possible in the sphere of 
operations of domestic capital, not let foreigners buy up 
Russian riches for peanuts, taking advantage of the situation. I 
do not like high-sounding words, but I think that the meaning of 
what I have said is clear to everyone. 
  In the estimation of one serious economic expert, today's 
privatization prices are such that the entire of Russia may be 
purchased for $60 billion. In 1994 our privatization policy will 
open the gates for foreign capital to start buying up Russia. 
Such foreign company may buy more than one plant such as the ZIL 
at voucher auctions. I am convinced that we have to think more 
about domestic capital.... 
  [INTERFAX] But this is protectionism. 
  [Luzhkov] And what is wrong with that? Let the young Russian 
capital get its legitimate privileges in the course of 
privatization. 
  As to protectionism, as long as the capital's residents vest 
their trust in me, it is simply my responsibility to express the 
summary will of the Muscovites. 
  [INTERFAX] What specifically are your proposals? What is 
their substance? 
  [Luzhkov] First. To change substantially the methodology of 
appraising the value of everything that is to be privatized. To 
make it so that the enterprise's price reflects its real value. 
We have many examples where the initial appraisal of a plant has 
turned out to be 200 times lower than its real worth. This only 
surfaces at auction sales. As of 1 July 1992 the price of 
enterprises was frozen, including those in Moscow, and that was 
it. There has not been any revision since. Money has devalued, 
and many enterprises can now been had almost for free. 
  Second. A territory's right in the privatization process. So 
far it does not have any rights whatsoever. All we can regulate, 
for instance, is the transfer into private ownership of dental 
offices, sea ports of local significance, and cemeteries. Such 
is the legal space of local bodies of power, including those in 
Moscow. 
  I, for instance, cannot make a decision to put on hold 
privatization of hotels in the capital. If the collective 
decided to privatize the water supply or sewer system, for 
instance, they could do this through the courts in a matter of 
one or two months. 
  We know that hotels and farmers markets in Moscow are highly 
criminalized structures. So why should we hand state property 
over to the mafia on the cheap? Who gave the current privatizers 
such a right? Let the city itself dispose of its property! 
  But Mr. Chubays says: "No, we, and only we, will conduct 
privatization--the State Committee for the Administration of 
State Property" [GKI]. 
  During a personal encounter two or three weeks ago, I asked 
Chubays: "Anatoliy Borisovich, why is it that you mistrust us so 
much? What is it that I have done, for instance, for you to 
harbor suspicions?" 
  I want to remind you that I was there when the cooperative 
movement was just taking off in Moscow; we developed it further 
than anywhere else. And there were quite a few specialists at 
the time who tried to do away with this undertaking. 
  The first commodity exchange also was in Moscow. It was G. 
Popov and I who launched it. This was the beginning of a market 
infrastructure, after all! The government of Moscow facilitated 
in every way possible the development of a commercial banking 
infrastructure. Trading houses and chambers of commerce were 
also our initiative.... 
  But Chubays just keeps repeating the same thing: "You will 
halt, slow down privatization...." 
  We say: We need all peoples' privatization. The vouchers 
should have been personalized from the very beginning, so they 
could be traced. Then there would not be machinations involving 
them. But they did not make the voucher this way. I do not know 
whose ill intent this was. And instead of people's privatization 
we got a concentration of voucher capital and the use of the 
latter for buying up property appraised literally at pennies. 
  [INTERFAX] In your opinion, where will all this lead? 
  [Luzhkov] If Moscow loses its property now, it will be for 
good. The euphoria will pass; what will remain is deep and 
bitter disappointment. So what do we do then--begin reshuffling 
once again? 
  I gathered directors of defense enterprises for a meeting 
recently. What did we talk about most? They are concerned with 
the course of privatization. They also say that a different 
approach is needed. 
  [INTERFAX] What did the president tell you on this subject? 
  [Luzhkov] He is much better than Chubays; he understood our 
concerns. He believes, for instance, that Moscow should decide 
on its own what to privatize and what not. He said the same to 
Chubays, straight. I deliberately asked B. Yeltsin to have a 
meeting with both of us together. 
  The president asked my opponent why, for instance, Moscow 
enterprises have been appraised so low. The head of state 
pointed out that Moscow is an infrastructure that is completely 
different from any other city in Russia. And why are the rights 
of local authorities so limited in privatization process in 
general, inquired the president. 
  [INTERFAX] So what conclusion did B. Yeltsin reach on the 
basis of this conversation? 
  [Luzhkov] The president said that he is willing to sign an 
edict that will give Moscow the right to establish special 
privatization terms. He also told us that he is willing to grant 
the 10-12 largest enterprises in Russia special conditions in 
this process. 
  [INTERFAX] Of what class are these enterprises? 
  [Luzhkov] Well, for instance, the GAZ [Gorkiy Auto Works]. 
There are such enterprises in Moscow, too.... On the basis of 
this conversation, the government of Moscow has prepared a draft 
presidential edict. 
  By the way, I do not understand in general why we, while 
constantly talking about demonopolization, have created such a 
monster--a supermonopoly such as the GKI. The USSR had 140 
sectoral ministries, and they still could not cope with this 
enormous task. And now it turns out that Chubays on his own can 
manage this property colossus. 
  In my opinion, the GKI should only develop a methodology for 
the process, and implementation should be left to the 
territories. Chubays and his agencies in essence have become a 
supermonopoly. Is this not dangerous? Dictatorial methods of 
privatization will not result in any good. What is happening 
with respect to property right now is a 1917 Revolution, except 
in reverse. Have we not had enough social experiments and 
cataclysms? 
  By the way, Moscow city property had been appraised at R100 
billion at the old prices. How much then should it be worth now? 
As a minimum, let us multiply the price by a factor of 1,000. 
Chubays, however, wants to privatize the entire of Russia for 
R1.5 trillion. It is laughable, although this is a laughter 
through tears. And this property is not owned by some 
bureaucrats--it belongs to Muscovites. It is our responsibility 
to bring it to them. 
  Speaking again about domestic capital and its role in 
purchasing Moscow property. It needs help. Let them buy it on 
credit--not everyone has been able to save the necessary means. 
  And what will such a buyer do, for instance, having acquired 
such a plant? He will try to set the production in such a way 
that would allow him to pay off the debt as quickly as possible. 
There is no other opinion about it. This is the road to 
increasing the volume of production. An outsider, however, 
having acquired the controlling share of stock, will look at 
this same plant as a piece of real estate. What option is better 
for all of us, Russians and Muscovites? That is why there is 
such a boom around privatization, which often leads to physical 
violence. 
  And finally, on the national and city budget. Moscow is 
literally scraping up subsidies for pensioners, the disabled, 
and so on these days. We could proceed with these measures on a 
much greater scale had we received everything due us from the 
sale of city property. 
  [INTERFAX] By the way, what is your position on the idea of 
transferring the mayoralty building (formerly COMECON 
headquarters) to the State Duma? 
  [Luzhkov] First, we are disciplined people and comply with 
the president's decision. The Moscow government does not merely 
treat the decision of the head of state with respect--it 
supports the president, and sincerely is on his side. 
  Keeping all this in mind, however, we reported to B. Yeltsin 
that this building is not capable of accommodating the State 
Duma. This is an objective economic evaluation. The former 
COMECON building has 489 offices. Of them, 157 have reception 
rooms. There are very few conference halls that could be used 
for commissions' work and joint sessions. 
  It is not as though we were holding onto this property. The 
point is quite different. Moscow is the capital of Russia. When 
it comes to providing accommodations for the bodies of 
authority, it is the responsibility of the city government to do 
it. I personally think that the building of the former Academy 
of Social Sciences will provide better accommodations for the 
State Duma. 
  [INTERFAX] Why? 
  [Luzhkov] There are only about 100 people studying there 
now. 
In the entire huge, prestigious complex. The rest of the space 
is rented out. As to the contention that this building is too 
far from the center of Moscow, this may even be for the better. 
Lawmakers should work in peace, away from the pressure of the 
street, away from the everyday hustle and bustle. By the way, 
there are many examples of this in the world. As for me 
personally, I want normal relations with the deputies of 
Russia's new parliament. 
  By the way, if the issue comes to the point where it is 
decided that Moscow should build a new building for the State 
Duma, we will; we will find a good place for it. There is such 
an option. We will build it quickly. We have the resources and 
abilities to do this. And we will build a building for the 
Federation Council, taking into account the specificity of this 
chamber. 
  [INTERFAX] Yuriy Mikhaylovich, you yourself have mentioned 
that the fight for property caused by the existing methodology 
of privatization often shifts into the mode of physical violence 
against the competitors. Here is another murder--the chairman of 
the Rosselkhozbank's board of directors is dead.... 
  [Luzhkov] The situation is very difficult. Murder of top 
officials of commercial structures is becoming a regular 
occurrence. Unfortunately, not only in Moscow. 
  What happened to Nikolay Likhachev makes us think again 
about 
the situation in the capital. We need major measures aimed at 
normalization of the situation in the city as a whole. I also 
think that tougher measures need to be taken to provide 
individual protection for persons of interest to criminal 
structures. 
  Maintenance of law and order is first and foremost a task 
for 
the state. But the territories should not just stand on the 
sidelines. I do not want to promise much to Muscovites. Words 
are just words. 
  I would like to draw their attention to just one fact: Over 
the past year, Moscow has allocated more money to beef up law 
enforcement organs than the total they have received since the 
beginning of the century. This includes everything: 
communications, housing, personnel pay, transportation. I think 
we will soon have the right to demand of the Moscow militia more 
effective work in maintaining law and order in the city. Even 
what has already been implemented in Moscow in this respect is 
producing results, though. We will do everything possible to 
develop this trend further. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61080 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Discussion of Russian Federation Foreign Policy Precepts </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0100A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 19 Nov 93 pp 
1, 4 </F>

<F P=103> 944Q0100A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yakov Plyays: "Hallmarks of Russia and Its </F>
Foreign Policy: Toward an Understanding of the Argument 
Surrounding the Russian Federation's New View of the World"] 
  [Text] Heated arguments surrounding Russia's new foreign 
policy concept have been unabating for almost two years now. The 
most diverse political forces both at the helm of the country 
and struggling for it are having their say on what this policy 
should constitute. In the aftermath of programs pertaining to 
the long-suffering domestic policy, concepts of the 
modernization of foreign policy activity have appeared, as a 
rule. 
<H5>  Current Foreign Policy Concepts </H5>
  The first attempt to formulate a foreign policy concept for 
the new Russia was made shortly after the disintegration of the 
USSR and the declaration of the sovereignty of the Russian 
Federation. The speech of President of Russia Boris Yeltsin at a 
special session of the UN Security Council on 31 January 1992, 
as also Boris Yeltsin's special message to Butrus-Ghali, 
secretary general of the United Nations, contained not only an 
exposition of the main directions of Russian policy in the 
sphere of arms reduction and disarmament but also ideas 
pertaining to Russia's role in maintaining and strengthening 
international peace and security, within the confines of the 
former USSR included. 
  The speeches of the Russian president at the UN Security 
Council and two weeks later in the parliament of Russia 
prompted, it seems to me, other leaders of the country also to 
speak out on foreign policy topics. I am talking primarily about 
Ruslan Khasbulatov, former chairman of the Supreme Soviet of 
Russia. At the end of February 1992 even he spoke at the Moscow 
State International Relations Institute at the "Transformed 
Russia in a New World" workshop. Although much of what the 
speaker of parliament had to say either concurred with or 
reiterated what had been maintained by other leading figures of 
the country, his speech contained particular points also. They 
consist primarily of an accentuation of the directions of 
Russia's foreign policy which were in the past traditional for 
the diplomacy of the USSR. These are the direction of Central 
and Southeast Europe or the countries that were formerly a part 
of CEMA and the Warsaw Pact and also the direction of the Arab 
East, Asia, and Africa. 
  In all other respects the foreign policy concept proposed by 
Ruslan Khasbulatov was highly consonant with the Foreign 
Ministry concept. For both proceeded from the foreign policy of 
Russia's renunciation of ideologized bipolarity, that is, the 
customary division of the world into two opposite systems, of 
predominant reliance on military power as a means of foreign 
policy, and also of the a priori perception of any initiative of 
ours as epoch-making. 
  In March 1992 in the Supreme Soviet of the Russian 
Federation, as also the Foreign Ministry, politicians saw as a 
central task of foreign policy furtherance of the "formation in 
Russia of an efficient, dynamically developing economy" and also 
"help to national industry and national enterprise as a whole in 
reaching foreign markets" (see ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA of 6 March 
1992). 
  In Khasbulatov's opinion, this aspect was traditionally a 
weak point in the foreign policy of the USSR inasmuch as it did 
not outline precisely a system of foreign policy priorities. 
"Priority in our relations with the outside world," the Russian 
speaker said, "should be given to states, the development of 
relations with which enables us to optimally create, in 
accordance with long-term social and state interests, real state 
power." 
  A comparison of this proposition with that which is 
championed in the present Government of Russia and the Foreign 
Ministry shows that there is no fundamental difference between 
the first and the second. No one has questioned the importance 
of relations with the United States, the European Community 
countries, Japan, China, India, Turkey, and a whole number of 
other states. But granted all the importance of this direction 
of foreign policy, the former speaker said, it should not 
"screen from us relations with states on the territory of the 
former USSR and the states of Central and Southeast Europe." 
Geopolitical considerations and economic interests demand also 
close ties to the Arab East, Asia, and Africa. 
  Under the conditions of the radical lowering of the 
thresholds of the USSR-United States military confrontation, 
relations with the members of the CIS and also with the 
countries bordering the CIS are becoming preferable and more of 
a priority. This approach coincides to a certain extent with the 
approach of Andrey Kozyrev and his arguments concerning 
horizontal directions of Russia's foreign policy. 
  The above-mentioned and other directions of the foreign 
policy of the new Russia were reflected in the document "Basic 
Propositions of the Concept of Foreign Policy of the Russian 
Federation" approved by order of the president of the country in 
the last 10 days of April 1993. A group of highly qualified 
experts from the Foreign Ministry, the Ministry of Foreign 
Economic Relations, the Defense Ministry, the Foreign 
Intelligence Service, the Russian Federation Security Council 
staff, and two committees of the Supreme Soviet--International 
Affairs and Foreign Economic Relations and also Defense and 
Security--took part in the preparation of this document. This 
work was led by Yuriy Skokov. The document went through the 
entire procedure of confirmation within the framework of the new 
mechanism of the preparation and adoption of foreign policy 
decisions. It was approved by the Interdepartmental Foreign 
Policy Commission and confirmed at a meeting of the Security 
Council of the Russian Federation. For this reason, obviously, 
of all those that have been made public it is the most developed 
and full. 
  The concept set forth in the document is oriented, as V. 
Chernov, deputy chief of the Office of Strategic Security of the 
Security Council of the Russian Federation, maintained, not 
toward ideological precepts or the predilections of this force 
or the other in Russian society but toward the "vitally 
important interests of the country and its citizens." These 
interests include "support for the processes of formation of the 
statehood of the Russian Federation and defense of its 
territorial integrity; creation of the conditions ensuring the 
stability and irreversibility of political and economic reforms; 
Russia's active and full participation in the building of a new 
system of international relations, in which it is ensured a 
worthy place." 
  I shall not further trouble the reader with a paraphrase of 
the content of Chernov's article, especially since it was 
published in NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA of 29 April of this year. 
  In my view, neither the concept of the Security Council of 
the Russian Federation nor the others dealt with above take 
account to a sufficient extent of the salient features of Russia 
and its people, which jeopardizes its effective realization. It 
is this and also the fact that questions of foreign policy are 
essentially being skirted by the election blocs that prompted me 
to share my thoughts on the relationship between the particular 
features of Russia and the character of its people and the 
country's foreign policy. The success of our foreign policy 
actions will depend on the strength of this relationship to a 
considerable extent, it seems to me. And the other way about: A 
disregard for and insufficient consideration of the particular 
features of the country would ultimately bring about negative 
consequences. This is true, in my view, in regard to both the 
domestic and foreign policy of any country. 
<H3>  Salient Features of Russia and Its People as Factors of 
Influence on Foreign Policy </H3>
  There are a good many factors of influence on Russia's 
foreign policy. Both internal and external. 
  Among the internal, in my view, pertain not only the 
political and economic systems, the break with and change of 
which are occurring so dramatically in Russia at this time, but 
also the particular features of the country and the character of 
the people. It is on the latter that I would like to dwell in 
more detail, accentuating attention merely on what most 
influences the foreign policy sphere. 
  I would point among the salient features primarily to 
Russia's unique geopolitical and geocultural position. It is 
truly unique from various viewpoints. Particularly from the 
viewpoint of the link of Europe and Asia. Merely by virtue of 
this fact Russia could successfully perform the role of 
connecting link or linking bridge between the developed West and 
the rapidly developing (already no less developed than the 
Western countries in some respects) East. 
  An insufficiently developed Russia is preventing this bridge 
being dependable and firm, which is currently extraordinarily 
important for both the West and the East. 
  Besides the fact that Russia lags behind the foremost 
countries economically, it represents for the countries on both 
sides of the bridge, as a nuclear power with an unstable 
political situation, a great danger. Even greater, perhaps, 
than, formerly, the USSR. These two main factors, that is, the 
economic and military factors, are prompting both West and East 
to pull Russia into their orbit. Not in the distant future but 
today. For the sooner this happens, the more quickly these 
countries' economies will gain not only additional oxygen but, 
essentially, their second wind. Not to mention the fact that 
this would sharply enhance the security of both, with a 
considerable reduction in spending on military purposes, which 
also is of considerable importance for the economies of these 
countries. 
  This has to be seen. Not to derive benefits from this for 
itself would be an unforgivable mistake for Russia. I would note 
in this connection that a most important task of Russian 
diplomacy currently is to facilitate the erection of the bridge 
between West and East. This on the one hand. On the other, 
Russia should contribute to a lowering of the level of military 
confrontation on both sides of the bridge. I would add to what I 
have said that Russia's position on the world map prompts it 
also to be an arbiter and mediator in the solution of many 
problems arising in the Eurasian space. 
  Standing next door to and at the same time detached from 
this 
question is that of Russia's relations with the CIS countries. 
There is not at this time on the Eurasian land mass, it seems to 
me, a more urgent or more large-scale problem than the 
establishment of good-neighbor relations within the CIS 
countries. This task confronts Russia first and foremost. Unless 
friendly relations take shape among the CIS states, its 
interests will suffer primarily, then those of Europe, Asia, and 
the world. 
  It is for this reason that in relations with CIS countries 
Russia cannot confine itself merely to being a mediator and 
arbiter but should involve itself in patronage and messianism, 
although it is extraordinarily difficult to do so in the present 
situation. But as the experience of the past two years has 
shown, even in this situation Russia has been attempting to find 
financial and other resources and forces to perform its 
preordained role. In 1992 alone Russia's financial assistance to 
the CIS countries was estimated at $17.6 billion or many 
hundreds of billions of rubles, not to mention any other 
assistance. And this given the present virtually catastrophic 
situation in Russia's economy. 
  The Russian Foreign Ministry, by all accounts, has already 
understood full well that the preservation of good relations and 
peace, within the CIS included, is less costly than war. If only 
Andrey Kozyrev's article published in NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA of 22 
September of this year attests to this. I will adduce just two 
short, but very expressive quotations from this publication 
concerning the CIS. The first: "Russia, on account of profound 
historical, political, cultural, and other relations with 
neighboring states, could not and did not have the moral right 
to remain indifferent to their requests for help in securing 
peace." And the second: "It is time to surmount both our 
'internal' slowness and the indecisiveness of the world 
community in respect to Russia's peacemaking efforts in the 
space of the former USSR. This is not a 'neoimperial' but, for 
all that, a unique geopolitical space, the only one of its kind, 
where 'no one will make peace for Russia.'" The ideas expressed 
in the Russian minister's article concerning Russia's 
peacemaking role on the territory of the CIS were developed in 
his speech at the UN General Assembly session on 27 September of 
this year in New York (see NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA of 30 September 
1993). 
  Thus the experience of recent years (recent months 
particularly) shows that Russia is having one way or another to 
return to great-power (not imperial but great-power) politics in 
relations with its immediate neighbors, although not that long 
ago it was manifestly mistakenly attempting to renounce this. As 
distinct from the immediate neighboring countries, performance 
of its messianic role in respect to distant foreign countries 
would seem to me an extremely difficult business both now and in 
the immediate future. 
  To what I have said about Russia's patronage and messianism 
in respect to the republics of the CIS I would add one stage 
direction. I personally would prefer relations within this 
Commonwealth of Independent States to be built such as they 
should be built between sovereign subjects: on the basis of 
equality and mutual advantage. But there are 
realities that have taken shape over decades and centuries and 
there are, finally, particular roles that this country or the 
other performs, and it is impossible to ignore all this. 
  The problem of the conversion of Russia into a firm bridge 
between Europe and Asia and the tantalizing prospects which 
could be afforded the developed countries in the event of the 
enlistment of the Russian giant in their economic orbit on the 
one hand, and the danger emanating from the boiling overheated 
cauldron on the territory of the CIS stuffed with nuclear and 
other weapons of mass destruction on the other, puts the 
liberal-democratic world in a very difficult position. It will, 
willy-nilly, be necessary to help us, accommodate us, agree to 
compromises.... This world will altogether have to do what it 
would never do in another situation. 
  But Russia also currently is in a no less easy [as 
published] 
(if not more difficult) position than the West. With the natural 
resources and human potential such as it has it is humiliating 
and shameful to act the part of suppliant for aid and support. 
But the main thing is not even this but the fact that it will be 
necessary to change its distinctiveness and adapt itself to the 
more developed countries. Russia is resisting this in every 
possible way and seeking ways to preserve its essence and at the 
same time to join the civilized world. It is now impossible to 
say how this struggle will end. It would seem to me that Russia 
will, for all that, have to change considerably. But it still 
has a chance to preserve its distinctiveness. 
  As far as the military-defense factor is concerned, it is 
conditioned by the fact that from century to century Russia has 
had to keep its powder dry and defend itself against 
interventionists in all directions. Avid for Russia's land, 
water, and forest resources, foreigners have forced the country 
to waste enormous funds, resources, and forces on defense. 
Whence the military-defense complex in Russians' mentality. 
Fortunately, it has not killed off in Russians' souls an 
openness to peace, sincere benevolence, and hospitality. 
Nonetheless, Russia cannot fail to reckon with this foreign 
policy complex. It is no accident that a most acute struggle is 
under way in our society around the question of disarmament, 
arms reduction, and the sale of weapons on foreign markets. 
  Speaking of the military-defense complex, it cannot be 
forgotten either that there has in recent decades been a 
fundamental change in the situation with the appearance of 
weapons of mass destruction (particularly nuclear). Wars and 
interventions have become an extraordinarily dangerous business 
not only for those against whom they are directed but for the 
aggressors also. We should have spotted this particular feature 
of the contemporary world order back in the 1950's and have 
radically restructured our views of the outside world, military 
doctrine, and so forth. Approximately three decades behind the 
times, many of us are even now still clinging to the habitual 
dogmas. Yet the main danger now threatens us from an entirely 
different direction. 
  The rapid development of the productive forces in the 
foremost countries and of their foreign economic relations is 
enabling them to expand by nonmilitary means and to achieve in 
this way to a certain extent what was previously achieved by 
war. In a sense this expansion is a boon not only to the 
expansionists but to those who are being subjected to it also 
inasmuch as it enables the latter to accustom themselves to 
progress more rapidly. But it could be a danger for them also if 
they forget their national and state interests. This should be 
remembered. By present-day Russia particularly. And we should on 
the one hand have a modern army guided by the doctrine of 
defensive sufficiency and, on the other, formulate and 
implement laws that safeguard security and national 
interests in all spheres. 
  But in defending state and national interests it should be 
remembered that, as distinct from previous years, there has been 
a pronounced growth of the need for defense of the interests of 
private individuals. Nonetheless, the defense of state interests 
proper will for a long time to come prevail over other aspects 
of Russia's foreign policy activity. 
  The said factors are, it may be considered, of a fundamental 
nature, for they have either a natural origin or such long 
historical roots that they are imprinted on the nation's genetic 
code. 
  But there are also other factors which, although lacking 
such 
long historical roots, are still quite powerful and influential, 
as their effect has been manifested in recent decades and 
persists to some extent. I refer, of course, to the effect of 
the theory and practice of the Soviet foreign policy doctrine in 
all its components (a confrontational approach and antagonism 
with the world of capitalism, proletarian internationalism and 
unity with the fraternal countries of the socialist community, 
solidarity with the peoples of the developing states fighting 
against imperialism, and so forth), which served the system of 
totalitarian socialism and which still has not yet fully 
disappeared. It would be naive to think that the former doctrine 
will disappear from diplomatic and other departments dealing 
with foreign policy without resistance. 
  Nonetheless, Soviet doctrine was officially abandoned even 
before the demolition of the USSR, and at that same time the 
search for a new paradigm began. It persists to this day, and 
the situation is further complicated by the fact that Russia has 
yet to determine its position as regards its domestic 
ideological reference points. Under the conditions of the 
extreme intellectual ferment and ideological confusion various 
political forces and individual politicians have been seeking 
their own answers to the urgent questions of internal and 
external life. 
  For this reason the subjective and, particularly, 
personality 
factor (the capacity of the president or the foreign minister to 
generate and pursue a foreign policy appropriate to the times, 
for example) is also performing a big role in the transitional 
period. 
  Finally, there is one further extraordinarily important 
factor of influence on the foreign policy of any country, Russia 
included. These are changes in the international situation and 
the behavior of partner countries, which frequently 
dictate a certain line of behavior. 
  To collate briefly what has been said about the factors of 
influence, it should be mentioned that they consist of six 
blocks: natural; historically conditioned and subdivided into 
long-term and relatively short-term; systemic or connected with 
the change of systems; factors of the transitional period; 
subjective; and international. The importance and priority of 
each of the said blocks may be argued, but their influence is 
obvious. The comprehensive simultaneous effect of these blocks 
frequently leads to complex specific foreign policy situations 
and steps. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61081 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karasin Discusses MFA Personnel Policy, Ministry Changes </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0104A Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian No 83, 25 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0104A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Grigoriy Karasin, director of the department </F>
of information and the press of the Russian Federation MFA, by 
unidentified SEGODNYA correspondent; place and date not given: 
"Grigoriy Karasin: There Is No Alternative Diplomatic Service"] 
  [Text] [SEGODNYA] The subject of personnel reshuffling in 
the MFA [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] of Russia and Russian 
embassies is not abating in the Russian press. It is difficult 
at times for the ordinary reader who is not initiated in the 
diplomatic "realm" to compose a complete picture of what is 
happening on Smolensk Square. Can you talk briefly about the 
latest appointments? 
  [Karasin] The interest of the Russian press, and indeed of 
the public as a whole, in the personnel policy of the MFA can be 
explained and is completely understandable. We are talking about 
people to whom protection of the foreign policy interests of the 
state is to be entrusted. 
  The diplomatic service has a specific character. There are 
two main criteria for selection of personnel for this 
work--devotion to the state interests of Russia and the 
professional ability to defend them and resolve the tasks set by 
the leadership of the country. 
  The specific character of the MFA does not permit 
sluggishness; it is a living, lively organism that is 
permanently searching. Together with mandatory specialization 
according to regions, problems, and languages, diplomats of a 
good level develop a universality in themselves. This makes it 
possible to use them in many sectors of the diplomatic service. 
Experience has shown that if a diplomat sits in one chair 
perpetually and is occupied with some single problem, this means 
stagnation, which is not beneficial to him or to the resolution 
of problems. Work in the central apparatus in Moscow alternates 
with long and short assignments abroad. This is the kind of 
rotation of personnel along the horizontal and vertical that 
refreshes professional perception and promotes new approaches. 
Therefore, when we talk about the appointment of deputy 
ministers, or the managers of individual sectors as ambassadors, 
this is by no means a reason for sensations. Rather, vice versa, 
this is an affirmation of the established practice, which 
justifies itself under the new conditions. 
  I would like to emphasize one sensitive point associated 
with 
the appointment of ambassadors. The fact is that after the 
confirmation of one or another candidate, the leadership of the 
state to which an ambassador is being sent must give its 
official concurrence in his appointment--an agrement. In a word, 
until an agrement is issued, it is not possible to talk about 
the fact that an ambassador has been appointed. 
  And one more thing. No one is making a secret of the 
appointments of new ambassadors under current conditions, and as 
soon as the fact has been accomplished, the information becomes 
public property. The most reliable source of such information 
are the official channels of the MFA, and they must be believed. 
  [SEGODNYA] Many readers are interested in the mechanism for 
appointing Russian ambassadors for work abroad. First of all, 
how is the selection of candidates made? At the same time, which 
is given more attention--professionalism, loyalty? Do any 
normative documents exist that regulate the activity of 
ambassadors and define their rights and duties? 
  [Karasin] An ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of 
the Russian Federation is an outstanding figure in many 
respects. He represents not the MFA but the state as a whole, 
and it is precisely on him that the image of Russia abroad 
depends. Moreover, the ambassador is the director of the 
diplomatic collective and, indeed, of the Russian colony as a 
whole. For this, you will agree, it is necessary to possess high 
business and personal qualities. Naturally, we will add to this 
a high professional standard and competence in area studies and 
international affairs. 
  Ambassadors are not born. It is the cherished aim of any 
diplomat to become an ambassador, for the sake of which he works 
for decades, and sometimes his entire life. Incidentally, by far 
not everyone achieves this aim. This makes the post even more 
honorable and crucial. 
  It should be noted that in our country, as in other 
countries, not only regular diplomats become ambassadors but 
also statesmen, scientists, and journalists. In their practical 
work, these ambassadors rely on professional diplomatic 
employees. 
  As far as I know, the normative acts that regulate the 
activity of the diplomatic service, including that of 
ambassadors as well, have been developed. However, they have not 
been approved yet, inasmuch as the former Supreme Soviet did not 
adopt the law on state service. Thus, the problem has remained 
unresolved. 
  [SEGODNYA] The opinion exists that the reform of the 
diplomatic service did not disappear completely for the MFA. As 
a result of the reorganization, old established structures were 
disrupted, but new and more capable ones have still not been 
created. How much does this correspond to reality? 
  [Karasin] I will not begin to conceal the fact that the 
reorganization that was conducted two years ago was not painless 
for us. It affected people's destinies. But such a reform was 
the result of the fundamental internal political changes that 
occurred in the country and the necessity to give Russia a new 
look in the international arena. In this sense, it was justified. 
  A nucleus of experienced and promising diplomats remained 
with us. They, I am confident, will be able to withstand all 
possible kinds of temptations on the side. Today, we are 
practically going through the same material difficulties as 
scientists, doctors, teachers, and other workers in the 
budgetary sphere, but we like our work, and we do not intend to 
leave it. 
  Nothing stays put in the world, everything evolves. This is 
also the way the situation stands in diplomacy. Therefore, 
organizational modifications will be continued. This is 
indicated by the meeting of the MFA collective on 12 November at 
which a decision was adopted on the further activation of work 
with CIS countries and the introduction of appropriate changes 
in the structure of individual subunits. This, however, does not 
envision any kinds of reductions. 
  [SEGODNYA] Does the appearance of numerous parties and 
movements on the domestic political landscape have an affect on 
the foreign policy of Russia? What will be the effect of the 
existence of various points of view on pressing international 
questions on the activity of Russian foreign missions? 
  [Karasin] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Russian 
embassies abroad were and will be general state institutions. 
Under conditions of political pluralism, we are interested in 
constructive interaction with all branches of authority, and all 
sensible political forces and parties. One of the most important 
tasks of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is elucidating the 
essence of our positions on all international problems in order 
that our foreign policy be understandable and accepted by 
millions of Russians. 
  And one more thing. By virtue of various internal political 
processes and the conflict of ambitions, torrents of groundless 
accusations were poured out on the diplomatic service. Diplomats 
in the center and at embassies in essence were subjected to 
continuous moral-psychological pressure, which created 
additional difficulties and, frankly speaking, did not 
contribute to strengthening the prestige of our country and to 
confidence in its representatives. After all, to consider 
foreign policy problems and criticize individual actions does 
not mean to recklessly defame our own diplomats. It is 
necessary, apparently, to be aware that there is not and cannot 
be an alternative diplomatic service, and that the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs is the only structure for the conduct of foreign 
policy. Russians need have no doubt in our ability to defend the 
interests of the country. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61082 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentaries on NATO Expansion Issue </TI></H3>
<H4>   Nonexpansion `Victory' Queried </H4>
<F P=102> 944F0223A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 8 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 944F0223A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Baranovskiy: "Foreign Policy Victory: </F>
The Leader of a Project on Russian Security Problems of the 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) Wonders 
Whether It Should Be Put Down to the Credit of the Russian 
Federation"] 
  [Text] Official Russian diplomacy, foreign intelligence, 
and a whole number of well-known analysts from academic circles 
are unanimous that it was necessary to prevent the incorporation 
in NATO of our former Warsaw Pact allies. 
  We were successful long ago in propounding this line--in 
Western capitals--and we have made it clearly understood to 
Warsaw and Prague and Budapest that they should not look for 
full membership in the near future. Only satisfaction may be 
felt, it would seem: We stuck to our guns, we are still reckoned 
with, and our opinion is taken into consideration. This is 
undoubtedly a foreign policy victory brilliantly organized by 
Russia's Foreign Ministry. But perhaps we should not be in any 
hurry to put it down to our credit? 
  First, we have somehow come by this success too easily. 
There 
were in NATO, after all, few who felt any particular enthusiasm 
at the prospect of finding themselves dragged into possible 
showdowns on the territory of the former socialist camp. But 
there were no in any way serious moral-political or strategic 
grounds for declining this role, seemingly. Now there are: 
Moscow's position has to be considered, Russia's isolation is 
impermissible, and all this affords more than serious arguments 
for restraint in the eastern direction. So the opposition 
emanating from us is in fact only to the benefit of many people 
in the West, for it provides a perfectly convincing excuse for 
calmly, without losing face, postponing sine die the adoption of 
difficult decisions. 
  Second, the political costs of such a deliberate or 
unwitting 
ingratiation of the Western partners fall wholly on Russia--as 
far as relations with the former allies are concerned, in any 
event. Had the North Atlantic alliance rejected them on its own 
initiative, it is toward it that their negative emotions would 
have been directed. Now, however, it transpires that it is 
Moscow that has prevented an introduction to the "select club" 
for those who wanted this, so all possible rebukes should be 
addressed to the former. We have essentially been tripped up, 
having agreed to pay someone else's bill. And we should not 
console ourselves with the fact that it is not about to be 
presented or that it is not that large. 
  Third, there is something ethically unseemly in this whole 
situation. A well-bred individual would hardly permit himself to 
unceremoniously point out to the owner of the house to which he 
wishes to come: Either invite the whole crew together with me or 
invite no one without me. This way of framing the question has 
grated on no one in the West, it seems. But even in high 
politics, granted all its differences from everyday life, the 
atrophy of elementary standards of decency is fraught with the 
danger of a loss of self-esteem. And the latter consists also, 
specifically, of not going into hysterics if for some reason or 
other you have not been given an invitation. 
  And, finally, one further point of considerable importance. 
Claims that the former socialist countries should obtain 
Moscow's blessing for a foreign policy choice they have made are 
already being classed as characteristics of Russian policy in 
the international arena. The USSR once possessed in full measure 
this droit de regard in respect to the Warsaw Pact countries and 
even intended to preserve it after the disintegration of the 
latter. What, are we once again attempting to reproduce the old 
model of interstate relations in East Europe? 
  The issue of ethics in foreign policy cannot be brushed 
aside 
just like that since it by no means boils down to a simple 
choice between the pompous trivialities of primitive idealism 
("let's live amicably") and rational, and sometimes cynical, 
calculation ("might is right"). But it would make sense to 
reflect on certain problems connected with our active attempts 
to prevent the expansion of NATO even from a purely pragmatic 
viewpoint also. 
  Of course, from the viewpoint of Russian influence it would 
be splendid were our former allies to link a strengthening of 
stability in the region not only with NATO but with Moscow also. 
But the initiative should, for all that, come from them. The 
Americans are not overly foisting themselves on West Europe, 
which only makes their positions there stronger. 
  The set of problems today has proven very suitable for 
"adopting a position" and graphically demonstrating both to 
critics within the country and to foreign contracting parties 
that Russia has its own, particular interests in the 
international arena and is fully resolved to defend them. 
  The signal is, perhaps, timely, just as long as all the 
steam 
has not gone into the whistle. The question in itself is by no 
means a super-priority for Russia. Whether, for example, the 
Czech Republic joins or does not join NATO would have no 
significance either for our relations with Ukraine or for the 
prospects of normalization in the Transcaucasus or for the 
development of events in Central Asia or for the continued 
evolution of the CIS as a whole. That is, for the search for 
answers to all the foreign policy challenges that truly demand 
Moscow's paramount attention, but of which the problem of 
military-political confrontation with the North Atlantic 
alliance is not one. 
  Russia is, of course, interested in an all-European 
architecture that does not erect new barriers between us and the 
West. Aleksey Arbatov is perfectly right to stress that the 
"filching" of states in this intermediate zone in terms of 
spheres of influence could result in the restoration of frontal 
confrontation (NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA, 1 October 1993). But could 
this be avoided were frontal resistance to the expansion of NATO 
to be organized? And would such resistance not be phase one of a 
future confrontation? 
  After all, many people in the West recognize the possible 
negative consequences of an expansion of the North Atlantic 
alliance and are displaying caution. True, illusory, and, I 
would say, localistic sentiments prevail in political circles of 
our former allies. 
  Perhaps it would be better to renounce the prohibitory 
fervor, which tactically is of benefit clearly not to us and 
which could strategically drive us into an impasse? It is not, 
of course, a question of sitting with our arms folded and 
waiting for something to turn up. Russia could, say, have very 
serious reasons for considering the CSCE a more attracting 
structure than NATO. So we should concentrate attention on 
increasing the efficiency of the corresponding mechanisms in the 
first case, not on throwing wrenches into the works in the 
second. Especially since these works are spinning their wheels 
as it is. 
  There is no doubt that we need to seek to ensure that other 
participants in international life reckon with our foreign 
policy interests, our concerns on questions of the country's 
security, and our ideas concerning real and potential external 
threats to Russia. The question is how to define these interests 
and how to ensure that they are respected without reviving 
stereotypes of the past or losing our own dignity. And, what is 
of considerable importance, without causing repercussions that 
could sooner or later boomerang against Russia itself. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61083 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentaries on NATO Expansion Issue </TI></H3>
<H4>   Equal Relations With NATO Sought </H4>
<F P=102> 944F0223B Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 8 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 944F0223B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dmitriy Gornostayev: "Russia Will Not Take the </F>
Exams: The Relations of It and Other East European Countries 
With the North Atlantic Bloc Are, as Has Become Clear Following 
the Brussels Meeting, To Assume the Nature of Partnership"] 
  [Text] Brussels-Moscow--It has been said for several years 
now that it is essential under the new conditions following the 
end of the cold war to move toward a qualitatively new level of 
relations between West and East, primarily Russia. And so, 
finally, more or less specific decisions were adopted at the 
meetings of the NATO Council on 2 December and the North 
Atlantic Cooperation Council a day later in Brussels on the 
interaction of the once mutually hostile parts of the 
Euro-Atlantic space. The "Partnership for Peace," about which 
people began to speak following the October visit to Moscow of 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, formed the basis of 
this interaction. The basis of the concept was laid, if we 
glance into recent history, by Russia in President Boris 
Yeltsin's message to the NATO Council session in December of the 
year before last, which spoke not of membership of the bloc but 
of the intention of full-scale cooperation with it in specific 
spheres. Then, when a number of East European 
countries--Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, 
Slovakia--advanced the idea of swift and urgent affiliation with 
NATO, the Americans presented this concept, in new packaging, it 
is true. One way or another, it is an expansion of partner 
relations, not quantitative expansion, which has been approved 
by both NATO and the NACC [North Atlantic Cooperation Council]. 
  For Russia this is important primarily because on these 
terms 
it will not be isolated from the process of Euro-Atlantic 
integration, which could have happened given NATO's 
reinforcement by former participants in the Warsaw Pact. Their 
overriding idea concerning affiliation to the North Atlantic 
alliance was not taken seriously in principle. Largely thanks to 
the active explanatory work of Russian diplomacy, incidentally. 
And now, according to Andrey Kozyrev, minister of foreign 
affairs of the Russian Federation, this idea has been buried. It 
is gratifying that the decision on the expansion not of the bloc 
itself but of specific partner relations among all states was 
adopted at the NACC session by consensus, having obtained 
support not only on the part of NATO and Russia but of the 
Central and East European countries themselves also. 
  True, even now there is a difference in the approaches to 
the 
essence of this process. There is on the part of the alliance an 
attempt to interpret this movement by use of the "NATO plus" 
formula. It means that there is the NATO bloc, to which other 
countries conforming to NATO standards--transparency of the 
military budget and civilian control of the military 
department--should affiliate. As a counterweight to this, Andrey 
Kozyrev put forward at the NACC session his concept of the 
association and cooperation under the aegis of the CSCE of all 
leading regional organizations in the Euro-Atlantic space. The 
Russian idea is that NATO, the CIS, the Western European Union, 
the European Union, and such should become equal partners, among 
whom no one would occupy a dominating position. And the 
military-political and military-technical aspect of such 
partnership should be secured by the North Atlantic Cooperation 
Council, which, in Moscow's opinion, should be made an 
independent organization with its own secretariat and other 
support structures. Meanwhile, however, the NACC is a NATO lobby 
for the North Atlantic bloc. And if some people, as the head of 
the Russian Federation Foreign Ministry said in his speech at 
the NACC session, "like to stand in the lobby and take the exam, 
this is the sovereign right of each state." Russia, however, 
will not do so. Answering the question of your NEZAVISIMAYA 
GAZETA correspondent, Kozyrev emphasized that, on the other 
hand, it would be stupid to refute the fact that NATO is a 
structure that actually exists, and much that is useful could be 
derived from cooperation with it. We can for this reason speak 
about the conclusion of an agreement between NATO and each 
individual country, and not an exclusive but complementary 
version is possible on this level also, as are both at the same 
time with the simultaneous strengthening of the structures of 
the NACC, which, incidentally, is the Russian idea, which all 
the delegations in Brussels greeted with interest. "The seed," 
Kozyrev said, "did not fall on stony ground." 
  There are far fewer disagreements at the practical programs 
level. There is in the documents that were approved a 
substantial set of specific forms of cooperation from joint 
maneuvers through the training of peacekeeping forces. Even now 
Russia's Northern Fleet is conducting exercises together with 
NATO naval forces. In addition, as Boris Gromov, deputy minister 
of defense of the Russian Federation, said in conversation with 
your NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA correspondent, an agreement between 
Russia and NATO on joint military operations is being made ready 
for signature at the present time. It is also contemplated 
bringing the peacekeeping battalions in the former Yugoslavia, 
Russian included, under the jurisdiction of NATO, under the 
aegis of the United Nations, naturally, for greater efficacy. 
  Generally, following the Brussels meeting there have come to 
be more conditions for cooperation. The Partnership for Peace 
concept is blazing a trail for itself, for which much of the 
credit goes to Russian diplomacy. Politicians expect a further 
expansion of it from the top-level meetings scheduled for 
January: of NATO in Brussels and of Boris Yeltsin and Bill 
Clinton in Moscow. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61084 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia Seeks Place in World Arms Market </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0112A Moscow KOMMERSANT in Russian No 48, 6 Dec 93 pp 
10-11 </F>

<F P=103> 944Q0112A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Alla Glebova and Sergey Tsekhmistrenko under the </F>
"Arms Market" rubric: "Russia Regaining a Niche in the World 
Arms Market"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  However, the State Will Trade in Arms </H5>
  Mikhail Maley, the chairman of the Interdepartmental 
Commission for Scientific-Technical Issues of the Defense 
Industry, exclaimed: "The thing has happened that I have dreamed 
about for the last two years: Specialized foreign trade 
associations (trading in weapons--note by KOMMERSANT) were 
removed from the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Foreign 
Economic Relations and placed directly under government 
management." 
  According to information received by the KOMMERSANT 
editorial 
office, a secret document that as a matter of fact provides for 
the creation of a unified state system for trading in arms 
manufactured in Russia was signed by the president of Russia in 
the middle of November. Until recently, the editorial office did 
not have confirmation of the fact that the decision had been 
made. Only last week did Aleksandr Shokhin mention the issuance 
of the edict at a press conference, and Aleksandr Maley, whom 
KOMMERSANT approached for consultation, confirmed the existence 
of the document. 
  As specialists from Maley's commission hope, the restoration 
of vigilant state supervision of the now numerous traders in 
Russian arms who have already fanned out throughout the world 
will help Russia to accomplish a very important task: to regain 
the lost markets for arms sales in Eastern Europe, Africa, and 
the Near East in the environment of stiff competition and to try 
to assert itself in new markets. 
  As recently as five years ago, Russian weapons had 
guaranteed 
markets for sales in Eastern Europe, Africa, and the Near East. 
However, these markets have virtually been lost because of the 
well-known events. Meanwhile, competition in the arms market is 
quite keen. Therefore, weapons from the United States, France, 
and so on began to be delivered to these regions instead of 
Russian weapons (whose exports have fallen by a factor of almost 
five in the last three years). 
  This year, Russia has participated in the largest worldwide 
arms exhibitions. Specialists say that the latest Russian 
military materiel on display in Ankara, Abu-Dhabi, Dubai, and in 
Budapest at the "C+D '93" exhibition which was held last week 
"took the buyers' breath away." However, commercial results are 
not that impressive. Despite the fact that many countries 
(China, Syria, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and others) are 
clearly becoming interested in Russian armaments, things did not 
develop beyond an expression of interest. 
  However, this is not the main point either. The specialists 
see reductions in output as the root cause of the disorderly 
retreat of Russian arms producers from traditional markets for 
their sales. 
  Last week, the Security Council of the Russian Federation 
gathered in order to determine the reference points for a new 
industrial policy of Russia and to discuss materials on the 
situation in the economy based on the results of nine months of 
this year, which had already been reviewed by the government. 
The "Conversion" section was the smallest, just over half a 
page, in a voluminous review prepared by the government staff. 
To date, this has been the only attempt to show the defense 
industry in the light of facts and trends. It is maintained that 
over the period of the year that has ended, the total volume of 
production in defense industries dropped 15 percent; the volume 
of military output dropped by more than 30 percent, and that of 
civilian output--by 10 percent. It turns out that the proportion 
of civilian output in the total volume of output of the 
military-industrial complex comes to about 80 percent (whereas 
in 1988 it was just 44 percent). The number of plants that 
manufacture mostly military output continues to decline 
steadily, and comes to one-sixth of the total number of 
enterprises in the "defense sector." 
  In short, the "defense sector" is being disarmed quickly, 
and 
the unknown author of the half-page of text discreetly praises 
it for good behavior. However, as eyewitnesses testify, the 
things that made the government happy scared members of the 
Security Council--they came to the conclusion that the 
military-industrial complex is on the brink of technological 
peril. Having discussed the submitted papers, members of the 
Security Council set forth borderline conditions, the violation 
of which would pose a threat to the security of Russia. 
<H3>  The Security Council Ordained: There Shall Be a 
Military-Industrial Complex </H3>
  Mikhail Maley viewed the last meeting of the Security 
Council 
as a milestone: "Solutions have become possible in Russia...." 
In his words, the Security Council essentially gathered in order 
to do a simple and understandable thing--finally establish the 
reference points for the development of the military-industrial 
complex of Russia. Reports on the condition of the defense 
industry were made by Andrey Kokoshin, the first deputy minister 
of defense, Viktor Glukhikh, the chairman of the State Committee 
on the Defense Industry, Viktor Mikhaylov, the minister of 
atomic industry, and Yuriy Koptev, the head of the Russian Space 
Agency. 
  The positions of the speakers coincided: It is necessary to 
preserve priority technologies; it is impermissible to 
discontinue individual types of production which will not be 
successfully restored in the future; the opportunity to build up 
mobilization capacity in the event of a military threat may not 
be lost. A member of the Security Council who wished to remain 
anonymous stated: "This is not at all to say that the volume of 
arms production should be boosted. It is just that we must not 
lose the capability of producing modern tanks or missiles that 
are far superior to the potential of foreign military materiel." 
  It was noted at the meeting of the Security Council that a 
disproportionately sharp decline in the defense industry has 
been caused primarily by the lack of funding. According to 
information from sources close to the Government of Russia, the 
debt of the Ministry of Defense to the enterprises of the 
military-industrial complex that has piled up over the last few 
years has come to 500 billion rubles [R]. Of course, this is of 
a different order than the debt of the budget to the defense 
complex as a whole (it has already reached several trillion 
rubles and, incidentally, likewise has not been paid). However, 
economists note that enterprises that produce mainly civilian 
products can somehow stay afloat by selling such products. 
Unlike those, a majority of enterprises that work almost 
exclusively for the Ministry of Defense have no additional 
sources of financing and are forced to cut back military 
production, primarily outlays on scientific development. 
Minister of Finance of Russia Boris Fedorov, who spoke at the 
meeting of the Security Council, noted that norms for allowances 
for science were set at the level of 5 percent of the military 
budget; actually, 3 percent is spent for such purposes. This 
means that Russia is running the risk of losing its primacy in 
the development of the latest types of weapons which many 
world-class specialists acknowledge. 
  Sources close to the Security Council maintain that the 
council may secure a special decision of the president aimed at 
supporting the defense industry, however, through changes in the 
structure of the military budget rather than through additional 
funds. In the words of Mikhail Maley, Boris Yeltsin stated at 
the meeting of the Security Council that from now on, 10 percent 
of the military budget will be allocated to develop the 
industry. The Security Council also demanded that the government 
guarantee payments for the arms already ordered by the Ministry 
of Defense, and repay debts with the inflation index taken into 
account. 
  Summing up the proceedings of the Security Council, Mikhail 
Maley noted that he was particularly happy about the decision to 
implement economic reforms in the territories with military 
industry clusters under the aegis of the military-industrial 
complex: "Comprehensive development programs will be worked out 
for the Udmurt, Mari, Chuvash, and Mordvinian Republics, and for 
Novgorod and Moscow Oblasts, which will provide for 
everything--from weapons exports to the establishment of 
bakeries whose equipment will be produced by the 
military-industrial complex. According to Mr. Maley, these 
programs will be presented at the February meetings of the 
Security Council. 
<H5>  I Am the State </H5>
  The payment of state debts, improvements in conditions for 
financing arms producers, supplemental funds for supporting 
viable scientific programs in the area of military 
technology--all of those may ultimately be considered 
investments making it possible for Russia to produce good 
weapons, and even the best weapons in the world. The defense 
sector should recoup what is invested by boosting arms exports. 
Military experts note that the military-industrial complex lived 
through all of 1992 with the motto "Make money by selling 
weapons." However, in 1992 exports of weapons generated only 
$2.3 billion (an estimate by Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr 
Shokhin; other sources give an even smaller sum--$1.9 billion), 
instead of the planned $6 billion, and then under older 
contracts. Meanwhile, according to estimates by the same 
military specialists, right now Russia may earn $10 billion, or 
even more annually by exporting weapons. Experts in the defense 
field note that a qualitative change will not occur until 
Russian arms stop competing against Russian arms on the world 
market. 
  Until mid-November 1993, as many as four specialized 
Spetsvneshtekhnika, Oboroneksport, GUSK, and Promeksport--traded 
in Russian weapons. In addition, the right to trade in weapons 
was being sought by Voyentekh, which had been established to 
sell weapons of old models from the stocks of the Ministry of 
Defense. Each specialized association billed itself as a 
structure representing state interests, but each was a 
departmental structure and for this reason acted in its own 
interest. Promeksport, which was established within the 
organization of the Russian Federation Committee on the Defense 
Industry, advocated the interests of the industrialists; 
Voyentekh operated in the interests of the Ministry of Defense. 
Spetsvneshtekhnika, Oboroneksport, and GUSK, foreign trade 
associations of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, were 
together looking out for their own interests. Departmental 
structures were endowed with equal rights, competed against one 
another in foreign markets, drove down prices, and frustrated 
the signing of one another's contracts for the delivery of 
Russian weapons. 
  The departmental associations competed and continue to 
compete against direct weapons producers, many of whom have been 
granted the right to direct access to the market for products 
manufactured above state requisitions. For example, the Baykal 
company, Izhmash, or the Kalashnikov joint-stock company have 
such permits. Until recently, the Tula arms plant also belonged 
to this category, but the government permit it had has already 
expired. 
  Finally, spice is also added to this sauce by "foreign" 
suppliers of Russian weapons from both the faraway and adjacent 
foreign countries, who are also doing a brisk trade in weapons 
produced or designed in Russia. 
  Countries of Eastern Europe have resolved to considerably 
reduce their national armies and are now selling off surplus 
weapons accumulated by them during their tenure with the Warsaw 
Treaty Organization. These surpluses are of Soviet manufacture. 
Moreover, still in preperestroyka times, the countries of the 
Warsaw Treaty Organization were granted the right to 
independently sell some of the products manufactured at local 
enterprises, and are now vigorously taking advantage of this 
right. Soviet weapons (or spare parts for them) were produced 
within the framework of state-to-state cooperation and 
"technical assistance"; for example, the production of the 
Kalashnikov assault rifle has been established in Poland, 
Hungary, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and Romania. 
  The export strategy of Moscow was guided by considerations 
of 
political trends, boosting the positive balance in trade with 
African countries which, as it now turns out, are incapable of 
paying for the deliveries; its brethren in the socialist camp 
have mastered the principles of free competition, by no means 
only in theory, and have achieved great success in the more 
solvent Asian market. 
  Weapons specialists note that no modifications have been 
made 
in the design of weapons over the years in which Soviet licenses 
were used. The legendary Mikhail Kalashnikov, who came to the 
capital of Hungary for the "C + D'93" small-arms exhibition 
studied carefully the models of his namesake automatic weapons 
manufactured in Romania and Hungary. He subsequently remarked 
that our former allies merely "modified handles and butts to 
suit their ethnic specifics." As far as the quality of weapons 
produced under licenses is concerned, specialists do not rate it 
too favorably. What kind of confidence in the "Kalashnikov" 
trademark on the whole may there be, they note, given that 
Kalashnikov assault rifles manufactured in China on occasion jam 
after the very first burst? This is also one of the reasons why 
Russian weapons have begun to lose the battle for the world 
market. 
  As KOMMERSANT experts in patent law say, Russia has 
virtually 
no opportunity to influence the former member countries of the 
Warsaw Treaty Organization in order for them to stop the 
production of weapons under licenses. The already mentioned 
"Kalashnikov," having been developed by a secret laboratory, is 
not protected by any patent; such was the procedure. One thing 
remains--to count on buyers sooner or later giving preference to 
the acquisition of higher-quality weapons directly from the 
original producers anyway. 
  To be sure, such original producers turned out to be 
unexpectedly numerous after the disintegration of the USSR. By 
now, Russia has got competitors not only on the banks of the 
Vistula and the Oder, but also of the Danube and the 
Neman--Ukraine and Belarus, where the main plants producing 
equipment for air defense systems and the largest plants for 
aircraft and armored vehicle repairs are concentrated. Having 
become independent states, these and other republics of the 
former USSR are selling piles of the most up-to-date weapons, 
which they obtained during the division of the assets of the 
Soviet Army. 
  Specialists note that existing procedures for the issuance 
of 
licenses have become yet another serious obstacle in the path of 
increasing arms exports from Russia. Up until the aforementioned 
Yeltsin's edict, the issuance of licenses to export products for 
military technical uses was among the responsibilities of the 
Main Directorate of Military-Technical Cooperation (GUVTS) of 
the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. According to GUVTS 
Chief Aleksandr Kotelkin, in addition to an end-user certificate 
(to avoid unauthorized re-exports of weapons to third 
countries), a government permit, a petition, and an initialed or 
signed contract should be filed with the directorate in order to 
obtain this license. Mr. Kotelkin noted that, in and of itself, 
this procedure is quite logical and justified. However, he 
acknowledged that under Russian conditions, seeing the license 
through the echelons frequently takes up to nine months. 
According to information from Russian weapons traders, the 
process of obtaining licenses in some CIS countries is much 
simpler and much less time-consuming, which gives exporters from 
the republics of the CIS a clear advantage in comparison to 
Russians. 
  Worse still, in Russia the procedure for the issuance of 
licenses for weapons applies to the delivery of spare parts. 
Specialists from the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations 
consider this feasible; after all, if one has a full set of 
components it is not difficult to start the assembly of the 
entire object. However, traders note that in many cases the 
prolonged waiting period for licenses to export spare parts 
interferes with prompt technical services for foreign buyers, 
which substantially reduces the competitiveness of Russian 
exports. Incidentally, the latest documents of the government do 
not fundamentally change anything in the existing licensing 
system (one of them is published in this issue of KOMMERSANT). 
However, changes are forthcoming in the system of arms trade, 
and major changes they are. 
  The simplest thing that immediately comes to mind would be 
to 
merge all Russian competitors together, which was actually 
done--the Rosvooruzheniya corporation will unite all of the main 
weapons traders existing in Russia as of now. 
  The first attempt to create a unified state company for the 
arms trade was made as early as 1991 by Sergey Krasnov, the most 
experienced weapons trader in the USSR (for a long time, he 
headed the relevant division of the GKES--State Committee for 
Economic Cooperation). After the GKES was abolished, the 
relevant divisions were transferred to the Ministry of Foreign 
Economic Relations, and Sergey Krasnov was fired by Petr Aven, 
the minister of foreign economic relations at the time, 
apparently for a bias toward monopolism. Two years later, they 
revisited this idea. Boris Yeltsin stated at a meeting of the 
Security Council last week that he intends to personally oversee 
military-technical cooperation, and ordered that a statute of 
the corporation be prepared by 25 December. General Viktor 
Samoylov, an adviser to Deputy Prime Minister Shumeyko for 
military issues, was appointed acting chief of the 
Rosvooruzheniya. 
  According to Mikhail Maley, the Rosvooruzheniya corporation 
will not adhere to strict centralization in the export of 
weapons. It will retain jurisdiction over issues on which the 
strategy of military-technical cooperation, the delivery of 
large batches of arms, and the latest developments hinge. It is 
expected that the existing regional associations of arms 
producers, such as the "Kalashnikov" joint-stock company, to 
which the largest military plants of Udmurtia belong (including 
the Izhmash) and the Baykal association, will keep and even 
strengthen their status. The federal company will operate in 
coordination with them, providing general guidance. However, the 
managers and government overseers of the federal structure do 
not conceal the fact that the degree of freedom of action for 
regional associations will be determined by them, after all, 
proceeding from the situation in each segment of the world arms 
market. 
  In a conversation with a KOMMERSANT correspondent, Mikhail 
Maley noted that the employees of Spetsvneshtekhnika, 
Oboroneksport, and GUSK will be hired to work for the state 
corporation only subject to certification. In his opinion, the 
Voyentekh and the Promeksport do not have any prospects, whereas 
great deeds lie in store for the Rosvooruzheniye company. In his 
words, even Andrey Kozyrev, a well-known fighter for compliance 
with international agreements, called on Russia to expand arms 
exports as he spoke in the Security Council. 
  As Vitaliy Bokhanov, one of the leading arms specialists of 
the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of Russia, noted, 
Russian exporters intend to expand their presence in the already 
familiar markets of Central Europe, the Near East, and Africa, 
which Americans have lately begun to dominate. New markets have 
been planned--Southeast Asia, where Russia will have to fight 
China for a place in the sun, and Latin America, where the 
positions of American producers are also strong. 
<H5>  All the Best for Sale </H5>
  It is worthwhile to consider the exhibits presented by 
Russia 
at the two most recent arms exhibitions in Dubai (the United 
Arab Emirates) and Budapest (Hungary) precisely from this 
standpoint--as an attempt to make [Russia's] presence known in 
new arms markets and to revisit those already familiar to 
Russian producers. 
  In the opinion of Russian specialists who participated in 
the 
exhibition, the Dubai-93 aviation exhibition (which was held 
from 7 to 11 November) brought Russian aviation back to the Near 
East. Having joined UN sanctions against Iraq, Libya, and the 
former union republics of Yugoslavia, Russia deprived itself of 
traditional markets for the sale of armaments. The IDEX-93 
exhibition in Abu-Dhabi (the United Arab Emirates) which was 
held at the beginning of the year heralded the return of Russian 
arms to the Near East, but this time from the side of the 
Persian Gulf. Out of 30 aircraft that took off there daily, 10 
were Russian-made. No contracts have been signed so far, but in 
the opinion of the managers of the Aviaeksport joint-stock 
company (the organizer of the Russian exhibit), the results 
exceeded all expectations. 
  The Russians demonstrated their most up-to-date weapons at 
the Dubai-93 aviation exhibition. The new combat plane Su-35, 
which, according to Yuriy Tsupko, the main engineer of the 
mass-production plant for the Su-35, "has no analogs throughout 
the world because of unique design solutions and technologies," 
had its foreign debut precisely in the skies over Dubai. In 
conversations with a KOMMERSANT correspondent, both Soviet and 
foreign military specialists noted that the Su-35 displayed 
incredible maneuverability, despite the fact that this is the 
only combat aircraft whose auxiliary fuel tanks are located in 
the tail. The plane is interesting not only as a 
state-of-the-art design development: Technologies for the 
processing of titanium, lithium, and composite materials in 
which Russia has a lead were extensively used in manufacturing 
the plane. In addition to the Su-35, which is not being 
mass-produced yet, the Su-27, the Su-30 MK, and a couple of 
sports Su-29's--a present to the king of the United Arab 
Emirates--performed in the skies over Dubai. Even the delivery 
of the equipment to the United Arab Emirates was thought-out and 
spectacular: En route to the aviation exhibition, the Su-27, the 
Su-30 MK, and the Su-35 performed the first Moscow to Dubai 
direct flight in the history of Russian aviation, refueling from 
a transportation Il-76 in the air. 
  Russian specialists have just one answer to the question 
about the need for such spectacular deeds: the market. Following 
the defeat of Saddam Husayn, the market of Persian Gulf 
countries is the most favorable for the member countries of the 
anti-Iraqi coalition, whose materiel acquitted itself splendidly 
in action. The above notwithstanding, Western experts who put 
the need of the United Arab Emirates Army for combat planes at 
30 refer to the Su-27 as the most likely competitor of the 
American F-16 and F-18. 
  Unlike the United Arab Emirates, which is an arms market new 
to Russia, the Budapest exhibit took into account the 
circumstance that, after all, Central Europe once was a 
permanent buyer of Russian weapons. To this day, the armies of 
Eastern Europe are outfitted almost 99 percent with materiel 
produced under licenses or on the basis of documentation from 
the USSR (although specialists noted joint developments with 
third countries which were presented at "C + D '93"). At 
present, as this materiel is already becoming obsolete, Russia 
offers know-how in the area of its upgrading; a special section 
of the exhibit was devoted to this. The former colleagues of 
Russia from the Warsaw Treaty Organization simply cannot afford 
Western weapons. Russian weapons sellers count on Prague, 
Warsaw, or Bucharest volens nolens turning their gaze to the 
former "elder brother" again, having postponed the ideas of 
re-equipping their armies to NATO standards until better times. 
  The Russian exhibit at the "C + D '93" in Budapest followed 
the policy of presenting the latest types of weapons. Against 
the background of other countries' exhibits, the Russian exhibit 
looked superb, as was noted by Russian and foreign specialists 
alike and the minister of foreign affairs, who visited the 
Russian pavilion. 
  To be sure, as the leaders of the Russian delegation noted 
in 
private conversations, the brilliance of the Russian exhibit was 
also due to the fact that the competition was caught off 
guard--"had they known what we were bringing, they would have 
prepared better." The competition did not expect the Russian 
side to show this extensive selection of products without 
analogs on the world market at an exhibition which is being 
organized for the first time and so far does not have a 
sufficiently weighty reputation among specialists. 
  Nonetheless, the latest accomplishments of the domestic 
designer thought in the area of small arms, hand-held antitank 
systems, and individual protective equipment were shown in the 
main Russian pavilion organized by the GUSK. The following were 
presented internationally for the first time: the 9-millimeter 
Baksan submachine gun (Russian gun producers pin great hopes 
specifically on this caliber, because it fits NATO standards), 
the 12.3-millimeter Udar revolver system, the original firearm 
system consisting of the AKS-74U assault rifle with grenade 
launcher attachments and the GP-25 grenade launcher mounted 
under the barrel, and the hunting carbines 6P18 (7.62 
millimeters), Berkut (7.62 millimeters), and Sobol (5.66 
millimeters). Visitors to the exhibition could also familiarize 
themselves with the models of weapons without analogs elsewhere 
in the world which had already been displayed in Abu-Dhabi and 
Ankara, such as the APS submersible assault rifle (5.66 
millimeters), the SPP-1m submersible pistol (4.5 millimeters), 
the PSS pistol (7.62 millimeters), the AS assault rifle (9.0 
millimeters), and the PSS sniper rifle (9.0 millimeters) with 
silencers; the improved-effectiveness Gyurza pistol; the RPG-29 
shoulder-fired antitank grenade launcher and the RPG-27 
rocket-propelled antitank grenade. Some specialists, in 
particular Vitaliy Bokhanov, one of the leaders of the Russian 
delegation, believe that in the future, it will be precisely the 
sale of antitank systems (they are manufactured by the NPO 
[Scientific Production Association] Bazalt), which will dominate 
the Russian exports of close-range weapons. 
  The Kub Association of Aid to Entrepreneurship represented 
at 
the exhibition the interests of a number of enterprises 
enterprises [as published] of the military-industrial complex of 
the Urals Region--the Motovilikhinskiye Zavody joint-stock 
company, the Permskiye Motory, the Inkar, the Nytva 
metallurgical plant and the Kamensk-Uralskiy foundry. In a 
conversation with a KOMMERSANT correspondent, Igor Lazukov, 
executive director of the association, stressed that 
participation in the "C + D '93" is both the first foreign 
venture by Kub and its first military experience. Products 
manufactured by people from the Urals--the Uragan and Smerch 
artillery systems, aircraft engines for civilian aviation and 
the air force, bimetallic rolled metal sheets for the production 
of cartridges--were geared specifically toward consumers from 
the Central European countries. 
  Participation in the exhibition became the swan's song for 
GUSK: Under the edict that has already been mentioned 
repeatedly, it became a part of the Rosvooruzheniya company 
established under the president. Although GUSK technically does 
not exist anymore, the task of breaking into the world markets 
for small arms and some other close-range weapons still remains 
topical, according to Aleksandr Semenov, the general director of 
the Russian exhibit at "C + D '93" and GUSK deputy chief. Russia 
does not intend to be content with a secondary status in this 
struggle. 
  For now, it is premature to talk about the commercial 
effectiveness of Russia's participation in the "C + D '93," 
despite the high grades given to the Russian exhibit by foreign 
specialists. There were virtually no official delegations in 
Budapest; for this reason, the interests of potential customers 
were represented mostly by intermediary companies that are not 
authorized to sign contracts. However, the Russian side did not 
count on instant success to begin with. As Mr. Semenov noted, by 
participating in the exhibition, Russia strove to show that, 
despite the complex period that the country is going through, 
its "defense sector" has overcome the stagnant condition 
characteristic of recent years, and that its products, despite 
the opinion of the competition, are quite up to world standards 
and are even superior to them. 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  Foreigners Finance the Russian Military-Industrial Complex </H5>
  At present, the Su-35, the most advanced combat plane in the 
world, carries the trademark of the Tesmo-Don-Gulf company. Givi 
Papiashvili, who came from Soviet Georgia, founded a company by 
this name in Dubai. This trading company intends to accomplish 
programs for the placement in the United Arab Emirates market of 
not only the Su's, but also the largest helicopters with the 
greatest load-lifting capacity in the world, the Mi-26's. Mr. 
Papiashvili will receive profits from his investment activities 
only after contracts are signed. 
  Experts are inclined to believe that two years of efforts by 
the Sukhoy Experimental Design Bureau to return to the Near East 
will be crowned with success after the Dubai-93 aviation 
exhibition. American interests will also be taken into account 
in this case, because the Su-27 will most likely be outfitted 
with American airborne equipment. [End of boxed item] 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  Russian Businessmen Are Also Prepared To Pay </H5>
  Vladimir Kastyrin, who heads the Moscow Airways joint-stock 
company, made a sensation in Dubai. He stated that he was buying 
50 Be-32 planes produced by the imeni Beriyev Taganrog 
Scientific and Technical Aviation Complex (TANTK). Moreover, as 
a KOMMERSANT correspondent learned, the first Be-32 presented in 
Dubai is already the property of Moscow Airways and was built 
with its funds. 
  So far, Moscow Airways has been the only Russian air carrier 
company that has dared to finance the domestic aircraft 
industry. Mr. Kastyrin believes that, to be sure, it is 
necessary to turn to the West; however, the main point is not to 
lose the promising domestic market for air carriers. It is 
profitable to develop the latter only through using the 
relatively cheap Russian equipment. 
  Mr. Kastyrin said: "We need the Be-32 as the Chinese need 
rice. This plane is extremely versatile: It can use virtually 
any surface as an airfield (including water and ice). This plane 
is inexpensive (its base price is $2.4 million), convenient, and 
indispensable in environments lacking roads, such as Russia, 
Africa, and the Arabian Peninsula." 
  In Dubai, representatives of the Aeroconsulting private 
company, the Irkutsk aviation plant, the imeni Beriyev TANTK, 
the Aviaeksport joint-stock company and the Moscow Airways 
joint-stock company announced their intention to form a 
consortium to mass-produce the Be-32 by the middle of 1995. 
According to Nikolay Sharlau, the ideologist of the creation of 
the concern and director of the Aeroconsulting company, it is 
planned to manufacture five Be-32's in 1995, as many as 24 in 
1996, and subsequently 50 aircraft annually. Vladimir [as 
published] Sharlau said: "The government is preparing a decree 
'On the Implementation of a Program for the Mass Production, 
Sale, and Operation of the Commuter Airline Plane Be-32.' 
However, this will be merely moral support for the Be-32 
program. For the first time, not a kopek of state funds will be 
used to organize the mass production of a plane." The program 
will be profitable if 500 aircraft are manufactured with the 
last delivery date in 2004. [End of boxed item] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61085 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Decree on Missile Technology Exports </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0117A Moscow KOMMERSANT in Russian No 48, 6 Dec 93 p 41 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0117A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Council of Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation </F>
Decree No. 1178 of 19 November 1993: "Revisions and Addenda to 
the Statute on the Procedure of Control of Exports From the 
Russian Federation of Equipment, Materials and Technology Used 
in the Manufacture of Missile Weapons"] 
  [Text] The Council of Ministers-Government of the Russian 
Federation decrees: 
  That revisions and addenda shall be made to the Statute on 
the Procedure of Control of Exports From the Russian Federation 
of Equipment, Materials, and Technology Used in the Manufacture 
of Missile Weapons approved by Decree No. 70 of the Council of 
Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation of 27 January 
1993 ("Digest of Acts of the President and Government of the 
Russian Federation" No. 5, 1993, entry 396), it being presented 
it in a new version (attached). 
  [Signed] V. Chernomyrdin, chairman of the Council of 
Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation 
  Approved by Decree No. 70 of the Council of 
Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation of 27 January 
1993 (in the version of Decree No. 1178 of the Council of 
Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation of 19 November 
1993) 
<H3>  Statute on the Procedure of Control of Exports From the 
Russian Federation of Equipment, Materials, and Technology Used 
in the Manufacture of Missile Weapons </H3>
  1. This statute specifies a set of measures controlling 
exports (transfers, exchanges) of complete rocket systems 
(ballistic missiles, space-launch vehicles and research 
rockets), remotely piloted vehicles (cruise missiles, 
radio-controlled target drones and radio-controlled 
reconnaissance aircraft) capable of delivering a payload a 
distance of 300 km and more, and equipment, materials, and 
technology that could be used in their manufacture and also 
special equipment intended for the preparation and launch of the 
said missiles and remotely piloted vehicles (hereinafter called 
goods and services used for missile manufacture). 
  2. Exports (transfers, exchanges) from the Russian 
Federation 
of goods and services used in the manufacture of missiles shall 
be controlled in order to counteract the proliferation of 
missile equipment and technology that could facilitate the 
manufacture or acquisition of missile systems capable of 
delivering weapons of mass destruction and also the manufacture 
or acquisition of the production capacity for such systems and 
encompasses all types of foreign economic activity (other than 
imports), including production and S&amp;T relations, coastal and 
border trade, commodity-exchange transactions, and the 
demonstration of exhibits at international exhibitions and fairs. 
  3. It is not the purpose of the statute to put obstacles in 
the way of national space programs or international cooperation 
in such programs, except in the instances where their 
realization could facilitate the manufacture of systems for the 
delivery of weapons of mass destruction. 
  4. The procedure for control of exports from the Russian 
Federation of goods and services used in the manufacture of 
missiles specifies: 
  the preparation and issue of findings concerning the 
possibility of exports (transfers, exchanges) of goods and 
services applied in the manufacture of missiles enumerated in 
the List of Equipment, Materials, and Technology Used in the 
Manufacture of Missile Weapons Whose Exports Are Controlled and 
Realized by License (hereinafter called the List) approved by 
Directive No. 20-rp of the president of the Russian Federation 
on 11 January 1993 (in the 19 November 1993 version of Directive 
No. 744-rp of the president of the Russian Federation); 
  the licensing and customs formalization of the exports 
(transfers, exchanges) of goods and services applied in missile 
manufacture. 
  5. The List shall consist of two categories (parts). 
  Category I shall include the complete rocket systems capable 
of delivering a payload weighing no less than 500 kg a distance 
of 300 km and more and the equipment and technology that are 
most significant in the manufacture of missile weapons, exports 
of which are, as a rule, banned. 
  Category II shall include complete rocket systems that are 
capable of delivering a payload a distance of 300 km and more, 
but which are not part of the systems specified in Category I, 
and the material, equipment, and technology used in the 
manufacture of missile weapons that are exported by license. 
  6. Exports (transfers, exchanges) of complete rocket systems 
and goods and services included in categories I and II of the 
List and also of all missiles or remotely piloted vehicles shall 
be prohibited if there is reason to believe that they are 
intended for use as a system for the delivery of weapons of mass 
destruction. 
  In the consideration of the applications specified in Clause 
8 of this statute for the issue of findings on the possibility 
of exports (transfers, exchanges) of complete rocket systems and 
remotely piloted vehicles pertaining to Category II, and also 
the equipment, materials, and technology used in the said 
systems, account shall be taken of the possibility of a swap of 
distance for payload weight, as a result of which they would 
pertain to Category I. 
  In the specific instances where equipment pertaining to 
Category I could in accordance with note 2 of the List be 
specified for export (transfer, exchange) in the procedure 
established for materials, equipment, and technology pertaining 
to Category II, the exporter must comply with the conditions 
specified in Clause 7 of this statute. 
  Exports of specially designed production capacity intended 
for the development and production of complete rocket systems 
and the equipment (products) contained in Category I of the List 
shall be prohibited, except in the instances allowed in 
accordance with the international missile technology control 
regime. 
  7. Findings of the Russian Federation Export Control 
Commission under the auspices of the Government of the Russian 
Federation (Export Control of Russia) on the possibility of 
exports (transfers, exchanges) of goods and services used in the 
manufacture of missiles shall be prepared and issued by a 
working body of Export Control of Russia--the Ministry of 
Economics of the Russian Federation Export Control Department. 
  The subjects of economic activity on the territory of the 
Russian Federation or at locations (points) under the 
jurisdiction or control of the Russian Federation, regardless of 
forms of ownership, must necessarily when concluding contracts 
(agreements, treaties) for the export (transfer, exchange) of 
goods and services used for the manufacture of rockets included 
in Category II of the List indicate in the wording of the 
contract (agreement, treaty) the end users and purpose of the 
use of the exported goods and services and undertakings 
(guarantees) of the importer that these goods and services will 
be used only for the purposes stated and also will not be 
copied, modified (modernized), or reexported without the 
exporter's permission. 
  Permission for reexports, modification or copying shall 
necessarily be agreed with Export Control of Russia and may be 
obtained upon compliance with the conditions enumerated in this 
clause. 
  The undertakings (guarantees) must be specially drafted by 
the importer in an official body of the importing country having 
the corresponding authority for this in respect to each specific 
deal for the supply of each export (transfer, exchange) item 
included in Category II of the List in the form of an 
international import certificate or similar, and in the event of 
the absence of a procedure for the drafting of an import 
certificate, in the form of a document containing the 
undertakings specified in paragraph two of this clause, with a 
certified translation into Russia. 
  In the event of exports (transfers, exchanges) of equipment 
(products) included in Category I of the List, the contract 
(agreement, treaty) shall also necessarily record a provision on 
the exporter's right to check on the use of the exported 
commodity for conformity to the purposes specified in the 
contract. 
  8. The licensing of exports (transfers, exchanges) of the 
goods and services included on the List shall be obligatory for 
all subjects of economic activity on the territory of the 
Russian Federation, regardless of forms of ownership, and shall 
be performed in accordance with this statute. 
  Goods and services included on the List shall be exported 
(transferred, exchanged) only in accordance with one-time 
licenses issued by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of 
the Russian Federation. 
  The basis for the issue of a license shall be the findings 
of 
Export Control of Russia concerning the possibility of exports 
(transfers, exchanges) of goods and services used for the 
manufacture of missiles. 
  To obtain findings the following shall be sent to the 
Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation Export Control 
Department (1 Okhotnyy ryad, Moscow 103009): an application for 
the issue of findings concerning the possibility of exports 
(transfers, exchanges); an application for a license drafted in 
accordance with the requirements established by the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian Federation; a copy of 
the contract; the originals of the documents containing the 
undertakings (guarantees) of the importer (in the event of their 
being absent from the text of the contract), and the official 
body of the importing country specified by Clause 7 of this 
statute. 
  To obtain findings concerning the possibility of the 
temporary shipment outside of the Russian Federation of 
equipment (products), materials, and technology contained on the 
List for demonstration at exhibitions and fairs an application 
containing information as to the name of the exhibition (fair) 
and the location and timeframe of exhibition of the shipped 
items and also undertakings (guarantees) concerning the return 
of the exhibits without a change in their quantitative and 
qualitative characteristics shall be sent to the Ministry of 
Economics of the Russian Federation Export Control Department. 
  Findings on the possibility of exports (transfers, 
exchanges) 
shall be issued within no more than 20 days following receipt by 
the Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation Export 
Control Department of the listed documents. 
  The findings shall be forwarded by the Ministry of Economics 
of the Russian Federation Export Control Department to the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian 
Federation. A copy of the findings shall be sent to the 
applicant. 
  The Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian 
Federation shall send (according to the agreed form) to the 
Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation Export Control 
Department information on the licenses issued on the basis of 
the findings. 
  9. When the applications for exports (transfers, exchanges) 
of goods and services used for missile manufacture are being 
considered, account shall be taken of the following factors: 
  the requirement to prevent the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction; 
  the possibilities and purposes of the recipient country's 
rocket and space programs; 
  the significance of the supplies from the viewpoint of the 
possibility of the manufacture of systems of the delivery (aside 
from remotely piloted vehicles) of weapons of mass destruction; 
  an evaluation of the end use of the transferred hardware; 
  the applicability of the corresponding multilateral accords. 
  10. Materials, equipment (products), and technology 
containing information constituting a state secret shall be 
shipped outside of the Russian Federation in accordance with the 
requirements of the Russian Federation law "State Secret." 
  11. Goods and services used for the manufacture of missiles 
contained on the List shall, when being relocated outside of the 
Russian Federation, be subject to compulsory customs 
formalization in the established procedure. 
  The exporter shall show the customs authorities the license 
obtained, which serves as grounds for the export item to be 
allowed out of the Russian Federation. 
  When exhibits and exhibition materials pertaining to missile 
equipment (products) and technology contained on the List for 
demonstration at exhibitions and fairs are shipped outside of 
the Russian Federation, the customs conditions must specify 
undertakings from the Russian organization shipping the exhibits 
and exhibition materials concerning their return. 
  The State Customs Committee of the Russian Federation shall 
present (according to the agreed form) to the Ministry of 
Economics of the Russian Federation Export Control Department 
information on the shipment of goods and services for which 
findings and licenses specified by Clause 8 of this statute were 
issued. 
  12. Persons violating the procedure of export control 
established by this statute shall be liable in accordance with 
current legislation of the Russian Federation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61086 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Strategic, Radioactive Materials Smuggling </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WP0039A Moscow KOMMERSANT in Russian No 45, 15 Nov 93 p 38 </F>
<F P=103> 94WP0039A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Oleg Utitsin under the heading "Search": "Metal </F>
Rock"] 
  [Text] First of all I want to give my best regards to 
the members of the militia on the event of their recent holiday, 
in hopes that they will also give us a holiday someday: a little 
respite from banditry. Secondly, let us talk about a serious 
matter: the smuggling of strategic raw materials and rare earth 
metals out of the former USSR. And here is why: if Mariya Devi 
Khristov has prophesied the end of the world correctly (24 
November, or according to posters in Moscow October -- mark it 
down on you calendar), then the buyers of nuclear weapons 
components will only warn a "close circle of restricted 
individuals" about it... 
<H5>  Spherical Thieves </H5>
  Journalists have gotten in the habit of saying that when the 
organized crime members shoot it out with each other they are 
dividing up spheres of influence. When you ask militiamen about 
the structures of these groups, the answer you get is that that 
all depends on spheres of influence. What sort of spheres are 
these? It is hard to describe them precisely, the militia 
explains, because the term includes both the areas in which the 
gangs operate, various operations by commercial structures which 
serve as fronts, and the high-paying crime business in which the 
bandits themselves engage. According to Ministry of Internal 
Affairs representatives, the oldest (i.e. most well-established) 
and profitable of those types of business are antique smuggling 
and the drug trade. A new business in existence since about 1988 
involves the smuggling of strategic raw materials and rare earth 
metals. 
  A press briefing on this topic was given by the Moscow 
Internal Affairs Main Administration last Wednesday. First 
journalists heard Ministry of Internal Affairs statistics: the 
number of cases of theft and smuggling of strategic raw 
materials increased by a factor of two in 1993 compared to the 
previous year. The briefing organizers' explanation for this 
phenomenon was twofold: firstly, the raw materials are now 
freely available for sale and, secondly, there is inflation, 
which is forcing citizens to carry off magnesium from plants in 
sacks or in convenient hiding places in their clothing. This 
situation leads one to the conclusion that if ordinary workers 
are carting off our country's defensive wealth, then they must 
have gotten their example from someone in management. As noted 
at the briefing, the administrators of enterprises often 
conspire with commercial structures. The administration writes 
off materials as waste, after which businessmen export that 
"waste" to other countries. And not to very distant countries 
either -- the Baltic countries, for example. 
  Also alarming is the fact that, according to KOMMERSANT's 
information, for the past three years Moscow has not been the 
focus of attention by law enforcement organs as a center of 
strategic raw material smuggling. But now comes this briefing... 
<H5>  How It All Began </H5>
  In the mid-1980's, almost immediately after the beginning of 
perestroyka, uranium, plutonium and other materials of interest 
to those wanting to build nuclear weapons began to be quietly 
shipped out of the USSR. In the early 1990's I was invited to 
meet with a secretary of the South Korean Embassy, who spent a 
long time telling me about the possible effects of a nuclear 
strike by North Korea on the people of his country. According to 
that individual's figures, North Korea had four secret plants 
working to manufacture nuclear weapons using components stolen 
from the USSR. 
  Let us go back in history a bit. In 1991 two kilograms of 
red 
mercury were seized in Milan. According to some sources this is 
used in missile and torpedo guidance systems. A short while 
later the KGB (as that agency was then called) officially 
informed the world public that the red mercury did not exist. 
One month ago foreign television showed foreign scientists 
analyzing that very same mercury and finding it ready for use. 
  Somewhat later came Rutskoy's scandalous report that 
bureaucrats were dealing in red mercury. 
  The most interesting thing is that some people (capitalists 
and communists) are saying that it does not exist, while others 
(communists and capitalists) are saying that it does. We will 
only get to the truth in this debate when it is used... 
  But the problem is not mercury, the problem is that uranium, 
plutonium, tellurium and other materials are being taken out of 
the country. 
  According to KOMMERSANT's figures, the sources of those 
materials are secret state-run enterprises and USSR Ministry of 
Defense bases that have now become bases belonging to other 
countries' ministries of defense. With the complicity of certain 
military officers, nuclear components are flowing out of areas 
where military units are based. As a rule, the items most 
interesting from a theft standpoint are the nuclear weapons 
which are slated for destruction (under an agreement between 
Yeltsin and Clinton). 
  According to reports from KOMMERSANT informants, reactor 
fuel 
is the most commonly stolen item. Usually anything radioactive 
is shipped out by train in the same cars that carry industrial 
wastes. 
  In the same train or following it there travels an observer, 
who is termed a "middleman" in organized crime language. From 
the moment the material is loaded to the moment it crosses the 
border of the former USSR this "middleman" stays with it, and if 
the goods get through all right he receives 0.5 percent of the 
final payment for the exported items (by way of example, 
according to one source's figures one kilogram of red mercury 
costs between $200,000 and $300,000 at its destination). 
  Whereas previously this was all done by structures close to 
the KGB or similar agencies, now this kind of business is being 
handled by organized crime groups that have gained access to the 
trade on account of their money, connections and sales market. 
And so it began... 
<H5>  Stabbed </H5>
  Aleksandr Svechinskiy, director of the Karaganda 
Metallurgical Combine, was killed in Temirtau by a bullet in the 
back of the neck. According to some sources, Svechinskiy had 
opened up a channel for under-the-table shipments of iron from 
Kazakhstan to accomplices in the Baltic countries. 
  According to the official version of the investigation, this 
version does not exist. According to the unofficial version, 10 
days later Kazakhstan karate champion Sergey Shmakov, who had 
allegedly covered for the metal shipments to the Baltic 
countries, got stabbed (coincidentally). That's the way it 
goes... 
  Sergey Shmakov, the holder of a 3rd-degree black belt in 
karate (in 1990 a student of his became champion of the USSR), 
died at 3:35 am on 8 January, bleeding to death from a deep 
knife wound to the abdomen. His killers have not been caught. 
Unofficial sources say that in 1991 Shmakov had started 
combining his professional sports activities with business. In 
1991 he tried to do joint projects with the director of the 
metallurgical combine, among other things by shipping the 
enterprise's products to Lithuania. According to one version, 
Shmakov must have been killed by outsiders, because he was 
widely respected by the locals. 

<FIG ID=FBIS-USR-001C-52A>           Approximate Diagram of the Current Flow of Strategic and Radioactive Materials </FIG>





</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61087 </DOCNO>
<HT>     "jpusr001___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   EC Reaction to Foreign Bank Restrictions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0110A Moscow KOMMERSANT in Russian No 48, 6 Dec 93 p 18 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0110A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Georgiy Bovt and Natalya Kalashnikova under the </F>
"Foreign Banks in Russia" rubric: "Europe Is Not Used To 
Changing the Rules in the Middle of the Game"] 
  [Text] Boris Yeltsin's edict "On the Activities of 
Foreign Banks and Jointly Owned Banks With the Participation of 
Non-Residents' Capital on the Territory of the Russian 
Federation" (see KOMMERSANT No. 46, p. 5), whose issuance was 
prompted, judging by the comments of some of its supporters, by 
considerations of "healthy protectionism," did not go unnoticed 
in international financial and economic circles. The negative 
reaction to the proscriptive sanctions of the edict on the part 
of a number of Western commercial banks, including some that are 
members of the London Club of Russia's creditors, was joined by 
the EU Commission [EUC]. Last week, EUC Deputy Chairman Sir Leon 
Britten sent a letter to Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr 
Shokhin, who heads the Russian delegation at the EU 
negotiations. The bewilderment on the part of Russia's Western 
European partners is quite understandable: The EU mandate was 
the centerpiece of negotiations between Boris Yeltsin and the 
EUC Chairman Jacques Delors, which took place in Moscow on 11 
November, and then the president's edict, which nullified these 
agreements, came out in less than a week. 
  Representatives of Russia's Choice in the government 
unanimously supported the edict; Viktor Gerashchenko, on the 
other hand, took an unequivocal stand against it (see KOMMERSANT 
No. 46, pp. 4-6), thereby provoking a statement signed on behalf 
of the Association of Russian Commercial Banks by Mssrs. Yegorov 
and Vinogradov. At the same time, a group of influential bankers 
in their response statement supported the position of the 
Central Bank of Russia's chairman, referring, in particular, to 
the impermissibility of torpedoing the agreements reached with 
the EU. 
<H5>  How a Compromise Was Reached and What Is at Stake </H5>
  It took a year and a half of difficult negotiations to 
enable 
Boris Yeltsin and Jacques Delors to declare in November at the 
first Russian-European summit that practically all hurdles in 
the way of signing a partnership agreement had been overcome. 
The agreements, reached as a result of a series of mutual 
concessions and compromises, legally formalized the trade and 
economic equality in bilateral relations: The EU recognized 
Russia as a "country with an economy in a state of transition" 
(until then it had been treated as a "country with a state-run 
economy"). Europe also agreed to other major compromises. This 
included, in particular, the conditions for applying protective 
measures and most-favored treatment in trade; suspending 
quantitative restrictions; and freedom of commodity transit. An 
agreement was also reached on the question of antidumping 
procedures (the EUC applies them to 15 items of Russian 
exports). According to the agreements reached, antidumping 
sanctions are to be preceded by consultations, which will allow 
the disposal of the issues under dispute at the early stage of 
the conflict. In addition, the EU undertook an obligation to 
take into account Russia's competitive advantages resulting from 
the presence of its own raw materials base and the optimum 
volume in certain types of production. 
  Certain progress also was reached in the commercial services 
market. Now the European partners are willing to remove all 
barriers in the path of unrestricted and competitive price 
formation: They have accepted the idea of the so-called 
"evolutionary provision." In accordance with this, an agreement 
between the parties is to be reached on all specific issues in 
this area before the partnership agreement expires. According to 
Aleksandr Shokhin's data, in the event that the West removes the 
restrictions, Russia can claim 20-25 percent of the space 
market. Overall, as the program for developing nontraditional 
exports is implemented, by the middle of 1990's income from 
exports may increase by $5 billion-$6 billion. An agreement was 
also reached on the provisions with respect to liberalization of 
coal and steel sales, as well as the terms of mutual trade in 
the event of EU expansion through addition of third countries. 
Also coordinated were positions on transborder trade in 
services. The parties agreed on granting the most-favored 
treatment to companies at the stage of formation and the 
national laws at the stage of their operations, taking into 
account exceptions from the national laws. 
  This, as well as a number of other preliminary agreements, 
which in essence meant for Russia a breakthrough into European 
markets of goods and services, were reached upon the EU 
condition, among other things, of granting European banks 
operating on the territory of Russia most-favored treatment. 
Taking into account the need to protect Russian banks in open 
competition with Western ones, Moscow agreed to this proposal 
only on condition of applying to foreign banks Russian national 
laws with a number of exceptions. Aleksandr Shokhin held special 
consultations with Russian bankers on this matter. On 27 October 
EUC Deputy Chairman Sir Leon Britten was informed of the results 
of these consultations. 
  Moscow's decision consisted of the following. At the 
stage of setting up their operations, EU banks would get 
most-favored treatment, and for five years after signing the 
Partnership Agreement with the EU the following exceptions from 
national laws would remain in force for these banks. First, the 
restriction on the number of branches opened by the banks on the 
territory of the Russian Federation; second, a limit on a 
minimum deposit in the amount equivalent to 100,000 ECU for each 
individual deposit; third, a ban on operations involving 
placement of assets, as well as conducting middlemen (brokerage) 
operations with joint-stock societies' stocks and privatization 
vouchers. The aforementioned exceptions were not to extend to 
joint-ownership banks with a more than 30 percent participation 
share of Russian shareholders. Over the transition period, 
Russia undertook an obligation not to change the terms of banks' 
operations (already opened as of the date of signing the 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the EU) in the 
direction of worsening (limiting) operational environment. 
  These are Russian proposals that were accepted by the EUC. 
It 
was as a result of this compromise solution that the Commission 
petitioned the EU Council of Ministers, asking that a new 
mandate be granted for the completion of agreements with Russia. 
And it was granted precisely on the basis of these agreements. 
The provisions of this mandate--which, naturally, include 
agreements on banks--served as a basis of negotiations at the 
first Russian-European summit in Moscow on 11 November, where 
both parties unanimously declared a breakthrough in bilateral 
economic relations. It was agreed, in particular, that on 8-10 
December Boris Yeltsin would visit Brussels and would sign 
together with Jacques Delors a Political Declaration, which 
would register the intent of the parties to conclude a 
partnership agreement as soon as possible. At the time it was 
assumed that its text in English may be initialed (after the 
experts fine-tune the draft) as early as in the end of December, 
and by the spring the agreement may be signed by all 12 EU 
countries individually. The situation, however, changed only six 
days later: The entire blueprint for a compromise was nullified 
by one stroke of the presidential pen. Rumors began spreading in 
Europe and in Russia that once again someone was directing his 
hand. A reasonable question then is: Qui prodest? 
<H5>  How the Compromise Was Brought to Naught </H5>
  Let us remind the reader that the edict "On Activities of 
Foreign Banks...." signed by the president on 17 November simply 
barred foreign and jointly owned banks (which had not begun 
doing so before 15 November 1993) from working with residents of 
Russia until 1 January 1996. At the time of the signing of the 
edict, only two fully foreign-owned banks (Lionskiy Kredit, a 
subsidiary of Credit Lyonnais, and a bank jointly owned by the 
Dresdner Bank [FRG] and BNP [France]) had begun their 
operations. The rest, who only intended to begin operations in 
the Russian market, "had their rights taken away." 
  The reaction to the edict in Russian financial and political 
circles was swift. It left one with the impression, however, 
that many of those who by definition are supposed to prepare 
documents of this sort not only had nothing to do with it, but 
had not even been informed of its preparation. 
  At least Viktor Gerashchenko, the head of the Central Bank 
of 
Russia, and Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr Shokhin, whose 
responsibilities include foreign economic relations, having 
disowned any participation in the edict's preparation, in 
essence questioned its legitimacy. Viktor Gerashchenko explained 
the issuance of the edict by the fact that "in the course of the 
election campaign some commercial banks, fearing competition and 
wishing to develop as monopolies, exerted certain pressure on 
the president's staff." Deputy Minister of Finance Aleksandr 
Pochinok, in turn, hinted that the ministry has nothing 
whatsoever against the presence of foreign banks in Russia. His 
boss, Boris Fedorov, however (at a meeting in the KOMMERSANT 
editorial offices, see KOMMERSANT No. 47, pp. 4-5) was more 
frank, and praised the edict in extremely positive terms. In the 
process, he did not miss the opportunity to drop that "nobody in 
the government is aware of what Shokhin agreed on with the EU." 
And he hinted that, in his opinion, the compromise reached with 
the EUC does not mean anything. 
  What remains open is another, and also quite reasonable 
question: Why the decision on banks, which generally should have 
been made (or at least worked out and discussed) by the 
government, came out in the form of a presidential edict? 
<H5>  What Next? </H5>
  While from the standpoint of domestic policy the edict once 
again showed the unpredictability of the presidential team's 
actions, which often prefers to act autonomously from the 
government, in the foreign economic sphere it jeopardized the 
holding of another summit between the president of Russia and 
the European Union (which is already scheduled for 9 
December)--a fact about which the edict supporters remained 
modestly silent. 
  Such a sudden change in the rules of the game may have 
far-reaching negative consequences for Moscow: The 
scheduled--already eighth--round of negotiations with the EU, 
which took place last week, already demonstrated this 
graphically. Now the Russian delegation had to "regroup in 
action" at the negotiations with the EU, searching for a new 
compromise. In Shokhin's opinion, there is no choice other than 
bringing together two positions that are hard to reconcile. That 
is: Until the agreement with the EU comes into force, offshore 
terms of the presidential decree will be in effect, and after 
the agreement in signed--the exceptions on which an agreement of 
the EUC already has been reached will go into force. 
  It cannot be precluded, however, that watching Moscow's 
unpredictable maneuvers, the EU may lean toward toughening of 
the Union's negotiating position as a whole. There already have 
been some indications of this: During the latest round of 
negotiations in Moscow, the parties were unable to reconcile 
their positions on exports of Russian enriched uranium into the 
EU; neither is a solution to the "aluminum problem" in sight. It 
appears that now the EU will redouble its efforts in insisting 
on making special provisions in the agreement permitting the 
suspension of its action in the event that its substantive 
elements are violated. It is possible that the provision on 
violating the principles of a market economy, already removed at 
the proposal of Russia, will be reanimated again. This 
provision, in Shokhin's opinion, could be used by EU countries 
whenever the economic conditions worsened. Neither is the EU 
ready yet to accept Russia's request for access to European 
Investment Bank's credits. There is also another provision in 
the draft agreement that links economic partnership with 
Russia's observance of "human rights." 
  It appears that the reaction of the London Club at the 
negotiations on the restructuring of Russian foreign debts also 
will come fairly soon. After all, members of this club are 
precisely the same banks that fell victim to the president's 
action. As is known, Russia has not accepted the club's proposal 
on forfeiting sovereign immunity in guaranteeing the debt. It 
looks as if the London Club is in no hurry now to come up with 
compromise proposals, however. 
  If the banking conflict is not extinguished in the nearest 
future, we can also hardly expect a tidal wave of investment 
into the Russian economy, because that is precisely how the 
investment was supposed to be channeled--through foreign banks. 
In any case, the Deutsche Bank, one of Russia's largest 
creditors and investors, has already openly made a statement to 
this effect. 
  [Box p 18] 
<H5>  Statement of Four Banks </H5>
  As KOMMERSANT's editors have learned, on 3 December the 
leadership of four major Moscow banks, which operate actively in 
European financial markets, signed a statement (the text is 
published below), in which they disassociated themselves from 
the position of the Association of Russian Banks and the Moscow 
Banking Union on the issue of the fate of foreign banks in 
Russia. According to information received by the editors, 
Rosselkhozbank chairman Nikolay Likhachev was supposed to join 
"the statement of four" but for a tragic reason was not able to 
do it. 
  In the opinion of KOMMERSANT experts, the statement 
authors' support for the Central Bank of Russia's position and 
that of many influential Western bankers regarding the 
impermissibility of discrimination against foreign banks was 
prompted not so much by a purely academic interest in the 
problem as the desire to minimize obstacles in the path of their 
own projects--current and future--in foreign financial 
markets. 
  "On 23 November, Mssrs. S.Ye. Yegorov and V.V. Vinogradov, 
the top officials of the Association of Russian Banks [ARB] and 
the Moscow Banking Union [MBU], issued a statement on behalf of 
these public organizations, in which they supported the 
restrictive measures against foreign banks in Russia envisaged 
in the 17 November edict "On the Activities of Foreign Banks and 
Jointly Owned Banks With the Participation of Non-Residents' 
Capital on the Territory of the Russian Federation." This 
statement also contains a negative appraisal of the position of 
Central Bank of Russia Chairman Mr. V.V. Gerashchenko, who has 
expressed doubts regarding the expediency of such measures in 
the current circumstances. 
  "We, the leadership of a number of major commercial banks, 
want to attract the public's attention to the fact that Mssrs. 
S.Ye. Yegorov and V.V. Vinogradov's statement were not 
coordinated with our banks and many other commercial banks that 
are members of the ARB and the MBU. This statement does not 
express at all a common position of all commercial banks in 
Russia and therefore may be regarded only as the personal 
viewpoint of the persons who signed it. 
  "In this connection, we find it necessary to point out that 
we consistently (and no less than the leadership of public 
banking organizations) support the course of the president and 
the government toward the intensification of economic reforms, 
development of Russia's financial system, strengthening of the 
ruble, and protection of national interests in the banking 
sphere. Our banks, not in words but in deed, make a considerable 
contribution to the improvement of the Russian economy, its 
revitalization and modernization, and the preservation of the 
rich existing potential of domestic industry. We also make a 
considerable effort to gain worthy positions for Russian banks 
in the international banking community, for the development of 
equal trade and economic cooperation with foreign partners and 
for attracting to Russia foreign financial resources on a 
healthy basis. 
  "We believe that the real effectiveness of the declared 
measures is questionable. Moreover. In the event that these 
measures are implemented, operations of existing branches and 
representations of Russian banks in foreign countries will 
inevitably become considerably more difficult; there will arise 
obstacles in opening new Russian banking institutions abroad; 
and the mistrust toward our financial-banking institutions, born 
of the catastrophic legacy of the former USSR, will rise again. 
The unpredictability of regulatory activity in Russia has 
revealed itself once again. 
  "On a broader scale, by creating a prominent precedent, 
these 
measures may reflect negatively on the process--very important 
for Russia, and at the same time very difficult--of forming 
principally new politico-economic relations between our country 
and the rest of the world, first and foremost with partners from 
among the states with developed economies. For instance, by the 
estimate of some members of the Russian Government and a number 
of high-ranking European figures, these measures, to put it 
mildly, do not quite correspond to the agreements on the status 
of foreign banks in Russia, which have been reached with 
considerable difficulty at the negotiations with the European 
Union and which are to become a part of a package of global 
agreements between Russia and the EU, ready to be discussed at 
the highest level during the president of Russia's visit to 
Brussels scheduled for 9 December. 
  "Legalization of restrictive measures against foreign banks 
in Russia, in our opinion, may reflect only the current 
interests of some influential commercial banks and other 
structures, which would like at any price to gain a monopoly 
position in the domestic market in order to earn superprofits in 
the current economic conditions. This, however, will not be 
produce any benefit toward the normal development of the entire 
banking system and the Russian economy as a whole." 
  [Signed] D. Orlov, chairman of the board of the 
Vozrozhdeniye 
Moscow joint-stock company [Signed] V. Sudakov, chairman of the 
board of the International Moscow Bank [Signed] R. Chudnovskiy, 
chairman of the board of the Optimum commercial bank&gt;  [Signed] 
V. Yakunin, president of the Tokobank joint-stock commercial bank 
  [Box p 18] 
<H3>  AvtoVAZbank and Stolichnyy Granted Permits To Open Foreign 
Branches. Now the Real Problems Are Ahead </H3>
  The Central Bank of Russia [CBR] this week issued permission 
for two Russian commercial banks to open foreign branches. The 
AvtoVAZbank intends to open an office (with the status of a 
branch) in Cyprus, and the Stolichnyy bank--a branch in 
Amsterdam (Netherlands). The Central Bank has not considered the 
National Credit bank's application for permission to open a 
branch in the United States, since the latter has not submitted 
all the required documentation to the CBR. For Stolichnyy, the 
process of getting permission to open a branch (the working 
capital is set at 100 million guilder) was long and torturous. 
Now the Russian bank will have to begin negotiations with the 
National Bank of the Netherlands regarding a license to operate 
there. In turn, in accordance with licensing rules, the Bank of 
the Netherlands in considering the question of issuing the 
Russian bank a license will have to request a paper from the 
Central Bank of Russia banking oversight service certifying the 
reliability and solid standing of the candidate. 
  Nevertheless, KOMMERSANT experts believe that if anything is 
capable of burying Stolichnyy's dream of a branch in 
Netherlands, it is not the CBR's obstacles but its involvement 
in the campaign launched by a number of Russian commercial banks 
regarding limitation on activities of foreign banks in Russia. 
(At the conference of bankers in the former Supreme Soviet, a 
Stolichnyy representative supported applying restrictions to 
foreign colleagues). It so happens that Dutch banks--ING and ABN 
AMRO Bank--felt more painfully than others the blow dealt to 
foreign banks that have come to Russia. No sooner did they get 
general licenses from the CBR than they lost them. Moreover, the 
ABN AMRO Bank, having received a license from the Central Bank 
of Russia, signed an agreement to set up in Kazakhstan a joint 
bank ABN Amro Kazakhstan--apparently with a great hope of 
expanding operations through the opportunity to work with 
rubles. (The cofounders of the joint bank in Kazakhstan, with a 
charter capital of $5 million, were Kramede-Bank, and on the 
Russian side--the International Financial Corporation). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61088 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Impact of Trade Protocol With Brazil Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0109A Moscow KOMMERSANT-DAILY in Russian 4 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0109A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT-DAILY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Georgiy Bovt and Svetlana Sukhova with follow-up </F>
comment: "Russia and Brazil Will Increase Commodity Turnover 
Sharply"] 
  [Text] Jose Eduardo do Andrade Vieira, minister of 
industry, commerce and tourism of Brazil, and Oleg Davydov, 
minister of foreign economic relations of Russia, yesterday 
signed a statement of intent between the two countries on trade 
and economic cooperation. The colossal Brazilian market is 
opening up to Russian businessmen. It is attractive not just by 
its size--Russia can operate thereon in the role not only of 
exporter of raw material but of supplier of machinery, 
equipment, and technology. 
  The present state of trade relations does not satisfy either 
Brazil or Russia. According to Mr. Vieira, in 10 months of 1993, 
Brazilian exports to Russia amounted to only $146 million 
(Russian exports were only a little more). Trade is at times of 
a sporadic nature--from one incidental contract to another--and 
many transactions are effected via middlemen. The statement 
signed yesterday, on the other hand, opens the Brazilian market 
to Russian businessmen. It is planned within five years to reach 
a commodity turnover level of a minimum of $2 billion (it will 
in 1994 even have doubled compared with the present year). The 
trade plans are notable not only for the bare figures alone, for 
that matter: As distinct from trade with the West (where exports 
to us are supported by government credit, as a rule), trade with 
Brazil will be supported by credit from pools of commercial 
banks. From the Russian side lines of credit will be provided, 
it is anticipated, by, in particular, the Moscow Business Bank, 
the Mezhkombank, the Imperial Bank, and the Export-Import Bank. 
  Brazil's big interest in the Russian market fits perfectly 
well within the program of the encouragement of exports with a 
simultaneous adjustment of foreign trade priorities which has 
been announced by this country. The North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) will create certain problems for South 
American commodities, nor is the European Union in any hurry 
fully to open its doors to them. Russia and Brazil frequently 
run into antidumping measures in respect to identical 
commodities (textiles, aluminum, isobutanol, and such) on 
European markets, incidentally. Besides expanding the 
possibilities for the coordination of trade policy in third 
countries, the statement signed yesterday creates a real basis 
for the mutual--and conflict-free--realization of the foreign 
trade plans of Russia and Brazil. 
  Thus, Russia, preoccupied with a restructuring of its 
agricultural imports (hitherto largely oriented toward the 
West), intends to pay more attention to purchases (together with 
the traditional coffee and cocoa) of Brazilian soybeans, sugar, 
and meat. A certain niche in Russian imports could be filled by 
inexpensive Brazilian footwear also. The Brazilians, in turn, 
are interested in Russian turbines and engines, chemical 
fertilizers, and raw material for the chemical industry and 
pharmaceuticals. The Lado do Brasil company, specializing in the 
sale and service of VAZ automobiles, has already settled in on 
the Brazilian market. Plans for the purchase from Russia of 
specialized fishing vessels and floating fish-processing plants 
and a research ship for Brazilian research in Antarctica were 
agreed in the course of the Moscow negotiations. 
  Russia has long been mulling over plans for an outlet onto 
the Latin American arms market. Brazil could become a good 
springboard for products of Russia's aerospace complex. The 
Brazilian side expressed once again in Moscow an interest in the 
joint development of inertial-guidance systems for space-launch 
vehicles. At Brazil's suggestion, a plan of Russia's 
participation in the creation of a global information system, 
which with the aid of 66 satellites would link all countries of 
the world, is being developed. Brazil's Alcantara Cosmodrome, in 
the state of Maranhao, would be used for the launches of these 
satellites, which would reduce the cost of the project 
considerably: The geographical location of the cosmodrome would 
permit a savings at the time of the launch of up to 30 percent 
of the rocket fuel. 
  [Boxed item] 
<H3>  Enterprises That Participated in the Russian-Brazilian 
Negotiations </H3>
  --The Russian Finance Corporation --The Union of 
Industrialists and Entrepreneurs of Russia --The State 
Investment Corporation --The Oboroneksport, Prodintorg, and 
Obshchemasheksport all-Russia associations --The Agrarian 
Technologies of Russia company --The Shipbuilders of St. 
Petersburg joint-stock company --The Krylov Research Institute 
--The Konversiya-Interservis Association --The Union of Aviation 
Industry of Russia--Aviaprom and Myasishchev 
  [End box] 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  International Life Department Comment </H5>
  The results of the Brazilian delegation's visit were yet 
further confirmation of Moscow's interest in the assimilation of 
the Latin American market. Russia is counting on the states of 
the region (specifically, Brazil, which ranks among the "new 
industrial countries") that are prepared to purchase not only 
Russian raw materials but also its finished products. Russia 
could to some extent tackle problems of conversion here also, 
having obtained access to an ample arms and dual-purpose 
technology market. It has thus far belonged practically 
exclusively to the United States. And it is not fortuitous that 
a Russian exposition will appear for the first time at a 
close-combat arms exhibition in Uruguay in April-May 1994. 
  The first attempts to organize broad-based cooperation with 
Brazil were made a year ago, when Moscow was visited by a 
delegation of the FINEP major government investment corporation. 
Even at that time (as now also), the Brazilians supported the 
creation of joint ventures in the field of telecommunications 
and displayed an interest in solid-fuel rocket engines. This 
approach objectively corresponds to Russia's interests: The 
relocation overseas, primarily in the "new industrial 
countries," of enterprises of the military-industrial complex 
(in the form of joint ventures or affiliates) could to some 
extent remove them from the heightened interest on the part of 
Western competitors supporting strict control of Russian 
research-intensive exports. But it remains an open question to 
what extent it will be possible to avoid debate with the West 
about which kind of technology Russia may export, and which, 
not. And it cannot be ruled out that participation in the 
reconstruction of Brazil's cosmodrome could, as in the case of 
the infamous "Indian deal," cause an outcry in Washington. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61089 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> RUSSIA </F>
<F P=101> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prospects for Trade With South Africa Assessed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944Q0109B Moscow KOMMERSANT in Russian No 48, 6 Dec 93 p 12 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0109B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMMERSANT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Arutyunov and Viktor Zamyatin, under the </F>
"Commodity Market" rubric: "Russia-South Africa: Deny Yourself 
Virtually Nothing"] 
  [Text] [Begin boxed item] 
<H3>  Decree 1179 of the Council of Ministers-Government of the 
Russian Federation of 19 November 1993: "Measures in Connection 
With the Abolition of Sanctions in Respect to South Africa 
Imposed by Resolutions of the UN General Assembly" </H3>
  In connection with the abolition of sanctions in respect to 
South Africa imposed by the UN General Assembly (Resolution 48/1 
of 8 October 1993) the Council of Ministers-Government of the 
Russian Federation decrees: 
  1. That all state institutions, industrial, commercial, 
financial, and transport enterprises, banks, and private 
individuals under the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation 
shall proceed from the fact that the restrictions established as 
of 1962 by the UN General Assembly on relations with the 
Republic of South Africa in the political, economic, financial, 
scientific and technological, cultural, sports, and other fields 
are canceled. 
  2. That the abolition of the restrictions specified in 
Clause 
1 of this decree shall not extend to military and 
military-technical cooperation prohibited by current decisions 
of the UN Security Council. 
  [Signed] O. Soskovets, first deputy chairman of the Council 
of Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation 
  [End box] 
  "Russia, as distinct from the United States, where the 1986 
Anti-Apartheid Act has been in operation, never adopted 
independent decisions restricting trade relations between the 
two countries--it subscribed to the sanctions imposed against 
South Africa by the United Nations," was how Leonid Safonov, 
chief of the Russian Foreign Ministry Africa Desk, commented to 
KOMMERSANT on the title of the Council of Ministers' decree. 
Nonetheless, it is well known that (aside from the sanctions) 
trade with South Africa in Soviet times was held back by one 
further essential factor--ideology: relations were maintained 
merely with the ANC, the opposition at that time, and its 
leader, Nelson Mandela. 
  Now both the ideological and economic restrictions have been 
lifted. But Boris Kolokolov, deputy minister of foreign affairs 
of Russia, specified in a conversation with a KOMMERSANT 
correspondent that together with the restrictions on arms 
supplies, the embargo on trade with South Africa in oil and 
petroleum products imposed by the UN Security Council in 1977 
remains in force also. It is expected that all restrictions will 
be abolished only after the first free elections have been held 
in South Africa, a black and white government of national trust 
created, and a constitution adopted, that is, not before May 
1994. 
  It should be observed for fairness' sake that trade between 
Russia and South Africa, in spite of the international 
sanctions, has been conducted, nonetheless, and particularly 
actively in recent years. It is interesting here that the 
information on the extent of bilateral trade made available to 
KOMMERSANT by Russian and South African departments differs 
considerably. According to data of the Russian side (the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and the Trade and 
Industry Chamber of Russia), commodity turnover in the past year 
was not in excess of $800,000, with the significant 
preponderance of Russian exports ($500,000), what is more. South 
African statistics, meanwhile, put reciprocal commodity turnover 
in the first half of 1993 alone at $100 million. 
  Russian specialists see as the reason for this disagreement 
in the data the fact that South Africa's statistics record 
contacts at all levels--as distinct from the Russian statistics, 
which only take account in practice of deals between major 
(primarily state-owned) companies. Indeed, "unclassified 
commodities" in fact representing nothing other than small-scale 
wholesale consignments of wine (of excellent quality, in 
experts' estimation) and a variety of consumer goods, costly and 
not so costly, and not necessarily manufactured in South Africa, 
what is more, account in the South African statistical summary 
for a large part of the trade turnover--$80 million. 
  In the trade in "classified" commodities, on the other hand, 
imports into Russia of products of agriculture and food industry 
(approximately $3.5 million), textiles and wool ($7 million) and 
electronic equipment and precision instruments ($370,000) 
accounted for the bulk of these. In addition, a pronounced place 
in trade is occupied by products of chemical industry (imports 
from South Africa, $290,000; exports, $80,000). 
  Civil servants from the Ministry of Foreign Economic 
Relations of Russia and the South African Embassy believe that 
the very modest amounts of commodity exchange do not correspond 
to the two countries' possibilities and interests. As Leonid 
Safonov put it, "One has the impression that Russian 
entrepreneurs' ideas of Africa are shaped on the basis of the 
novels of Louis Boussenard." Meanwhile, according to him, not so 
much merchandise as unique technology could represent the main 
interest in South Africa for the Russian side. The knowhow of 
the Sasol firm, for example, permitting the production of liquid 
fuel from coal. It is this technology that under the conditions 
of the embargo on oil supplies has enabled South Africa to 
provide for 70 percent of the country's liquid fuel 
requirements. The technology of South African mining companies 
permits mining operations in very deep mines--up to 5 km. Many 
of South Africa's medical developments are assessed as being far 
above those of America and Europe. As we know, it was in South 
Africa that the world's first human heart transplant operation 
was performed, almost entirely with local equipment, what is 
more. 
  In turn, as specialists of the Russian Trade and Industry 
Chamber believe, national entrepreneurs also have things to 
offer contracting parties in South Africa. According to 
information from the Trade and Industry Chamber, the well-known 
South African firms Strategic Material Supplies, Balmoral, 
Feninx Steel, and Development Resource Group have given the 
Russian side their requests for structural and high-alloy 
stainless steel, pig iron, hot-rolled sheet steel, and billets 
for rolled products. The firms Ace, P.B. International, Latitude 
Links, Plumb Contracts, and Bregowa are interested in supplies 
from Russia (and, possibly, other CIS countries) of cathode 
copper, tungsten, aluminum, zinc, titanium, magnesium, electric 
cable, and wire. Through the mediation of the Trade and Industry 
Chamber office in Pretoria, they have established direct 
contacts with the Tsvetmeteksport and Sovkabel all-Russia 
joint-stock companies, the Inferkom group, and the 
Zarubezhtsvetmet VAP [expansion unknown], and, according to 
KOMMERSANT information, precontract agreements have already been 
concluded. Interest is being shown in South Africa in Russian 
cement also. 
  In addition, the Trade and Industry Chamber office has 
reached agreement on the sale via the Rusaf Trading, MANNCONN, 
Cinofoto, and Midas firms of test consignments of motorcycles, 
Krasnogorskiy Plant cameras, experimental Aviatika airplane 
models, and Vikhr boat engines, and also 3 million meters of 
viscose fabric. As the Trade and Industry Chamber observed, the 
prospects of supplies to South Africa of aviation equipment on 
leasing terms and the creation of a system of its maintenance 
are considered quite good, and there are opportunities for the 
joint creation of a system of passenger shuttle helicopter 
routes. 
  Purchases of tropical fruit and animal husbandry products 
(which are not inferior in terms of quality to their American 
and Australian counterparts, but which are cheaper) could be of 
interest in South Africa to Russian importers. 
  Specialists of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations 
advise entrepreneurs to think seriously of consolidating on the 
South African market to consider the quite complex domestic 
political situation in this country. Despite the fact that 
President De Klerk and the leaders of the ANC are endeavoring to 
avoid civil war, both white and black extremism is a reality, 
nonetheless. And even after the elections on 27 April 1994 and 
the formation of a coalition government, racial conflicts cannot 
be ruled out. It would thus be advisable to take account of the 
political instability factor when concluding contracts--and, 
accordingly, stipulating the parties' responsibility in the 
event of drastic changes in the political situation. 
  In addition, it is essential to take account also of the 
following fact. An agreement on trade and economic cooperation 
has been concluded between Moscow and Pretoria which proclaims 
the principle of most-favored-nation status in trade. It was 
signed on 22 October, that is, before the Council of Ministers' 
adoption even of the decree on measures in connection with the 
abolition of sanctions in respect to South Africa. But the 
cooperation agreement is of a framework nature, that is, it 
describes merely the most general principles of mutual 
relations. Two documents of fundamental importance for the 
development of business--on the protection of investments and 
the avoidance of dual taxation--have yet to be signed. Mutual 
contacts at expert level on these matters continue, but owing to 
the general situation in South Africa, these documents will not 
be signed before the elections. Thus, prior to the conclusion of 
these agreements, a favorable customs tariff will operate in 
respect to the commodities imported into Russia from South 
Africa, but taxes on the profits obtained from commercial 
activity will be collected by both sides. The same thing applies 
to the income tax for persons who are not public servants--if a 
citizen of Russia receives his earnings in South Africa, he must 
pay tax both in Russia and in South Africa. 
  Foreign citizens working in South Africa are taxed here, 
according to this country's laws, on a par with ordinary 
citizens of the country and are required to pay a progressive 
income tax. True, the interest computed for foreign individuals 
and companies (which are not managed and not controlled by South 
Africa) has since 3 June 1993 been exempted from income tax. 
  KOMMERSANT NOTE: According to information of the 
Embassy of South Africa, foreign shareholders are taxed at the 
rate of 15 percent of the sum total of the dividend. The maximum 
rate of income tax in South Africa is 43 percent, and the level 
of income subject to the maximum tax depends on sex and family 
situation. Thus, for married men this income has to be 80,000 
rand (approximately $27,000) or higher, and for single men, 
$56,000 rand ($18,600). Value-added tax is 14 percent. The rate 
of profits tax is 40 percent. 
  To return to the question of how promising South African 
technology is for Russian entrepreneurs, it is worth mentioning 
that the purchase thereof would seem highly beneficial from the 
taxation viewpoint. The point being that in accordance with 
Russian legislation--even with the absence of an agreement 
excluding dual taxation--Russian entrepreneurs are exempted from 
the payment of VAT when purchasing rights to technology. Customs 
duty, on the other hand, may be paid off in equal installments 
over the whole of the period of which these rights are acquired 
(and in practice such terms make it possible to reduce annual 
payments to negligible amounts). 
  And, finally, it is essential to take account of the fact 
that there is in South Africa the concept of "white" and "black" 
business, and even the interests of entrepreneurs of different 
races are represented by particular associations--the Afrikaner 
Businessman Institute of Commerce (AHI, represents the interests 
of "white" business) and the National Federative South African 
Trade and Industry Chamber (NAFKOK, the association of black 
entrepreneurs). The commercial interests of Russian businessmen 
in South Africa are protected by the Trade and Industry Chamber 
of Russia office, which opened in Pretoria in the summer of 
1992. In the year that it has been working in South Africa, the 
Trade and Industry Chamber office has concluded an agreement on 
cooperation with both the above-mentioned associations, and also 
with the South African Chamber of Business (SACOB). In addition, 
protocols on cooperation with the South African Foreign Trade 
Organization (SAFTO) and the Mining Chamber have been signed. 
All these organizations represent the interests of about 80,000 
South African companies--practically all which are of more or 
less note among the country's entrepreneurs. Inasmuch as trade 
relations between Russia and South Africa are as yet of a 
sporadic nature and Russian entrepreneurs lack, as a rule, 
permanent partners in South Africa, the Trade and Industry 
Chamber office could help them in their search. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61090 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CENTRAL ASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kazakh Chief of Apparatus on His Official Duties, 
Experiences </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0460A Almaty YEGEMEN KAZAKHSTAN in Kazakh 25 Sep 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0460A </F>
<F P=104>  Almaty YEGEMEN KAZAKHSTAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nurtay Abiqayev, chief of the apparate of </F>
the Republic of Kazakhstan president and cabinet of ministers, 
recorded by Yerzhuman Smayyl: "National Character Begins With 
the President."] 
  [Text] [Smayyl] Nurtay Abiqayuly, when you were granted 
your powers, confirmed by the authority of the president, from 
the highest leadership of the republic, it was said that you 
were, first and foremost, assigned the task of organizing the 
work of the apparate functioning in the area of providing 
services to the president and the cabinet of ministers. I would 
like to ask the following question in terms of this: what kinds 
of measures, what kinds of questions are involved with providing 
services to the president and the cabinet of ministers? 
  [Abiqayev] It is not necessary, in order to answer that 
question, to list the duties of the president as formulated in 
the primary law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Constitution, 
and the duties of the cabinet of ministers as established in 
special constitutional law, or go into detail about each duty. 
We must, however, understand the fact that the president is the 
head of state, that he manages the executive authority of the 
republic as a unified system, and that the cabinet of ministers 
decides questions of government. Thus, these two institutions of 
the republic leadership are involved with all sectors of state 
life. You can understand, in terms of this, the broad scope of 
the work of the apparate and where the emphasis lies. 
  When the institution of the presidency was first established 
in Kazakhstan, it had its own apparate as did the Kenges of 
Ministers. When the two were unified, we investigated how these 
things were in other countries. However, we strove to find our 
own way. Whereas there were previously more than 500 officials 
in the two apparatees, now there are 380. It is possible that 
staffing will decrease still more. However, it is now 
increasing. That is the first thing. Second, we have specified 
exactly what each person and each part of the apparate is 
concerned with: what is being done by ministries and committees, 
what the central apparate is concerned about, what must be 
turned over to oblast governments. 
  A sovereign and independent Kazakhstan has become a part of 
a 
world public. We must take in hand measures and very important 
reforms intended to get our country out of a very deep crisis. A 
second era of privatization, as the basis of a market economy, 
and of the ending of state ownership, has begun. However, the 
law on privatization is still being discussed with some 
production establishments in the United States with its history 
of more than two hundred years. Moreover, we made some mistakes 
when we first pushed privatization forward. We can say that this 
was the case in regard to the privatization of residential 
housing. However, we are pressing forward resolutely. We must 
understand our responsibility as an independent country to enter 
upon the road of world development. However, starting from the 
question of which countries we should go to first in our 
international relations and what policy we should maintain in 
regard to what nation, and how we must receive honored foreign 
guests, it is all virgin territory for us. We have entered into 
economic relations with some of the most developed nations in 
the world. We have established joint industries to jointly 
master our riches. One aspect of the proper control over such 
complex operations with their many problems is through the 
apparate. 
  Let me state one thing: as the president has said about 
this, 
the divisions of the apparate do not replace ministries and 
state committees. The apparate must provide the services of the 
president's office and cabinet of ministers, which enjoys the 
entire executive authority, in terms of organization and of 
cadres, in terms of creating favorable conditions for providing 
analysis on specific circumstances and the results of public 
opinion surveys on some given issue, and even for the fullest 
and most effective operations of the president's office and of 
the government. The measures to be carried out to achieve this, 
and the issues are extremely numerous and, other than those 
connected with daily services, must be determined separately 
with respect to every event or circumstance. 
  [Smayyl] Those organizational measures you mentioned in 
passing require that the apparate have powers at a level set by 
the leadership and that you have influence upon the appropriate 
ministers and chairs of committees. The chief of the president's 
apparate in the United States is in many areas considered second 
to the president... 
  [Abiqayev] In my view, it is appropriate to evaluate any 
given service in terms of how its level of power benefits the 
people or common concerns to a superior degree. In these terms, 
we must not understand involvement with organizational measures 
as diminishing one's stature. 
  However, if we try to make comparisons with conditions in 
the 
United States, I think that this does not reflect the real state 
of affairs. I do not look at my office in terms of exerting 
authority over another or in terms of rule. I was twice an 
assistant to President Nazarbayev when he was chairman of the 
Council of Ministers and later first secretary of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan Communist Party. When he became president, I was 
entrusted with taking charge of the apparate. Fate has 
determined that we have to live and work in difficult and 
interesting times. If I am able to guarantee the proper 
functioning of the presidential command, I think that I will 
have fulfilled the responsibility assigned me by the times. 
Under such circumstances, the deciding issue should not be how 
high my position is in the presidential command structure. 
  [Smayyl] The fact that the time of the president and others 
holding high governmental posts is scrutinized and divided by 
the minute is something which the people have hitherto been 
unwilling to believe. Thereby, is it possible that the president 
is unable to do what he wants to do because of the influence of 
a strict daily regime? In general, how is the work day of the 
president planned? 
  [Abiqayev] The work schedule of the president is in truth 
extremely tight. However, this is not to say that the president 
is allowed no time for creative efforts, to evaluate some 
circumstances or the other, or to carry out his thoughts and 
ideas. 
  This fact is shown clearly by how N. Nazarbayev's work 
schedule is planned. The president's Secretariat prepares 
suggestions for a normal month assigned for every week and every 
day. At this time, various long-term policies and analytical 
assumptions, the circumstances of the period, whatever measures 
there are from various authorities and organizations, 
social-political organizations within them, of high officials at 
various levels or of citizens in the ranks, and what requests 
will be made for meetings, are borne in mind and carefully 
researched. In any case, the scope of the president's heavy work 
load is determined in connection with activities in the 
international sector and the resolution of socioeconomic 
problems in Kazakhstan. In addition, planned as part of monthly 
work schedules are conferences with the leaders of the republic, 
receiving citizens and ministers, trips within Kazakhstan, and 
meetings with various specialized workers. For the president's 
creative work, time is allotted likewise for him to work with 
documents and acquaint himself with newspapers and magazines and 
reviews of the press. The draft of the work plan is reported to 
the president and it is altered and expanded if he sees the need. 
  Now as for your question of why the president's time is 
analyzed to the minute, I think that it is necessary for him to 
be able to accomplish the business planned for each day by 
organizing carefully activities of this sort. This teaches 
people to establish a work regime and to learn how to use time 
well. It should be mentioned in passing that if people brought 
questions before the president which should be resolved 
elsewhere, at other levels, then at times even vital questions 
of state would be delayed. 
  At the same time, one must not think that the president has 
become entangled in his strict daily regime. On occasion, if 
Nursultan Abishuly thinks that emphasis should be placed on 
questions raised by those persons he receives and the time 
allotted is too short, it often happens that the president will 
remain at work until 1:00 in the morning to resolve some 
question which has come up in this way. In fact, at a time like 
the present, when unresolved problems and questions are 
overflowing, we have gotten used to having the president work on 
Saturday and sometimes on Sunday. 
  [Smayyl] It is well known that there are a great many people 
sending the president letters and asking to see him. 
Specifically, what kinds of letters reach the hands of Nursultan 
Abishuly? What kinds of persons does he receive with what kinds 
of problems? Who determines this? 
  [Abiqayev] Indeed, what you say is true. The number of 
requests, appeals, and suggestions coming to the head of state 
and the number of persons asking to see him are not decreasing. 
During the past period of the present year, more than 2,000 
letters arrived each month and nearly 500 citizens were received 
each month at the apparate. One must add to this the letters 
received by the president when he is on a trip and those 
citizens he receives in local areas. 
  We get a lot of letters from CIS countries and from abroad. 
Nearly half of the president's mail are letters expressing 
support for his policies. There are many letters requesting 
help. Most of them are solved at the oblast level. However, we 
seem to think that only the president call solve all the 
problems of Kazakhstan. 
  As for letters read personally by Nursultan Abishuly and 
those persons received by him personally, the situation is as 
follows: the Apparate Division for Letters and Receiving 
Citizens provides to the president a summary of the letters 
arriving each month. The summary includes a discussion of the 
geography of the requests and appeals, of questions raised, and 
of the social circumstances of those writing the letters. At the 
same time, classifications are made of suggestions and thoughts 
regarding major problems, and letters directed at the 
development of our state and people. Direct assignments are 
given to the president, vice-president, prime minister, their 
deputies, oblast governors, and ministers, and to other high 
officials in terms of the classified letters and there is 
follow-up to make sure that the assignments are fulfilled. 
  Likewise, we analyze what those people wanting access wish 
to 
say and we make suggestions to the president. The head of state 
himself selects the people he wants to see and directly assigns 
other persons to be received by the appropriate official. 
  [Smayyl] A short time ago, United States Ambassador Courtney 
was received by Nursultan Abishuly and gave him a letter from 
the American President. Do you know what that letter was about? 
In general, when heads of state write letters to one another, 
what kinds of things are they about? 
  [Abiqayev] At first letters from foreign heads-of-state to 
the president of Kazakhstan had a purely official character. 
They were, it would seem, congratulations in connection with 
some special occasion or letters sent after some particular 
event. The president provided human warmth to this official 
style. He inquired about families, about kin, and freed the 
letters of stuffiness. Not long after such qualities began to be 
felt from the answering letters. We sent a letter to United 
States President Bill Clinton in connection with the 
establishment of an Aral fund and the selection of Nursultan 
Abishuly as Kazakhstan president. The United States chief of 
state made known his warm feelings in his letter to the 
president of Kazakhstan, supported the establishment of the Aral 
Fund, and said that he had given the appropriate orders. 
Likewise, he expressed his approval of the intention of 
Kazakhstan to become a country without nuclear arms. 
  Our relations with the United States have continued to 
develop and relations at the industrial level have proven 
successful. However, governmental authorities have failed to 
give attention to Kazakhstan at the required level. We spoke 
about this to Ambassador Courtney. The words had their effect. 
Recently United States Special Ambassador Strobe Talbott, 
presented the greetings of President Clinton, and said that the 
United States Government would devote special attention to the 
government of Kazakhstan. There was thus an agreement to make 
preparations for bilateral discussions at the ministry and for a 
meeting of the two heads-of-state. In general, when we talk of 
writing letters or of communication, it is in regard to pursuing 
a given question. If there is agreement of views, talks are 
carried out at the foreign minister level and specific steps are 
taken for a meeting of the heads of state. 
  [Smayyl] It is well known that both the president and the 
prime minister are concerned with questions in all sectors of 
life and are making decisions fateful and important for the 
country. As a person who has been there when so many questions 
have been decided at the state level in an independent 
Kazakhstan, tell us: does the president come to fundamental 
decisions in advance or does he seem to make decisions taking 
the suggestions and thoughts offered him into consideration? Are 
the suggestions and thoughts offered by the presidential staff 
adequate from you point of view? Can you recall a case where the 
president was indecisive and unable to come to a specific 
decision? 
  [Abiqayev] Before I fail to answer your question let me look 
in detail at a previous question. "Do the suggestions and 
thoughts of the president's staff satisfy you? The question is 
not the value of the suggestions and thoughts. It should be in 
terms of whether or not they satisfy the president. 
  Becoming an independent country and achieving this in a very 
difficult time places many, many questions before us. Under such 
circumstances, we must recognize that expression of the most 
complex suggestions and ideas from the president has a role in 
the formation of a new society in Kazakhstan. But as to the 
specific question, I cannot say that all the suggestions and 
thoughts expressed equally satisfy the president... 
  [Smayyl] Nurtay Abiqayuly, let us try to get one thing 
clear. 
Are there those on the president's staff who argue with him? To 
whom among those surrounding him does the president listen? What 
does he think of his opponents? 
  [Abiqayev] The words of opponents should not be directed so 
much at argument or at debate. If intelligent thoughts, 
well-conceived ideas are expressed, President Nazarbayev is 
ready to exchange views with them, to argue about those areas 
where there is disagreement, and to support his own policies. He 
strives to convince his opponents that he is right, to talk 
people into accepting his views, and to make them his 
supporters. If during a discussion he realizes that his ideas 
are wrong, he stops supporting them. There has been repeated 
criticism that we do not know how to take the views of others 
into consideration and that we are unable to work with opponents. 
  Courage is needed to argue with the president and, on 
occasion, to come out against him. If one is opposed to him, one 
will have to justify one's ideas in detail. However, Nazarbayev 
respects the views of Minister of Economics Beysenbay Iztilewov 
on theoretical questions. He takes into consideration the views 
of such persons as Minister of Finance Yerkeshbay Derbisov, 
First Deputy Prime Minister Dawlet Sembayev, Minister of 
Agriculture Baltash Turysnbayev, Qwanysh Sultanov on spiritual 
matters, and Abish Kekilbayev. 
  I suspect that the people know that the president takes 
counsel with the other high officials of the republic: with the 
chairman of the Supreme Kenges, with the vice-president, with 
the prime minister, and carries out the appropriate work. May 
God preserve us from becoming like some other countries where 
one leader is in competition with the other; where one comes out 
against what the other has said. The people are harmed by this. 
If the leading officials of the state know how to achieve 
concord, understanding, necessarily mutual respect, disagreeing 
only when necessary, then conditions will be created for the 
intelligent resolution of problems, whatever they are. In any 
case, we must make it a virtue that national character comes 
first and foremost from the head of state. 
  From what has been said above one should not conclude that 
the president pays no attention to others on his staff. 
Nazarbayev listens readily to good ideas whatever their source. 
  To finish this question, let me return to your original 
question about presidential decisions. 
  We have said that ideas about very important questions 
connected with the present era of transition, about the process 
of our country's consolidation, and about the market economy 
continue to come from the president. That is to say, the 
president expresses key ideas and strategies for solutions. 
Documents connected with very complex questions are prepared and 
he reviews them in detail. They are also discussed at meetings 
where the president is present or at sessions of the cabinet of 
ministers. In this way documents are signed. At present drafts 
of documents are prepared by those suggesting them. They are 
discussed in detail and ways of achieving them discussed. 
Signatures are collected starting with the lowest officials up 
to the heads of government. Only them do I place the document 
before the president. President Nazarbayev entrusts me with 
seeing to it that everything is in order and that the document 
is not contrary to existing law. 
  The Kazakhs have the expression "expect a person not to have 
done a lot of things but to have experienced a lot of things." 
The president's rich life time experience, the fact that he is 
thoroughly involved with the broad masses, his amazing quickness 
of thought, and abundant knowledge make it possible for him to 
express well-based, intelligent thoughts with regard to whatever 
the question. He is altogether divorced from any conceit. He 
always offers new ideas that are proper. Whatever the question, 
it is clear that President Nazarbayev has his own solution. 
However, he does not choose to force his decisions on anyone. In 
my view, first, it would seem as if he is testing himself and 
whether or not his thoughts are founded on those of the masses 
or not. Second, it would seem as if others are being subjected 
to a presidential test in such cases. 
  [Smayyl] As you know, there was a certain chilliness among 
the people towards the words spoken by the president at the time 
of his trip to the United States to the effect that: "we are 
still learning how to do things." There was incomprehension 
about why he was late in expressing his views regarding the 
August 1991 Moscow revolution, at the time of the referendum in 
Russian following it, and at the economic solidarity of the 
"Slavic three..." 
  [Abiqayev] Questions about this were at one time also asked 
of the president and he answered them completely. In my view, we 
must understand the need for the policy adopted by Kazakhstan in 
connection with events taking place in Russia to be different 
than that of some other CIS country. Second, what would we be 
doing becoming involved in the internal affairs of Russia, an 
independent country? Our relations with our neighbor to the 
north are very good. The heads of the two nations cooperate in 
many questions. Some credulous souls have said that the 
president was frightened in connection with the situations 
mentioned above and wish to blame him by saying that he did not 
know what to do. I speak as someone who knows the president 
well: Nazarbayev's personal resolution impresses everyone 
whoever they are, but must not the chief of a great nation be 
concerned with the mood of the time? For that reason, I think 
that the policy maintained by the chief of our country was the 
very best policy. 
  However, which of the new ideas expressed in his speech in 
the United States were wrong? If you think it over, all of us, 
beginning with President Nazarbayev, are still learning. This 
being the case, is it not a good thing to learn from a country 
with a history of more than 200 years. 
  [Smayyl] Nurtay, in the division of function you discussed 
above, you said that the apparate was concerned with 
investigation of the cadre policy of the leadership, with 
investigation of state officials and cadres appointed by the 
government, and with making nominations. How do you understand 
that aspect of your duties? 
  [Abiqayev] The cadre question is something very complicated 
and serious. Whether work gets done or not is, in my view, 
connected with what kinds of cadres are managing what sector. 
That is to say, because Saghat Tugelbayev, recently appointed 
governor of Atyraw Oblast, is an energetic leader, an oblast 
which has for many years seen no benefit whatever from the oil 
it produces, is now showing that it is altogether possible to 
renew the Atyraw area through that wealth. During last August 
and September, when the president was in various oblasts of the 
republic, he returned in a particularly good mood from his 
Atyraw trip. There are many good cadres among rayon governors. 
When the government of Almaty Oblast carried out a measure 
connected with privatization in Talghar Rayon, the president was 
satisfied with what the governor of the rayon, Alikhan Toybayev, 
did. 
  Another example is the process of privatization which makes 
special demands on cadres. If there is someone who does 
particularly well in this area, it is the chairman of the state 
committee, the deputy prime minister. Zhanibek Keribzhanov, who 
manages this authority, understands production and financial 
questions extremely well. However, the president has himself 
contributed a great deal to the privatization question. Many 
ideas have been expressed by Nazarbayev himself. Is not the 
question a matter of continuing to hone and carry out those 
thoughts in terms of its scope and of every circumstance? 
  At present individuals have come to the apparate who are 
sharp, who are adequately informed about economic questions, 
political conditions, and management techniques, and who, above 
all, actively support and actively carry out the policies of the 
president and of the government. Their average age is around 44. 
  [Smayyl] Formerly there was a well-known, single system for 
educating, training, choosing, and placing cadres. Most cadres 
were selected from the Komsomol, or from various industries. 
What is the situation now. 
  Representatives of many nationalities live in Kazakhstan 
along with the Kazakh people. Is not the continuation of the 
division of the Kazakhs into hordes creating difficulties in 
developing a cadre policy? Speak as forthrightly as possible. 
What are the guiding principles in this area? 
  [Abiqayev] You are right, there was previously a carefully 
defined system in cadre policy. This policy certainly had its 
disadvantages and advantages. Bearing in mind present 
circumstances and the demands of democracy, we have taken in 
hand the creation of a new system for choosing cadres. This new 
policy takes fully into consideration the responsibility borne 
by cadres and social circumstances. We are in the process of 
looking into the cadre question from the lowest level to the 
very highest levels of the president's staff, each according to 
his functions. It should be said that at the present time of 
transition to a market economy the president is not happy with 
the work of some oblast governors and some ministers. In this 
connection we are looking at young cadres known for their 
competence in industry and in commercial organizations. 
  The fact that there are representatives of many ethnic 
groups 
living with the Kazakhs is not, as you suggested, making cadre 
policy more difficult. The question is one of which factor one 
chooses to emphasize. If all residents of the republic think of 
themselves primarily as Kazakhstani, who should be concerned 
about what nationality, what place, what parents someone comes 
from. The primary measure must be a person's competence, 
knowledge, skill, and justice. Thereby there should be no 
concern about percentages as in past years. 
  [Smayyl] Since you have spoken about those years, let me ask 
a connected question. During the days of the December Incident, 
Abiqayev, first secretary of the Frunze Rayon Party Committee, 
was opposed to arming the peoples' militia with wooden clubs and 
cleavers and the word quickly spread that: "I will not go 
against my own people." However, the person who was then first 
secretary of Oktyabyr Rayon became a secretary of the Central 
Committee for producing the cleavers... 
  [Abiqayev] Alas, he heaped up such iron weapons in front of 
our rayon party headquarters.. 
  [Smayyl] Tell us, did those words have an influence upon 
your 
subsequent fate? 
  [Abiqayev] When I spoke those words, I was not thinking that 
I was creating some historical heroism. When various [i.e., 
different] instructions began to come down from various places, 
those words came first to the tip of my tongue. Subsequently, 
they have had no influence at all upon my life or my career. 
  [Smayyl] Some have said that your father was the neighbor to 
the president's father... 
  [Abiqayev] Lots of people want to be the president's family, 
friend, or, if all else fails, neighbor. If they are not, they 
pretend that they are and begin to envy. There is nothing 
special about our fathers being neighbors. I was born in another 
village. However, there are those who speak sarcastically in 
this way about the fact that I, like President Nazarbayev, one 
of the old-time people, am the son of a herdsman. 
  The "preservation among the Kazakhs of division into 
hordes," 
as you worded it, cannot be said to be a factor having a 
decisive influence upon cadre policy. Most of those making a lot 
of noise about this or that horde or clan have limited need for 
horde or clan interests. They are calling up the souls of their 
ancestors, and, exhibiting a false shame, are striving for power 
and hiding behind the shadows of figures with influence on the 
people. They are looking out for their own interests. All the 
talk about clan with regard to chief officials is, in any case, 
because of that. 
  To go on repeating such talk after the great meeting 
recently 
at Ordabasy is tedious. Let me repeat again: the primary measure 
of what one accomplishes is one's humanity. 
  [Smayyl] How are nominations for cadres to be appointed to 
high office made? At least, there must be someone who first 
mentions a certain person. But who are these people? 
  [Abiqayev] There must be an investigation. Ideas are 
collected on what is being done in each sector. If a position 
becomes available, as you know, various kinds of letters are 
received and various people make various suggestions. However, 
according to the established order, the following persons make 
the first suggestions: first, the president and the other 
leaders of the republic; second, there is a division in the 
apparate concerned with the oblasts; third there is a division 
carrying out cadre policy; fourth, there are the deputies of the 
prime minister in every sector; fifth, there are the committees 
of the Supreme Kenges; sixth, you can add me to their ranks. 
Such suggestions are made by officials of the apparate too. 
Since they are in contact with cadres on a daily basis, there 
are many occasions when their evaluations, thoughts, and 
viewpoints are altogether different. 
  [Smayyl] Some feel that, since they come in contact on a 
daily basis and work closely with leading officials, they 
themselves are really in control of things. What do you think 
should officials in the apparate be like? 
  [Abiqayev] We have noted that there is a system for 
selecting 
cadres. If any one becomes arrogant, or mercenary, if they 
attempt to make personal gain from their work in the apparate, 
we have little to do with them. It seems that at present some 
build up their own machine when they enter the apparate and when 
they go to the oblast bring people along with them. We cannot be 
in agreement with officials who fail to understand the proverb: 
"if you are great, be small." Understanding that every person 
has his own character, and respect for all is a quality 
absolutely needed for apparate officials. 
  This question, in terms of the apparate managed by you which 
provides services for the president and the government, must be 
the primary question for you at any time. Do these special 
characteristics of your office have an influence on your 
personal life? 
  [Abiqayev] At a difficult time such as the present, the fate 
of the nation and of the land of our people has been entrusted 
to the hands of Nazarbayev. I know that my presence on the 
president's staff under such circumstances is a responsibility 
assigned me by fate. However, I and my family know well what 
this responsibility demands. 
  Since the reins are held in the hands of the president for 
the entire people, we must all assist him in carrying out all 
his thoughts and plans. Only then will our nation pass quickly 
from the time of consolidation and, entering upon the path of 
development, grow to maturity. However, if everything that is 
Kazakhstan is able to stand on its own two feet, it will be 
clearly visible from every corner of the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61091 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CENTRAL ASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Market Terminology Reflects Current Kazakh Attitudes, 
Values </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0390A Almaty ANA TILI in Kazakh 28 Oct 93 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0390A </F>
<F P=104>  Almaty ANA TILI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amanzhol Qoshanov, academician, director of the </F>
Economic Institute of the Republic of Kazakhstan National 
Academy of Sciences, and Aytym Abdirakhmanuly, doctor of 
philogical science: "Let Us Consolidate the Terms of the Market 
Economy Correctly"] 
  [Text] Kazakhstan has become a sovereign nation, an 
independent state. Along with other CIS countries, our republic 
has gone over to a market economy. The Republic of Kazakhstan 
Law on Language was ratified and became effective from 1 July, 
1990. State policy directions for the development of the Kazakh 
language and other nationality languages of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan in the period up until the year 2000 have been drawn 
up and are being carried out. The Kazakh language has been made 
an official language. A republic language committee has be 
formed to set in motion and control these major tasks. All these 
major activities have brought forward major problems such as the 
development of the terminology of the Kazakh language and the 
creation of technical language. 
  Our republic has entered into the difficult and complex road 
leading to a market economy. During the present era of 
transition, we must assume a policy direction, master this vital 
world economic system, and lead our nation to a life of 
abundance. For this reason, we must advance not only enterprise 
but also economic science and education. Along with the objects 
and material base (foundation) of the market economy, we must 
also bring together and perfect its economic infrastructure. For 
that reason, we must learn and teach the market economy and 
develop it on a scientific and theoretical basis. To achieve 
this goal we must write a scientific literature and manuals. 
  It is well known to the people that there is a scientific 
literature and basic terminology, and that there are manuals, 
explanatory dictionaries, and handbooks for a general scientific 
language. There can be no doubt that all of them will have a 
favorable influence upon the mastery of a market economy, its 
study and teaching, and upon the development of science in this 
sector. If previously only specialists understood and promoted 
problems and terminology of the market economy, today life and 
livelihood demand that the whole people know about them. For 
example, hundreds of terms are used in the market economy 
including the following: letter of advice, autarky, hard 
currency deposits held in foreign banks, acceptor, excise duty, 
shareholder, alonge, lessee, barter, business, exchange, 
bonification, broker, brokerage, note, devaluation, dead weight, 
demonetization, dumping, deflation, dollar, discount, 
investment, encashment, inflation, commerce, consulting, 
consortium, concern, courtage, licentiate, leasing, marketing, 
management, know-how, offered, policy, privatization, claim for 
replacement of defective goods, refaction, book-keeping balance, 
spot, transaction, transferred, bill of exchange. 
  The terms of the market economy are connected with the 
terminology of work, of jurisprudence and general political and 
social terminology. However, in the case of the economic sector, 
to date only two dictionaries have appeared: 1) M. Abdirov, T. 
Qulqashev, S. Tolybekov: "Oryssha-Qazaqsha Terminologiya Sodigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Terminological Dictionary], 7 volumes, 
editor-in-chief, A. Abdirakhmanov, "Economika, Philosofiya," 
Almaty, 1962; 2) M. Nasyrova, "Alewmettik-ekonomikalyq 
Terminderding Oryssha-Qazaqsha Tusindirime Sodigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Explanatory Dictionary of Socio-Economic 
Terminology], "Qazaqstan," 1968, 1979. Since it is 25-30 years 
since these dictionaries have appeared, they cannot be obtained 
today and it is clear without saying that they are not up to the 
needs of the present. 
  The Republic of Kazakhstan National Academy of Sciences, as 
it advances a market economy, its terminology, and technical 
language in our republic, while bearing in mind the needs for 
development and consolidation, has composed "Naryqtyq 
Ekonomikanyng Oryssha-Qazaqsha Tusindirme Sozdigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Explanatory Dictionary of the Market Economy] 
(20 pages in size) under the authorship of leading officials of 
the Economic Institute (Academician A. Qoshanov, Doctor of 
Economic Sciences Q. Qashmuratov, Candidate in Economic Science 
Ye. B. Saghymbayev) with the participation of linguists 
(responsible linguistics' editor A. Abdirakhmanov). In our 
article we felt it suitable to offer for an exchange of views to 
republic intellectuals on certain scientific hypotheses and on 
our suggestions arising out of our experience in creating the 
dictionary mentioned above. 
  Hitherto, whereas standard economic terminology developed in 
close connection with terminology in the political-social sector 
as closely connected systems, now many terms in the market 
economy sector are newly created and brought to life. 
  What is the present state of terminology in the Kazakh 
language? We completely agree with the following viewpoint of 
Academician A. Qaydarov who just recently wrote a detailed 
article on the subject: 
  "The terminology of the Kazakh language is in a 
crisis (emphasis by the authors, A.Q and A.A.) today 
to a certain degree in connection with various objective and 
subjective circumstances. Instead of established scientific 
principle providing directions to the terminological process, 
and taking the lead, it lags behind, and terminological practice 
remains under foot." (A.T. Qaydarov, "Qazaq Tili 
Terminologiyasyna Zhangasha Kozqaras" [A New View of the 
Terminology of the Kazakh Language] Q. R. U. GH. A.[Republic of 
Kazakhstan National Academy of Sciences] KHABARLARY, Language 
and Literature Series, No 1, 1993, p 4). 
  Academician A. Qaydarov suggested 11 principles in this 
article as his conclusions for providing new directions for the 
terminology of the Kazakh language, regulating it, and further 
developing it. However, in our view these principles group along 
two (there could be more or less) basic lines. The first is to 
use to the utmost the internal possibilities of the mother 
tongue in creating terminology. The second is to establish new 
terms based on other terminology. (For example, whereas the vast 
majority of loan words at one time in history were from Arabic, 
Persian, and Mongolian, most borrowed words in the 19th and 20th 
centuries are from Russian or from other European languages via 
Russian.) However, if we carefully analyze these two overall 
principles, the ways in which terminology is constructed by 
semantic, phonetic, and grammatical means, and the various 
linguistic paths through which terms come in from other 
languages, the number of principles could be increased further. 
Thus there is the need to supplement the principles suggested by 
A. Qaydarov and also to consolidate some. For this reason we 
consider the two lines discussed above as scientifically proper 
in the question of the creation and consolidation of the 
terminology of a market economy. 
<H3>  1. Using to the Utmost the Internal Possibilities of the 
Mother Tongue in Creating Market Economy Terminology </H3>
  Inherent in this principle is one of those things creating 
the most difficulty in Kazakh scientific terminology: 
instability of terminology. Thus one of the most important goals 
in consolidating terminology is to stabilize that terminology in 
terms of its lexical meaning and to employ a given term always 
with the same meaning. Below we will discuss some unstable 
terminology and make some specific suggestions about how to 
unify these expressions. 
  The term "arbitration" occurs in Kazakh as arbitrazh, 
torelik, qazylyq, and sarapshylyq. In my view we should continue 
to use the international term arbitrazh as it is. The reason is 
that an arbitrator is concerned about disputes when industries, 
units, and organizations sign contracts, change them, modify 
them, carry them out, and make decisions regarding compensation 
when one party to the contract has caused harm to the other. For 
this reason, since arbitration is an institution of state 
importance and scope, the word should be used as is. Among the 
synonyms mentioned, the word sarapshy must be established as an 
equivalent to "expert" since a expert is a specialist with 
expertise in some sector. 
  The word "lease" occurs frequently as zhal or zhaldaw, and 
lessee as zhalger. At present we must make the words zhaldaw and 
zhaldawshy equivalent to nayem, and nayemshcik. It is proper to 
use zhaldaw (zhal) alone to replace the above arenda or nayem. 
This is because the two words have the same meaning but are 
different. Arenda is from Latin and nayem is from Russian. There 
are the words broker, makler, posrednik in Russian and all of 
them are given in Kazakh by the word deldal alone. The time has 
come to classify these words. The English word broker is an 
individual who is a middleman for goods, exchange, and funds 
exchange, or it can be a firm. The German word makler is a 
person who acts as a go-between when trade and financial 
contracts have been signed. ("Sovremennyy Slovar Inostrannykh 
Slov" [Current Dictionary of Foreign Terms], Moscow, "Russkiy 
Yazyk," 1992. The etymologies and meanings of foreign words used 
here are from this dictionary.) Looking at these meanings, a 
broker is not an individual, a broker is also a firm and an 
organization; however, a makler is a person. For that reason we 
suggest using these terms as follows in Kazakh: broker for 
"broker," deldal for "makler," and kelistirushi for "go-between." 
  The Russian terms voznagrazhdeniye, oplata, plata, and 
platezh are used improperly in Kazakh. Thereby voznagrazhdeniye 
means "reward," oplata, "remuneration," plata, "pay," and 
platezh, "payment." When we examine these words in context using 
them in this way seems correct. 
  The Russian words dogovor, kontrakt, kontsessiya, pakt, 
sdelka, and soglasheniye are, as a rule, sometimes represented 
in Kazakh as shart, sometimes as kelisim. Let us put things into 
order: dogovor is a shart ["agreement"], kontrakt is kontrakt, 
pakt is pakt, sdelka is mamile ["a treaty, pact, verbal 
agreement; a deal"], soglasheniye is kelisim ["agreement, 
contract"]. By a decision of the Kazakh State Terminological 
Committee, sdelka is kelisim; however, birzhavaya sdelka is a 
birzha mamilesi ["financial agreement"]. We must look at these 
terms again and define sdelka as mamile. Thereby soglasheniye 
will remain, regularly, kelisim. 
  It would be proper to use the following terms used in an 
irregular manner in the market economy as follows: dolg should 
be borysh ["debt"], dolzhnik should be boryshqor ["debtor"], 
zadatok, kepildeme ["security, deposit"], zadolzhenosty, 
bereshek ["debt"], zayem, zayem (state) kredit, nesiye ["debt, 
obligation"], and ssuda, qaryz ["loan"]. 
  Another group of terms used incorrectly are terms connected 
with profit and loss and accounting in economics, work, 
financing, and jurisprudence. They have not been systematized to 
this day and are each used differently when employed. Thus, for 
us to prove that this is the case could not be done even in a 
long report. We offer specific suggestions thinking that these 
terms should be used as follows: dokhod, 1) tabys ["income, 
profit"], 2) tusim ["yield, gain"], vyruchka, tusim, zatrata, 
shyghyn ["loss"], prikhod, kiris ["profit, gain, income"], 
rasxhod, shyghys ["expense"], pribyl, payda ["profit"], raschet, 
yeseptesu ["settle accounts"], schet, yesepshot ["account, 
accounting"], uchet, yesepke alu ["take into account"], ubytok, 
ziyan ["loss"]. 
  No equivalents have been established for terms such as the 
Russian words zakaz, zayavka, and porucheniye, often encountered 
in daily life. We suggest that they be used as follows: zakaz, 
tapsyrys ["order"], zadaniye, tapsyrma ["assignment, task"], 
zayavka, otinim ["that which is desired, requested"], 
zayavleniye, 1) otinish ["request"], 2) malimdeme 
["announcement"], porucheniye, tapsyrym ["assignment, task"]. 
  The terms zona and region used in daily life are only 
represented in Kazakh by aymaq. The word region, originally 
taken from Latin and in recent years spread throughout the world 
and established through the English language, corresponds nicely 
to Kazakh aymaq. This is because the meaning of the two words is 
"a large area combining several oblasts of a country or even 
several countries in terms of economic geography." (Loc. cit., p 
516). Moreover, since zona, taken from Greek, retains the 
economic-territorial meaning, that should be kept as is. Thus we 
should use aymaq for region and zona for zona. 
  One of the fundamental services of the market economy is 
connected with trade, as is well known. However, the terminology 
of this sector is altogether entangled and has not been 
distinguished. We are not going to examine the terminology of 
the trade sector term by term, nor research it, but we suggest 
the proper use below: kommertsiya, kommertsiya, kommersant, 
kommersant, kommercheskaya torgovlya, kommertsiyalyq sawda 
["commercial trade"], kommercheskiy, kommertsiyalyq 
["commercial"], spekulyatsiya, alypsatarlyq ["speculation"], 
torgi, sawdagha salu ["trade in something"], torgovlya, sawda 
'["trade, trading"], torgovets, sawdager ["tradesman"]. 
  The words kompaniya, kompanon, and tovarishchestvo used in 
the market economy also need Kazakh equivalents. The term 
kompaniya means a union of industries in trade, production, 
transport, and other sectors. For that reason, we should use the 
Kazakh word seriktestik ["group of friends"] for it, and 
seriktes ["friend, comrade"] for kompanon and seriktik 
["camaraderie"] for tovarishchestvo. 
  We need to regulate terms associated with supervision, 
control, and testing in social life. For example, we must use 
them as follows: Kazakh baqylaw ["observe, control"], for 
kontrol, baqylawshy ["one observing, controlling"], for 
kontroler, qadaghalaw ["review"] for nadzor, tekseru ["check, 
test"] for reviziya. 
  The word metod and the terms developed from it are not used 
correctly. For this reason the time has unquestionably come to 
use the word adis ["means"]. There is no need to reform the use 
of the word using metod, adis, tasil ["means, method"]. In our 
view the time has come to use, for the words developed from 
metod, adisteme ["systematized"], for metodika, adisnama 
["theory of method"], or metodologiya, for metodologiya, and 
tasil for priem. The Kazakh word adisnama can certainly confer 
the idea of "the study of scientific means for knowing" and I 
think that it will become normal use. However, it seems as if, 
for the present, the term metodologiya will continue to be used 
along with it. 
  The terms rezerv, resurs, and fond are frequently used 
primarily in the press along with the word qor ["resource, 
stock, fund"]. We think that they should be specified and used 
as follows: nakopleniye, qorlanu ["accumulate stocks"], rezerv, 
rezerv, rezervnyy fond, rezerv qor, resurs, resurs, fond, qor. 
  In practice the words obespecheniye and strakhovaniye are 
altogether confused. The should be used as follows as defined by 
the State Terminological Commission: obespecheniye, 
qamsyzdandyru ["insure against something"], obespecheniye 
sotsialnoye, alewmettik qamsyzdandyru, strakhovaniye, saqtandyru 
["protect"]. 
  The following often-encountered terms should be used without 
confusing them: oborot, Kazakh aynalym ["turnover"], 
obrashcheniye, aynalys ["turning around"]. In practice, when 
these terms are translated, we have often observed that because 
of the lack of the appropriate dictionaries, or because of 
uncertain meanings, certain terms are switched. We will only 
mention a few of the terminological combinations necessary for 
their proper use: optovyye tseny, kotere satu baghalary (tolayym 
satu baghalary) ["prices for sale in bulk"] (either), 
roznichnyye tseny, bolshek sawda baghalary ["prices for separate 
sales"], poshlina, bazh salyghy ["customs' duty"], tomozhiya, 
keden ["tax"], rentabelnost, paydalylyq ["profitability"], 
effektivnost, tiimdilik ["advantageousness"], etc. 
<H3>  2. Use of Terms From Other Languages in Consolidating 
Terminology for the Market Economy </H3>
  In general in Kazakh up until the time of the October 
Revolution words were introduced from Persian, Arabic and 
Russian, and a few from Mongolian. Typically among them was the 
entry of political and economic terms. We have no space here to 
characterize them all. 
  Terms in the modern Kazakh language for the market economy 
created on the basis of European languages are introduced and 
used through Russian. We will not be able to save ourselves from 
this and we need not lose the habit. For example, the rapid 
growth of the internal market economy within the Kazakhstan as a 
nation, and the very great increase in the establishment of 
commercial and marketing relations with foreign countries have 
demanded the use of hundreds of word in the market economy 
sector. They include words such as: abandon, aval, advance, 
advantage, letter of advice, autarky, admonition, agio, actuary, 
share, at par, auditor, out right, bonus, bordereau, broker, 
currency, warrant, slogan, dekort. 
  To be sure, we cannot just accept such foreign terms and we 
must strive to find Kazakh equivalents. Although there are many 
such words, finding and using Kazakh equivalents for such words 
have begun to occur. For example, there are a number of 
[replacement] terms now being used very nicely in practice, but 
there are still only a few. They include: arenda, Kazakh zhal, 
zhaldaw, arendator, zhalger, devalvatsiqa, baghasyzdanu 
["devaluation"], inflyatsia, qunsyzdanu ["become valueless"], 
monopoliya, monopoliya (dara iyelik) ["individual ownership"], 
privatization, zhekeshelendiru ["make private, individual"], 
prezentatsiya, tanystyru ["act of making known"]. 
  From this perspective, only a few words have been created as 
equivalents to international terms and terms with those meanings 
in Russian. In so doing we should not seek for new words but for 
single words in Kazakh equivalent to two such words. For 
example, shaghym ["complaint"] for zhaloba and pretenziya, 
buyryq ["edict"] or tsirkulyar and prikaz, ulgi ["pattern, 
model"] for shablon and obrazets, etc. 
  In conclusion there stands before the republic complicated 
tasks in the creation, development, and consolidation of terms 
of the market economy, in the popularization of the ideas in the 
scientific literature, in textbooks, in the pages of the press, 
on radio and television, and other mass media, and in the 
creating of terminological and explanatory dictionaries and 
handbooks for this sector. We have shared some of our practical 
thoughts with you regarding correct consolidation of terminology 
for the market economy, a key area of these tasks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61092 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr001___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title: 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CENTRAL ASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tatimov Examines Current Demographic Issues </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0392A Almaty AQ BOSAGHA in Kazakh No 8, Oct 93 pp 2-3 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0392A </F>
<F P=104>  Almaty AQ BOSAGHA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Maqash Tatimov, demographer, member of the </F>
National Kenges for State Policy under the Republic of 
Kazakhstan cabinet of ministers, candidate in pedagogical 
science, recorded by Zhanar Qurmanqulqyzy: "I Am One of the 
Those Responsible for Beginning the Great Caravan."] 
  [Text] [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, the people know you 
well as a scientist who has carried out a great deal of 
research, in spite of your youth, with the future of your nation 
and its prosperity in mind. They also know you well as a social 
activist who has never softened his valuable suggestions but has 
expressed them directly. I would like to begin our "discussions" 
with your own family. 
  [Tatimov] In general, I think it a mistake to become 
involved 
with a man's personal life in the pages of the press and to 
belabor it. However, it is possible that the thought has emerged 
from time to time that since I have been a demographer "we 
should see what kind of contribution this scientist is making to 
his own demographics in practice." 
  My first wife and I did not get along at all and we 
divorced. 
The name of my wonderful mate of the present is Mayra. She is a 
bibliographer by specialty. She is a graduate of the Moscow 
Cultural Institute, and is a doctoral candidate and an assistant 
professor. 
  I am the father of five children. My oldest child is a girl, 
23 years-old, a student. Kenzhem, my son, is nine. He is a 
student in the third grade of School No. 141 in Almaty. 
  During my youth I traveled a great deal in various parts of 
the republic. When my comrades, living in the four corners of 
the republic, saw a round yellow baby resembling me they decided 
it was "my child." "There is nothing shameful in words of 
greatness." (Tatimov was joking). 
  My wife did not think I was too eager. However, she was 
educated and I wanted to understand her. Thus, even if we were 
not totally in agreement about everything, we made our peace, 
came to understand one another, and are living a good life. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Since we have begun to establish state 
relationships with foreign countries, our kinsmen, who were 
forced to migrate due to past blows of fate, have begun to 
return. Among them there are many who, taking the view that "it 
is better to be a slave in one's own country than a sultan among 
foreigners," have returned once and for all in spite of our 
grave economic conditions. What kind of a contribution will such 
individuals make to the growth of our people's numbers? 
  [Tatimov] Indeed it is true that a great caravan of 
migration 
has begun to flow into our country. Our kinsmen were forced to 
leave their country far behind, throwing their fates to the 
winds. They encountered oppression from conservatives at the 
time of the civil war, were annihilated by leftist persecution 
at the time of Goloshchekin, and were alarmed by racist 
oppression during the era of colonialism. For a time we 
blackened the reputation of these innocents, but now a just 
political evaluation is being assigned, and we are not being 
sparing in our help to all of those expressing a desire to 
"return" to their native land in spite of the fact that our 
sovereign country is itself barely on its feet. This process is 
going forward with the direct support of the government and the 
president. I am one of those directly responsible for 
beginning what is in truth the last great migration, for its 
proper management, and for its timeliness. The Ministries 
of Labor, of Foreign Affairs, and of Internal Affairs are 
involved with such problems as the settlement of our kinsmen 
returning from abroad. 
  One in three of our kinsmen in Mongolia, that is to say, 
more 
than 50,000, have returned. We may say that the caravan has 
started and has taken the road. This great caravan will be 
continued from still other countries... 
  Kazakhs living in Tajikistan became refugees last year due 
to 
the effects of the civil war started by religious extremists. 
Our president has given them great assistance. Food, clothing, 
and drugs have been delivered by special trains. Some 6,000 of 
the 9,000 Kazakhs in Tajikistan have been evacuated 
simultaneously on the trains. Some 1,200 families have been 
resettled in Southern Kazakhstan Oblast, primarily in Zhetisay 
Rayon. 
  At the time of the 1990 Osh Incident, I was in Qorghantobe 
Oblast, in Qolkhozabat Rayon. At that time I advised our kinsmen 
in that area to return quickly to their country. Most listened 
to what I had to say, but some seemed to want to continue to 
think about it. Resources were adequate to evacuate them. Those 
remaining behind, who did not migrate, regretted it and in the 
end had to be removed involuntarily at the time of the civil 
war. Thus, there were also losses. In general it is a good thing 
to listen to experts thinking about what to do in such questions. 
  New focuses for migration have emerged. By the end of the 
year, a total of 7,000 persons, 1,000 families from Iran and 400 
families from Turkey, will migrate. A new Migration Department 
is now carrying out preparatory work. The heads of this 
department, Ghaziz Yesmuqanov, Pamir Kameldiyev, and Nurlan 
Ralqymzhanov, are doing a great deal of work. First of all, they 
are planning to evacuate military refugees who deserted at the 
time of the war in Afghanistan. This is because they are 
citizens of no country, lack employment, suffer from poor living 
standards, and, for that reason, should be returned to 
Kazakhstan quickly. 
  The proverb states: "it is difficult to begin a trek." If we 
understand how to be humane by creating favorable conditions for 
those coming for the first time and for those now leaving, I 
think that the 15,000 Kazakhs still remaining in Iran and the 
25,000 in Turkey will want to return to their homeland. Our 
"butter-heals" from Iran will primarily find a place to live in 
warm Southern Kazakhstan Oblast. The reason is that we cannot 
send those coming from warm climates to places where the weather 
is severe. They might not become acclimatized there! 
  There is something which must be said here: we are 
predisposed not to like but to hate Kazakhs. Instead of taking 
our countrymen who have come from foreign countries into our 
midst and making them our kinsmen, we accuse them by saying: 
"Oh!, are we to take this to mean that you have not forgotten 
Kazakh customs? You say one thing and do another." We call those 
returning from Mongolia "Mongols," and those come from Turkey, 
"Turks." Those come from Europe we accuse for their inability to 
speak Kazakh at all. There are now those who assign guilt 
because we accept some people who do no work at all. Instead of 
acting like this and looking for problems, I can say that if, 
above all, we make it possible for them to support themselves, 
and help them to get used to the new country, everything will be 
fine. 
  I do not know whether or not you understand, my dear, when I 
call our foreign countrymen "butter-heals." I have my reasons 
for calling them this. What have your Kazakhs not experienced!? 
During the time of the "Lake Alqa flight" [Dzungarian 
invasions], they put one foot behind the other [in the snow] and 
became "white-heals." During the era of colonialism they 
suffered oppression as "yellow-heals." During the time of the 
civil wars they wandered as "black-heals." During the time of 
Goloshchekin they suffered slaughter as "red-heals." There is 
the wise teaching of our forefathers that "there is a good side 
to every difficulty." In fact, there must be good sides to each 
of these four difficulties. The first good side, I think, is 
that our kinsmen who have gone to foreign countries have 
returned as "butter-heals." They will make a contribution to the 
flourishing of our nation with their work, goodness, honorable 
intentions, and experience in the school of life. It is 
well-known that "butter-heal" immigrants are those who have made 
countries such as America, Australia, Argentina, New Zealand, 
and Canada flourish and develop. 
  Similarly, three million of the "butter-heals" resident in 
foreign countries will make a major contribution to the 
flourishing and enrichment of our sovereign nation. For that 
reason, we must put our white tablecloth on the table before 
them and we must assemble them together in our black yurt called 
Kazakhstan. 
  We have mentioned the migration which we have recently 
organized. We have observed other, disorganized elemental 
migration. There are also many who have returned to their native 
country with their own resources, or by force. Thus, 20,000 
people came last year from Russia, 14,000 from Uzbekistan, and 
6,000 from other republics, 40,000 in all. All of these migrants 
will have a favorable influence on the exhausted 
ethno-demographic shape of our republic. 
  Something else which I would like to mention: I think that, 
God willing, and if the world does not end, a new campaign will 
begin in the new future to move gradually local people remaining 
behind in the ecological disaster of the Aral to northern 
oblasts and rayons which are ecologically healthy but are still 
weak in their ethno-demographic structure. This would comprise, 
first and foremost, Aral, Qazaly, and Shalqar rayons which 
remain in the disaster area. Later, if possible, we will have to 
take up the question of returning our kinsmen living in 
Karakalpakistan to the motherland. That migration would occupy a 
particular place in the ethno-demographic development of 
Kazakhstan. According to my calculations, if we were to move at 
least half of the 600,000 of our Karakalpak kinsmen living in 
the vicinity of the Aral in an organized manner to the recently 
mastered regions, that alone would change the ethno-demographic 
shape of Northern Kazakhstan in our favor in a fundamental way. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Children were once many in the families of 
Kazakhs who knew how to repeat the proverb: "a house with 
children is a bazaar, a house without children a dry graveyard." 
It has been said that the number of large families has been on 
the decline in recent years. What kind of evidence can you offer 
in regard to this? 
  [Tatimov] This question is one which is dear to my heart and 
well known to me. Since I understand the question well, I have 
been endeavoring to instill demographic thoughts and traditional 
attitudes into the minds of Kazakh women. Facts from my own 
research are offered in my book, "Tale of the People or Numbers 
and Thought," and in my recently published eighth book "Kazakh 
World (How Many Kazakhs Are there? When and Where Have Kazakhs 
Been Driven Out? When and Where Have They Been Oppressed, 
Shot?") These two books must still have not reached readers. The 
first copies of the first book were put into the pockets of 
those attending the World Conference of Kazakhs. The book is 
still not on sale and may never be on sale! The second book has 
only recently been published with a run of 60,000 from the 
"Ata-Mura" Press headed by an intellectual called Muqtar 
Qulmukhametuly. For that reason, let me repeat these facts again 
for Kazakh women from what is in this book: according to the 
1926 Census, each married Kazakh women had on the average 10 
children. After that the birth rate abated. The reasons for this 
were the deterioration of the health of the people, hunger, and 
Russian settlement. It could be said that the Russians had a 
role. Russian women at that time too took good care of 
themselves and did not have large families. Was not this 
characteristic of theirs beginning to infect Kazakh women? 
  In 1959 the number of births per woman had fallen to seven. 
However, since infant mortality decreased along with the 
birthrate, a demographic wave, a new explosion appeared. The 
reason was that, whereas women had previously borne 10 children 
while only one or two or survived, now only one or two of seven 
children died and five-six lived to maturity. Thus a demographic 
explosion was created. This was a general process taking place 
worldwide. Kazakhstan made its own contribution. The demographic 
wave lasted until the 1970s. 
  According to 1989 census information, the high birthrates of 
recent times had strongly declined, and we were near a three 
child threshold. Thereby we approached a level of two children 
in the cities and of four children in rural areas. This must 
give Kazakh women a great deal to think about. In particular, 
the market place was exerting a negative influence. While the 
birthrate continued to decline, the number of children given 
birth by Kazakh mothers in absolute terms stayed more or less 
the same. 
  The fact that this year the number of children given birth 
to 
by Kazakh women in the republic will be in the vicinity of 
202,000-205,000 is only because the demographic structure of our 
people is young. The reason is that those born during the period 
of the demographic explosion now have families and are bringing 
children into the world. I emphasized in an interview given to 
the newspaper ZHAS ALASH the need to struggle for a fourth 
child. The reason is that if the first child is a son, it 
replaces the father, and if a girl the mother, and the second 
child simply replaces the parents. The third child compensates 
for our various deficiencies, those not marrying and old maids. 
Thereby we maintain our numbers at a set level. It is the fourth 
child which provides growth. I myself am the tenth and last 
child of my father and the last child of my mother, the fourth 
son. But for such Kazakh characteristics of my parents, I would 
not have come into the world in 1940, just before the war, 
during the last difficulties of a time of persecution. If that 
was so, who would be now talking to you here about demographics. 
(Tatimov laughed loudly when he said this.) 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] One of the questions which you have raised 
and which has gained the attention of the nation during the last 
two or three years is getting one or two children from women who 
are still young but have not found mates. For this purpose they 
become junior wives or second wives to men who already have 
senior wives. There are many who are against this. Have you now 
changed your support for this policy? 
  [Tatimov] No! This is a very complicated question. It should 
not be oversimplified in this manner! A Kazakh has said: "the 
most difficult struggles are the struggle for land and the 
struggle of widows." However, today the struggle of those "old 
ladies" must be more difficult than any. It would not be too 
much to devote an entire interview just to that question. 
  Let me first of all tell who these "old ladies" are and 
provide an explanation. That is because some go on about "old 
ladies," "old ladies," but do not know who they are. "Old 
ladies" are those of the female sex who are over 25 but not yet 
50, who have never married, never established a household, and 
have had no children. In developed countries an expression like 
[Kazakh] "old ladies" is altogether absent. Kazakh women fear 
gossip and remain in their inappropriate state. Today they 
cannot extricate themselves from their dilemma. My advice is as 
follows: let us get a child or so from them all. This "severe" 
advice may seem a little coarse to others but life proves that 
it is correct. Is not becoming a mother and loving a child 
better than living alone? When we realize that most of today's 
"old ladies" are office workers, [we know that] they live in 
front of people. For that reason, they fear malicious words. In 
my opinion, it is criminal for them to waste their lives because 
people gossip. There are at present 110,000 "old ladies" among 
the Kazakhs and if they had only one-two children this would 
bring a generation of 220,000 into the world. Just like the 
proverb: "a voracious horse is no good horse," to be called an 
"old lady" is no honor for a woman. The words of the people are 
one thing, the laws of life are another. There is no need to 
issue a special law on the taking of two wives. It would be 
proper if this question were decided with the participation of 
the mosque. All we have to do is to drop Article 208 of the "Law 
on Marriage and the Family." It is stated there that taking two 
wives is forbidden. According to my research, no one has been 
brought to trial on the basis of that law since the war; that is 
to say, this law is entirely ineffective. Thus we must drop a 
dead law which no longer functions. After that, as the Russians 
say, "we can do anything which is not forbidden." 
  I know that some people do not agree with my views on "old 
ladies." That is to be expected. Everyone will not agree with 
every suggestion that is made. There will be proponents and 
opponents of every innovation. That is life. I know well that 
when I first made this suggestion that there would be opposition 
and that my opponents would primarily be those women supporting 
a false emancipation who are literate and who think themselves 
equal to their husbands (some times even superior). Moreover, 
they indeed came out against me and we were unable to cast light 
on this vital question. Only when this has been done can we 
cautiously approach this question as impartially possible and in 
a serious manner. It would be proper for us to look at the issue 
in such a way that no one is insulted and no one's feelings are 
hurt. 
  Those in favor of polygamy, in order to back up their 
position, make the point that Kazakhs formerly practiced 
polygamy and that this ancestral custom must be renewed. I am a 
supporter of limited polygamy but have no desire to present 
deceptive evidence in support of my views. As shown by the 1897 
census, only three-four percent of the Kazakh men of the time 
had two wives and those with three wives were one in a thousand. 
Thus, if our women who have remained unmarried become second 
wives to around four-five percent of all Kazakh men, the problem 
would thereby gradually be solved. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] It would seem as if another of the ideas 
which you have advanced, your thoughts on recognizing mothers of 
large families, has found expression in the presidential edict 
on this topic. Thus you are making plans for the carrying out of 
your suggestions related to the presidential edict. When will 
the day arise when the appropriate mothers get "golden prizes" 
and "silver prizes?" In honoring these mothers will only the 
number of children brought into the world be considered or will 
there be other measures as well? 
  [Tatimov] Indeed, I am making plans. It will not be long 
until such prizes are awarded. Competitions for these gold and 
silver prize honors are being announced. Nominations are being 
reviewed but no selections have been made. 
  The golden prize will be given to mothers who have borne and 
raised eight or more children. In my view, the level should be 
reduced to seven since the number of mothers with large families 
is on the decline and the number seven is a lucky number for the 
Kazakhs. The words "sufficient" [zhettik] and "adequacy" 
[zhetistik] have come from the word for seven [zheti] and the 
ideas of offering seven of something, of preparing seven cakes 
have arisen from that superstition. 
  The silver prize will be given to distinguished mothers who 
have raised five or more children. However, I have expressed the 
view that mothers with three children or more should also be 
included among the ranks of those with large families. Likewise, 
I have offered the suggestion that if there are distinguished 
mothers who raise and educate still more children, the president 
himself, or the premier, or the governor of the appropriate 
oblast or rayon should award them a special prize. 
  To be sure mothers who have borne many children, but who 
have 
not educated them properly or even abandoned them will not 
receive such honors. Far from it! 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, please do not hold it against 
me 
if I seem disrespectful and ask a question that is too direct. 
You, to be sure, are one of those interested in the growth of 
you country and in this regard have come out against artificial 
abortion. However, who knows better than women the soul and 
circumstances of women? For example, if a husband's income is 
inadequate to raise and educate five-six children, who gains 
from the bearing of children who crowd together for a miserable 
hand-to-mouth existence. In addition, an era of total 
destitution such as the present and the ecological environment 
are having a considerable negative impact upon the health of 
mothers. Every other pregnant women is anemic. It is well known 
that women with this disease do not bear healthy children. Thus, 
it would seem appropriate that the decision in this area to have 
children or limit a family belong to the family, and to women 
themselves. 
  [Tatimov] Indeed, I am opposed to abortion. You are correct. 
The decision to limit or not limit the number of children is 
something which concerns husband and wife equally. First the 
woman and then the man. Many women do not take into 
consideration their husband's views on this question. This is 
the reason for the increase in the number of abortions and the 
use of the loop. The man must also participate in determining 
family sizes. I think that it would be appropriate in the future 
to introduce a law that married women must have their husband's 
permission to get an abortion or to have a loop installed. In 
particular, smart women too often think of their own concerns 
and are having a negative influence on our demographics. To give 
numbers, whereas 204,000 Kazakhs were born in Kazakhstan in 
1992, during the same year 100,000 abortions were performed in 
the republic, 50,000 loops were installed, and various other 
things were done to prevent the birth of children. As a result, 
more than half of the children brought to life by Kazakh women, 
some 250,000, were eliminated. The number of children who could 
have been born but were not born exceeded the number of children 
born. We are not saying that families should not be limited. 
Each mother should be concerned about her health. However, the 
fact that 300,000 children of Kazakh women capable of bearing 
children were voluntarily suffocated and rejected makes my 
insides seethe. Is that Islam? This leaves aside humanitarian 
considerations. 
  Last year 47,000 Kazakhs died. Some 300,000 children were 
born, and, even with the death of 55,000, our people could have 
gained not 157,000, but 245,000. We, we ourselves, thus 
extinguished a substantial 88,000 of our natural increase. 
  There are the lamentations "Black Old Woman," "Black Old 
Man," "Black Child." Leaving their sorrow alone, who is 
expressing sorrow for the child never born and who feels the 
loss? There is no artist to produce a song about this or to 
write words. The greatest of sorrows is the sorrow of the unborn 
child. I miss them, although I am only a demographer... 
  My words to my daughter-in-law were when she had had a child 
and was in difficulty because of it: My Kazakh it is said, each 
child has its own fate. There is a Kazakh folk saying: "if one 
extra lamb is born, there will be one more plot of grass." 
  I am against limiting families with the excuse that as the 
market place has gained so much power we cannot support them. 
Let me consider each child separately. 
  The first child is always born for the father and replaces 
him. The second child is born to replace the mother. The third 
child is born to compensate for deficiencies. The fourth child 
is necessary for demographic law, for growth. If the fifth child 
comes to life, it does so for the people. The sixth child is for 
the fatherland, for the flourishing of our sovereign country. 
The seventh child, that is an honored number, and words which 
fulfill the desires of Heaven. When the eighth child is born, 
the spirits are satisfied. When the ninth child is born it 
satisfies the Muslim Religion, the will of Allah. If you say 
that we are nine children in our home, then your mother and 
father, Aqqaysha and Qurmanqul, are persons who have satisfied 
the will of Heaven in the blue sky, of the spirits of the dark 
earth, and of Allah, the only God. I would like to say thanks 
and express my satisfaction to your mother in particular and 
thereafter to your father for increasing and making flourish the 
numbers of the Kazakhs. 
  As for anemia, this disease is due to dietary and vitamin 
deficiencies. For that reason, slaughter a sheep and give it to 
a woman who has just given birth, just as [one does] before she 
gives birth, as a qalzha [special food for pregnant women]. It 
would be appropriate if the place where she works, or if she 
does not work, the place her husband works, or the kolkhoz or 
sovkhoz where the family lives were to provide it. I think this 
is something for local governors to think about.!.. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Let us return to the question of "old 
ladies" 
discussed above. There are many unmarried men. In my view, it 
would seem proper for this issue to find its own proper solution 
without some special state policy. What new facts and 
suggestions do you have to offer about this? 
  [Tatimov] Some have complained that I talk a lot about the 
problem of "old ladies." There are lots of old bachelors, why 
not pick on them? The reason is that women are the fundamental 
demographic support. It is they who increase or decrease the 
number of people. For demography, if a man remains unmarried, 
"with no shame at the words of greatness," if he is impotent, 
this means nothing since another man will take his place. 
However, if a woman does not marry, or remains sterile, or dies, 
another woman cannot replace her. The position of every woman is 
special in demographics. If a man dies, this is just one minus 
for demography. However, when a woman leaves the world, we must 
produce several minuses. If the woman is young, this means that 
four children, 12 grandchildren (at three each) from the 
children, 24 great-grandchildren from the grandchildren (at two 
each) will not be born. For this reason, in demography the 
problem of 110,000 "old ladies" is more of a problem than 44,000 
old bachelors! 
  The reason for the increase in the number of old bachelors 
is 
the worsening of ecological conditions in the republic. Some of 
the children being born in the environmental disaster areas 
suffer from impotency. 
  When we spoke of "old bachelors," we refer to males who have 
never married between the ages of 30 and 55. 
  Recently, I collected statistics throughout the republic on 
those assaulting [and killing] one another. Looking at this 
information, it was primarily men who assaulted [and killed] one 
another. Their numbers were three times more than the women. I 
wondered if the increase in the number of people killing each 
other was due to impotence. This is only a hypothesis. We must 
look at the question more deeply. Among women there are also 
"uninterested women" (frigid women), that is women who are not 
interested in men. However, they do not kill each other for that 
reason. However, impotency is a great grief for men. 
  I have stated above that "old ladies" cannot get out of 
their 
difficulty on their own, but I repeat that, in addition to the 
state, the mosque should become involved in this question. 
However, our mosques still take a mistaken view of them. I call 
this their social "impotency." 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, are there questions which 
concern you more than others just now as a person who loves his 
country? 
  [Tatimov] Tomorrow I will leave on a trip to Koshetaw. My 
purpose in going there is to carry out preparatory work for 
transferring there the Migration Department established under 
the Ministry of Labor. The reason, as I have already stated, is 
that the northern oblasts are still weak demographically. For 
that reason we have decided to move this department to Kokshetaw 
with the aim of preventing such manifestations as separatism, 
harming our young nation as we change the ethno-demographic 
shape of the oblasts. After that I will be in that city to carry 
out public opinion research on moving the capital to Aqmola. As 
a member of the National Kenges on State Policy, and as a 
specialist in demographic science, I will be very much involved 
with making specific suggestions. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Thank you! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
