
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59328 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar004___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  13 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Modern Enterprise System Experiment Described </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0224A Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 23 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0224A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Reform of State-Owned Enterprises Enters New </F>
Stage, Modern Enterprise System To Undergo Experiments in 100 
Enterprises"] 
  [Text] The "Decision of the CPC Central Committee on Some 
Issues Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure" adopted by the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party pointed 
out that establishing a modern enterprise system represents the 
orientation of reform of China's state-owned enterprises. To 
earnestly implement the guidelines laid down by the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, the State 
Commission for Restructuring the Economic System has decided to 
coordinate with related departments to select about 100 pilot 
state-owned enterprises to carry out experiments in establishing 
a modern enterprise system. 
  A modern enterprise system is one which reflects the 
socialized mass production and meets the requirements of the 
market economy. Its rights and responsibilities are clearly 
defined. The enterprise management is separated from government 
administration and carried out scientifically. By establishing a 
modern enterprise system, state-owned enterprises must 
fundamentally change their operation mechanism and genuinely 
become independent legal entities and main bodies in market 
competition. The establishment of the modern enterprise system 
shows that China's enterprise reform has entered a new stage of 
focusing on creating a new enterprise system from the stage of 
attaching importance to the policy of delegating more 
decision-making power to the lower-level units and letting them 
have more profits. To establish a modern enterprise system, we 
must proceed from the state of affairs in China, sum up our 
experience in successfully reforming our enterprises, and 
actively learn from the scientific approach of the enterprise 
system of the Western developed countries in forming the 
enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. 
  It is reported that the pilot enterprises will be selected 
from the large enterprises in various areas under the relevant 
departments of the State Council. Headed by unified leading 
groups these enterprises should have steadily scored outstanding 
achievements in management for three or more years and 
demonstrated high awareness in reforming themselves. Some of 
them will be industrial enterprises, while others commercial 
establishments. Still others will be enterprises in the field of 
science and high technology. Therefore, they will be large in 
number but they will cover all fields of work. 
  Their major tasks are to straighten out relationship between 
ownership and management of state-owned enterprises, set up a 
system of properties for enterprises who are legal entities, 
separate administrative and economic management functions of the 
enterprise and government, establish a diversified form of 
organization for enterprises to keep pace with the development 
of the productive forces, foster a scientific internal 
management system, implement a new accounting system, and so on. 
On the basis of their different characteristics, the pilot 
enterprises will formulate their own experimental plans to carry 
out all reform projects gradually and in a planned manner. 
  To carry out experiments in establishing the new modern 
enterprise system, we must not only solve problems in going 
through the transition period from the stage of the existing 
enterprise system to the new enterprise system, but also 
exercise the macro-control of the state well so that the reform 
projects in controlling state-owned properties and others will 
keep pace with other programs for enterprise reform. Thus, in 
carrying out experiments in selected enterprises, we must 
strengthen our leadership, do a good job in coordinating and 
organizing all pilot enterprises, work out our plans carefully, 
and give the enterprises the proper guidance. We must not only 
carry out reform and create the new, but also boldly carry out 
our experiments energetically, steadily, and reliably and in 
strict accordance with the standard. The State Commission for 
Restructuring the Economic System will convene a national 
conference on the work of restructuring the economic system in 
early December to work out concrete plans for carrying out the 
aforementioned experiments in selected enterprises. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59329 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar004___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  13 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Steps in Converting to Shareholding System Detailed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0142B Beijing ZHONGGUO JINGJI TIZHI GAIGE [CHINA'S 
ECONOMIC STRUCTURE REFORM] in Chinese No 9, 23 Sep 93 pp 36-38 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0142B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO JINGJI TIZHI GAIGE [CHINA'S 
ECONOMIC STRUCTURE REFORM] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview With Sun Xiaoliang (1327 2400 5328): "How To </F>
Restructure State-Owned Enterprises Into Shareholding Companies" 
-- First paragraph is editor's note] 
  [Text] It is no easy task to turn a state-owned enterprise 
into a listed shareholding company. There is a proper set of 
procedure to follow, and there are strict rules and requirements 
at every step. For this reason, ZHONGGUO JINGJI TIZHI GAIGE sent 
a reporter to interview Sun Xiaoliang, general manager of China 
Enterprise Shareholding System Consulting Company. He explained 
the method and procedure for converting enterprises into 
shareholding companies in simple layman's terms based on his own 
practical experience and according to current laws and 
regulations. His approach not only complies with government 
policies but is also workable. It is hoped that this article 
can be of help to those who want to restructure their 
enterprises according to the shareholding system and those who 
are interested in the subject. 
  In a recent interview, Sun Xiaoliang, general manager of 
China Enterprise Shareholding System Consulting Company, talked 
about his own ideas and suggestions on how to convert 
state-owned enterprises into listed shareholding companies. 
  Sun said, since Comrade Xiaoping's Southern tour speech, 
comrades from many localities, departments, and enterprises have 
gone to his firm asking how they could restructure state-run 
enterprises into listed shareholding companies. He said, since 
the founding of the China Consulting Company, more than a dozen 
enterprises have sought its services. Among them were companies 
that intended to list their securities in the Hong Kong and 
Shanghai exchanges, and there were also companies that wanted to 
be listed in Beijing's two corporate shares circulation systems. 
Based on these practical experiences and in accordance with the 
relevant laws and regulations, to convert a state-run enterprise 
into a listed company, essentially, one must follow five major 
steps: 
  One, the enterprise must submit an application and get 
permission to set up a shareholding system experimental 
point. 
  In this step, the enterprise must consider four things: 
First, what form of shareholding system should it choose? 
Second, what are the expected benefits? Third, what are the 
anticipated problems? Fourth, what are the possible risks? 
  There are two choices under the shareholding system--limited 
liability companies and corporations. When choosing the 
corporate format, one must decide whether to raise capital 
privately or go public, and in the former case, one must also 
decide whether to list the securities in the corporate share 
circulation system. Which format best suits the company will 
depend on what is practical and realistic. One must start out 
from practicality and consider the possible benefits as well as 
the risks. The risks referred to here may come from three areas: 
1) Investment risks. Some enterprises do well and others do not; 
stock prices go up and down, and therefore, when buying stocks, 
some people make money, others lose money. This kind of risk is 
borne mostly by the investors. 2) Listing risks. Some listed 
companies are successful; others fail. Listed companies must be 
prepared to take the risk of failing in the market. 
3) Risk of market collapse. This is an inevitable result of the 
stock market's bubble economy. When stock prices soar as a 
result of speculation, it is like a bubble that must eventually 
burst. Stock market disaster can cause serious social problems, 
and one must be prepared to take such risks. 
  When the government department considers approving an 
application to set up an experimental point, it must consider at 
least five things: 1) Does the application meet the state's 
industrial policy requirements? Enterprises that meet the 
state's industrial policy requirements have a better chance of 
being approved. 2) Is the applicant enterprise in a business 
approved by the state to implement the shareholding system? For 
example, enterprises in the banking industry and those in 
businesses pertaining to state secrets are not permitted to go 
public and implement the shareholding system. 3) Are the 
applicant enterprise's construction projects part of a state 
plan? 4) Is the enterprise qualified to and capable of making 
its own management decisions? For example, if many of the 
enterprise's products are under mandatory state plans or are 
required to accept unified state-set prices, its chances of 
getting approval are slim. 5) Can its stock generate a rate of 
return comparable to other stocks? Stocks yielding too low a 
rate of return will not qualify. 
  Sun Xiaoliang pointed out that, for now, after this first 
step is approved, the enterprise must still get a stock issuing 
quota which the state allocates to individual provinces 
(municipalities). This is necessary at this stage so that the 
state can control the number of stocks being listed. 
  Two, the enterprise must formulate and seek approval 
for an overall program to convert to the shareholding 
system. 
  The overall program for conversion must clearly explain five 
points: 1) The purpose of converting to the shareholding system. 
That is, what kinds of enterprise development problems can 
converting to the shareholding system solve? Such problems must 
be real, and the explanation must be convincing enough to move 
"God"--so convincing that the department in charge feels obliged 
to give its approval. 2) The feasibility of converting to the 
shareholding system. There are two important points: Will there 
be an attractive profit to investment ratio to give the 
investors a convincing return on their investments? Will the 
state get even more taxes and dividends from the enterprise 
after it converts to the shareholding system? 3) Plans for 
restructuring the assets. The key lies in reducing related 
transactions, increasing the profit rate, and getting rid of 
assets which should not be brought into the shareholding 
company. 4) Plans for issuing shares, including the total amount 
of capital stock, equity structure, method of issuance, and 
listing location and so on. 5) It must get instructions on 
specific issues, such as who represents the state's equity 
rights, how to deal with the enterprise's share of mandatory 
plans, how to coordinate government-controlled prices, how to 
adjust its tax rates, and so on. There are more than a dozen 
questions, and since situations vary among different 
enterprises, there are different ways to deal with them 
accordingly. 
  Sun Xiaoliang said that this step is the most troublesome 
and 
most complicated. To successfully get through this phase, he 
suggested paying attention to the following 12 points: 1) 
Reexamine the enterprise's development program. The 
capital-raising scope should be based on need, and the 
enterprise should formulate its development plan based on the 
best rate of return on capital and make that the basis for 
determining the number of shares to be issued. 2) Sort out and 
define the property rights. This step is even more complicated 
for enterprises in the ownership-by-the-whole-people system. 3) 
Examine its major contracts and credits and debts. 4) Examine 
plans for implementing the restructuring of company assets. 5) 
Readjust the previous year's profit to investment ratio and next 
year's profit to share capital ratio using the accounting system 
of a shareholding company. 6) Study ways to handle the state's 
mandatory plan and state-set prices. 7) Study the feasibility 
and method of adjusting the enterprise tax policy. 8) Study its 
land-use rights and method of using that as an input under the 
shareholding system. 9) Study ways to resolve the issue of 
paying for the on-leave and retired workers' living expenses. 
10) Clarify the state's representation with respect to equity 
rights. 11) Study ways to take responsibility for the profits 
and losses with regard to non-productive assets. 12) Study and 
designate a promoter and sign a promoter's agreement. Sun 
believes that the above tasks are very specific and very 
practical, but if they are done properly, the conversion plan 
should be quite simple. 
  Step three is for the enterprise to apply for and 
receive permission to form a shareholding company. 
  There are eight pieces of documents to be submitted when 
applying to form a listed company: 1) Application to form a 
shareholding company. 2) The promoter's agreement. 3) The 
feasibility report. 4) A draft of the company charter. 5) The 
property appraisal report. 6) The asset verification report. 7) 
The prospectus. 8) The industry management department's review. 
Before submitting the application form, the enterprise should do 
two things: First, convene a promoter's meeting and submit an 
incorporation resolution. Second, choose the law firm, 
accounting firm, property appraiser, and stock underwriter. 
After making the selections and commencing work, each can then 
do its part to prepare the documents accordingly. 
  Step four is to propose and obtain permission to issue 
shares after its application to incorporate has been 
approved. 
  When applying for permission to issue stocks, 12 pieces of 
documents are required. They are to be prepared by the lawyer, 
accountant, appraiser, and the stock underwriter, respectively. 
For example, the prospectus should be prepared by the 
underwriter; the accounting report should be prepared by the 
accountant, and the property appraisal should be prepared by the 
appraiser. The enterprise must facilitate their work and 
regularly check their progress. In addition, it should set an 
agenda for listing the securities. This should be coordinated 
by the underwriter who should set the daily work schedule and 
completion time and hold meetings to coordinate all tasks. 
  Step five is for the enterprise to seek permission to 
list its securities at the exchange. 
  The enterprise should apply for listing at the stock 
exchange 
of its choice (currently, the choice is between Shanghai and 
Shenzhen). After applying for and receiving permission from the 
stock exchange, it may proceed to issue shares. When all shares 
are successfully issued and the share capital collected in full, 
it can then convene a shareholder's meeting to set up the 
company. It must register with the local industry and business 
management department within the stipulated time. At that point, 
the conversion of the state-run enterprise into a listed company 
is complete. 
  Sun Xiaoliang warns all entrepreneurs that the 
reorganization 
of enterprises under the shareholding system is a very 
complicated and stringent process. In the above-described five 
steps, it is easy to discern that if an enterprise wants to reap 
the benefits of a listed company, it must pay a price. Recently 
nine large state-run enterprises began making preparations to 
list their securities in Hong Kong and had to go through a very 
stringent auditing process and disclose every aspect of their 
businesses. The procedure was so complicated and the 
requirements so stringent that many were shocked. Thus, any 
enterprise thinking about listing its securities in the market 
should be mentally prepared. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59330 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar004___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-004 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  13 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article on Why Fujian Attracts Foreign Investment </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0190A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 6 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0190A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hu Dunan (5170 3256 0589) and Huang Zhi (7806 </F>
1807), policy researchers for the Fujian Provincial Committee: 
"Fujian's Special Features in Attracting Foreign Investment"] 
  [Text] I. Developmental Characteristics of Foreign 
Commercial Investment Enterprises 
  In recent years, the Fujian Provincial Committee and the 
provincial government have announced a series of important 
measures for opening and reform, which have taken the work of 
using foreign investment to a new level of development. In just 
1992 alone, there were 3,113 foreign commercial investment 
enterprises approved throughout the province, with contracts for 
$6.351 billion in foreign capital, actual use of foreign capital 
amounting to $1.416 billion. These three quotas indicated, 
respectively, increases of 1.6 times, 3.4 times, and 1.2 times 
again over the previous year. From January to July of this year, 
2,998 new foreign investment enterprises were approved 
throughout the province, with contracts for $7.203 billion in 
foreign capital, and $1.58 billion in capital actually received. 
These were, respectively, increases of 1.41 times, 2.63 times, 
and 1.42 times again over the same period last year. 
  In recent years, the development of foreign investment 
enterprises in Fujian has had the following new special features: 
  A. Foreign investors were mostly the "three types of 
overseas 
Chinese," i.e., Chinese in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and foreign 
countries, with a steady increase in investors from other 
countries and regions. Eight million overseas Chinese came from 
Fujian, as did 800,000 residents of Hong Kong and Macao, and 80 
percent of Taiwanese' residents' original family home was 
Fujian. With expanded opening up to the outside and improvement 
of the conditions for investment, they have been eager to invest 
in their hometowns, and have become the main body of foreign 
investment in Fujian Province. Up to July, 1993, investors from 
32 countries or regions had invested in Fujian. If calculating 
on a basis of approved contracted foreign capital, capital from 
Hong Kong and Macao constituted 55.8 percent of the total, 
capital from Taiwan made up 24.9 percent, with 19.3 percent 
coming from other foreign countries and regions. In recent 
years, industrial and commercial business people from Europe, 
the United States, and Southeast Asia have had optimistic views 
of the excellent investment circumstances in Fujian, so 
investors increased rapidly. Among newly approved investment 
projects in 1992, 54 were American, with contracted capital 
amount to $144 million; nine were Canadian, with contracted 
capital amounting to $36.66 million; 65 were from Singapore, 
with contracted capital amounting to $200 million; 73 were from 
the Philippines, with contracted capital amounting to $149 
million; 17 were Malaysian, with contracted capital amounting to 
$41.63 million; 17 were Indonesian, with contracted capital 
amounting to $34.2 million. 
  B. There was an increase in the number of major foreign 
investment projects, a big breakthrough in attracting major 
investors. In recent years, there have been many achievements in 
the work of inviting tenders, resulting in a series of visits to 
Fujian by some large financial groups with considerable 
influence overseas, and some important industrial business 
people. These were to negotiate investment in large scale 
construction and development. Preliminary statistics indicate 
that there are 10 major investment projects throughout the 
province which have gross capital of more than $100 million, and 
163 investment projects with over $10 million in capital. What 
is especially inspiring is that these big financial groups and 
investors have shifted from mostly checking out the investment 
environment into an actual development and construction period. 
The success rate of negotiations is higher, projects are 
implemented quickly, and one by one a large group of major 
projects have commenced establishment and operations. There are 
38 major projects of over $10 million which have gone into 
production in Fuzhou, and most of the big projects in such 
cities as Xiameng, Quanzhou, Putian, and Zhangzhou, have gone 
into production one by one. Foreign capital investment 
construction along the entire first line of the coastal area is 
displaying a robust situation. 
  C. The scope of foreign capital investment has expanded 
further, with the direction of capital developing toward 
tertiary industries. Since 1992, foreign capital investment has 
developed into multiple areas, in projects involved with over 90 
industries, including agriculture, forestry, poultry, fisheries, 
the feed industry, coal industry, metallurgy, building 
materials, electricity, mechanical manufactures, textiles, shoe 
manufacturing, plastic products, bamboo and wood processing, 
furniture, paper manufacturing, the chemical industry, chemical 
fibers, printing, traffic, transportation, electric power, real 
estate, food, hotel information inquiry, health, sports, 
literature and art, broadcasting and television, public affairs, 
and finance, etc. In particular, pushed by the reform and 
opening in China and guided by industrial policies, some big 
business people have not hesitated to put considerable amounts 
of money into renewal of the older districts of cities, helping 
to develop such public concerns as traffic, electric power, etc. 
and vigorously developing such tourism and shopping facilities 
as hotels, shopping centers, retail sales outlets, holiday 
villages, high class vocation centers, large scale entertainment 
places, etc., which touched off a wave of tertiary industry 
development. Looking at the industrial structure of foreign 
investment, among the currently approved amount of foreign 
capital, 1.9 percent went into primary industry, 67.8 percent 
went into secondary industry, and 36.8 percent went to tertiary 
industry. The rate of investment for this tertiary capital had 
obviously increased. 
  D. The open coastal areas dominate investment distribution, 
but this is gradually spreading toward the mountainous regions 
inland. Fujian's open coastal area has very favorable 
conditions, such as nearness to Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, 
convenient traffic and favorable policies, etc., so it is still 
a hot spot for foreign investment. Up the end of July, 1993, 
among 11,038 foreign investment projects throughout the 
province, the city of Fuzhou had 2,516 projects, with agreements 
for $7.52 billion in foreign capital, and $663 million in 
foreign capital actually in use; Xiamen had 2,009 projects, with 
$5.286 billion in foreign capital agreed upon, and $1.286 
billion actually in use; Quanzhou had 3,386 projects, with 
agreements for $4.06 billion in foreign capital, and $583 
million actually in use; Putian had 654 projects, with 
agreements on $1.748 billion in foreign capital, and $234 
million in foreign capital actually in use; Zhangzhou had 978 
projects, with agreements on $1.33 billion in foreign capital, 
and $212 million in foreign capital actually in use. With the 
overall investment environment improved and the open areas 
expanded, foreign investment has moved steadily inland to the 
mountainous region from the coastal area, there has been a rapid 
increase in the number of investors engaged in mining, forestry, 
tourism, etc., and a group of foreign investment projects have 
developed along the mountain railway line. Among these, Longyan 
had 328 projects, with agreements on $318 million in foreign 
capital, and $40.23 million in foreign capital actually in use; 
Ningde had 354 projects, with agreements on $261 million in 
foreign capital, and $83.92 million in foreign capital actually 
in use; Shanmin had 347 projects, with agreements on $210 
million, and $33.24 million in foreign capital actually in use. 
  E. Investment form was initially the single project type, 
but 
gradually developed into a series of developments, opening up 
regionally. In the early part of the 1980s, foreign commercial 
investment in Fujian was dominated by scattered manufacturers, 
with single projects. In the middle and later years of that 
decade, there appeared a series of trade developments, and in 
the 1990s regional development has taken a more complete form, 
with land packet development becoming an important pattern in 
foreign commercial investments. Up to the end of May, 1993, the 
province had approved 79 parcels of land for foreign commercial 
development projects. The contracted amount of land to be 
developed in these areas in the near term is 48.34 square 
kilometers, with $1.828 billion in foreign capital. In these 
parcels of development areas, the imported projects will have a 
higher starting point, with complete supporting public 
facilities such as water, electricity, roads, posts and 
telecommunications, pollution control, etc., and most of 
projects can be developed and built in the time framework 
specified in the contracts. At present, 34 projects are under 
construction, and 12 projects, including Rongqiao, Hongkuan, 
Yuanzai, Majia, Panlong, and Zhenshi, have gone into production 
or are close to completion. Basically, the pattern followed has 
been rolling development -- develop a packet, construct a 
packet, then profit from it. Take for example, the Rongqiao 
Economic and Technical Development Zone in the city of Fuqin: 
during the five years after it was established, the State put 
only 2 million yuan into it, while foreign investors put in $596 
million yuan; an enterprise group was formed in the development 
area, which established and constructed 107 foreign capital 
enterprises, and 58 enterprises had gone into production, with 
forecast earnings of 2.5 billion yuan annually, and $300 million 
in foreign currency. Also, in Fuqin's Hongyuan Investment Zone, 
since it was established over one year ago, 10 square kilometers 
were developed in the first phase, and 17 initial projects were 
listed in the plan, a large group of projects, including a 
flower mill, paper manufacturer, a petroleum plant, etc. In an 
intense campaign of preparation for the establishment and 
construction of a 30,000 ton port, they are building an 
infrastructure in the zone, such as water, electricity, posts, 
roads, etc., and a start has been made on all of these. 
  F. It accelerates gathering foreign commercial investment 
enterprises into groups, and further improves their technical 
and managerial level. In recent years, some foreign commercial 
investment enterprises have gradually developed into groups on 
the basis of making higher profits. Large groupings of powerful 
enterprises have organized and built up enterprise groups, such 
as the Fuyao Glass Industry Corporation, Ltd., and Yongdexing 
Corporation, Ltd., continuously enlarging the enterprises' 
degree of grouping. In cities where foreign enterprises are 
concentrated, there has been formed a pattern of trade 
association and specialization alleys. Foreign capital 
enterprises in Jinjiang are enthusiastically applying themselves 
to building a "shoe city," a regional shoe production center and 
large scale specialized shoe trade market which will spread 
across the country with production, operations, wholesale and 
retail sales all combined in one entity. In Fujiang's open 
coastal areas, there has been a wave of development, a "shoe 
city," "fashion city," "umbrella city," "toy city," "packing 
city," etc., with different special features. In addition, the 
technical structure of foreign investment enterprises has 
obviously improved. A group of enterprises concentrated as to 
technology and capital were established in succession in the 
past several years. Take for example, the Guanjie Electricity 
Enterprise in Fuqing: its imported electric terminal indicator 
production line can produce 200,000 terminal indicators per 
year; the high technical level of its facility and the size of 
its production scale can be termed first class in the same 
industry in the nation. With enterprises becoming more 
specialized and automated, many foreign investment enterprises 
are computerizing their routine management operations, inviting 
a large number of people with specialized qualifications and 
knowledge of modern enterprise management. Their attention to 
building an enterprise culture has brought their operations and 
management to a new level. 
  G. Gaining considerable notice has been the high rate of 
independent capital enterprises and the phenomenon of state 
owned enterprises "grafting" foreign capital to increase the 
proportion of independent capital investment. At present, it 
occupies 60.7 percent of foreign capital enterprises. All of 
Fujian's prefectures and cities have also selected a group of 
state-owned enterprises to "graft" foreign capital, implementing 
multiple forms of joint ventures in plants, workshops, foreign 
investor purchasing, leasing and foreign investor contracting, 
importing the operational system of foreign capital enterprises. 
The Hong Kong Zhongche Investment Corporation, Ltd., is carrying 
out a joint venture with 41 state-owned enterprises in the city 
of Quanzhou, which will be a "total" remolding, with a total 
investment of 1 billion yuan. This action has had the positive 
effect of alleviating the financial burden on Quanzhou's city 
government, changing the operating system of state-owned 
enterprises, promoting Quanzhou's state-owned enterprises, 
readjusting and promoting the level of industrial structure. 
This has attracted attention from all sectors. 
II. We Cannot Ignore the Role That Development of Foreign 
Investment Enterprises Has Played in Fujian's Booming Economy 
and Social Progress 
  The abrupt rise of foreign investment enterprises in Fujian 
has had a positive effect in promoting Fujian's opening and 
reform and socioeconomic development, chiefly manifested as: 
  A. Furthering the adjustment and perfecting of the socialist 
ownership structure, bringing new motivation and vitality to 
development of the domestic economy. The rapid development of 
foreign investment enterprises has fostered new competition in 
the main body of the domestic economic system, and causing the 
single ownership structure in Fujian province to start to shift 
to a multiple level ownership structure in which the public 
ownership system is dominant. It has formed a new developmental 
pattern in which state ownership, collective, township, foreign 
capital, individual, and private ownership enterprises promote 
and spur on one another, and stimulated the domestic economy's 
rapid development. During January to July of this year, Fujian 
had a gross output of 46.154 billion yuan in agriculture and 
industry, an increase of 36.6 percent over last year, including 
16.11 billion yuan industrial output achieved by foreign 
investment enterprises, a 56.8 percent increase, and 35 percent 
of the province's industrial output above the township level. 
Among newly added industry in the province, foreign investment 
enterprises occupied 47.4 percent. The arrival of a great many 
foreign enterprises has become the conduit for efficient 
allocation between the international and domestic markets, and 
for two types of resources, in such industries as electricity, 
shoe manufacture, building materials, machinery, light industry, 
the food trade, etc. Foreign investment enterprises and the 
state-owned, collective, and township enterprises are supporting 
each other to form a batch of close or semi-close joint stock 
enterprise groups guided by the international market, centered 
on export products, and linked by economic benefits. To take 
the shoe industry as an example, foreign investment enterprises 
took eight world famous sports shoes as their chief product, and 
brought the products of more than 1,000 State owned, collective, 
and township shoe manufacturing enterprises into the 
international market. 
  B. Accelerating readjustment of industrial structure, 
promoting improvement and replacement of product mix. The 
development of foreign investment enterprises has presented new 
challenges and vitality to industrial structure adjustment in 
Fujian, remolding and developing not only such traditional 
industries as electricity, shoe manufacturing, clothing, toys, 
gold and silver jewelry, beverages, feed, machine processing, 
medicinal chemistry, etc., but also appearing in a batch of new 
products which are suitable for both domestic and overseas 
markets. These industries, which include electricity, plastics 
and rubber, shoe manufacturing, building materials, and clothing 
manufacturing, etc., have become mainstay industries in Fujian. 
This has greatly accelerated the process of industrial structure 
adjustment, and improved the structure and distribution of 
trade. The boom in foreign investment enterprises has led to the 
replacement of a group of older enterprises in Fujian, 
refinement and distillation of traditional technology, and 
brought the quality, design, modeling, and packing of products 
to a new level. A large group of products have won either the 
international gold prize, or the national, ministry, and 
provincial titles for excellence, and are selling well in the 
domestic and overseas markets. 
  C. Increasing the state's revenue income, promoting the 
public matters of society's development. There has been an 
annual increase in the amount of revenue from foreign investment 
enterprises throughout the province, and these have become an 
important channel of Fujian's revenue. In 1992, 1.1 billion yuan 
in various revenues were turned over by foreign investment 
enterprises, which was one-seventh of the provincial revenue 
income; this is expected to rise to 1.4 billion yuan in 1993. In 
addition, numerous foreign investors have enthusiastically aided 
in the development of such societal welfare and public affairs 
matters as education, health, sports, cultural, roads and 
electric power, etc. They have been generous with contributions 
of money or materials, and have made greater contributions to 
the modernization of their hometowns. 
  D. Importing a batch of advanced technology and equipment, 
promoting a scientific and technical boom. In recent years, the 
direction of foreign capital investment has begun shifting from 
labor intensive industries to capital and technology intensive 
industries. The technical level and amount of science and 
technology in imported equipment has improved greatly, with some 
enterprises imported facilities and technology attaining the 
international advanced level of the 1990s, so it has greatly 
accelerated the pace of Fujian industry's becoming more 
scientific and technical. Meanwhile, foreign invested 
enterprises have invited a large number of scientific and 
technical personnel to China, combining their favorable capital 
situation with the cheap science and technology of the mainland, 
in an advantageous merger to cooperate on preparing new 
technology and developing new products, to produce a very strong 
competitive power in the international market. It can be said 
that foreign investment enterprises have been in the forefront 
of enterprise technical progress in Fujian Province, and the 
"point man" in promoting scientific industry in the province. 
  E. Development of an export-oriented economy, promoting 
links 
between the economy of Fujian and the international market. 
Foreign investment enterprises are Fujian's bridge and link to 
the outside, and are an important pillar of Fujian's export 
oriented economy. Among Fujian's 4,300 foreign investment 
enterprises which have gone into production, as many as 3,000 
are export enterprises. Through their flexible operating system, 
foreign investment enterprises rapidly linked international and 
domestic production features, producing goods which promptly 
entered the international market, rapidly promoting foreign 
trade and export increases in Fujian. Among a $4.2 billion 
foreign trade and expert volume in the province in 1992, the 
self operated exports of foreign investment enterprises was 
$1.814 billion, which was 42.43 percent of the gross provincial 
exports; among gross provincial exports of $2.812 billion during 
January to July of this year, the self operated exports of 
foreign investment enterprises was $1.389 billion, which was 49 
percent of the gross. Of the surplus in the balance of foreign 
exchange, in 1992, $567 million was transferred to the market, 
and $279 was paid in, making for a foreign exchange net of $288 
million. Foreign investment enterprises' management model and 
operating systems were affected chiefly by international 
practice and adjustment of international market operational 
regulations, and had a positive learning effect on speeding up 
enterprise reform in Fujian and building the socialist market 
economy. Some of the state-owned, collective, and township 
enterprises in Fujian imported the scientific management model 
of foreign investment enterprises, but insisted that there be 
the following preconditions: public ownership and distribution 
according to work; establishment of an operations system with 
responsibility; rights and profits be unified; implementation of 
regularized production and management, standarized technological 
management, and systematic personnel management. All operations 
and management had to comply with international practice which 
improved production and economic benefits of enterprises, and 
laid a good foundation for connecting Fujian's provincial 
economy with the international market as soon as possible after 
joining GATT. 
  F. Wider channels and means of employment, and easing the 
societal pressures from job-seeking. So far, the province's 
foreign investment enterprises have hired 530,000 employees, 
which was 9.8 percent of hires in all of society. The rapid 
development of foreign investment enterprises not only brought 
jobs to a great many of the urban unemployed, but also made use 
of a large group of rural society's surplus labor force. This 
played an important role in reducing the State's investment in 
employment, easing societal pressures from job-seeking an 
promoting social stability. 
  G. Promoting the concept of opening among the people of 
Fujian Province, and building closer relationships with the Hong 
Kong, Macao, and Taiwan region and with neighboring countries. 
The development of foreign investment enterprises has promoted 
the concepts of opening and the market economy among the people 
of Fujian, nurturing and training a group of talented, 
export-oriented people familiar with international economics and 
trade, and good at operations and management. Meanwhile, 
building closer contacts between Fujian and with the people of 
Hong Kong and Taiwan, Southeast Asia, Europe, and the United 
States, has strengthened mutual understanding and friendship, 
which was helpful to the country's unification and peace, and 
has been helpful in promoting direct and early "three 
communications" between the two banks of the straits, as well as 
being helpful in consolidating and developing warm friendships 
with neighboring countries. 
  Overall, after 15 years' of reform and opening to the 
outside, foreign investment enterprises have continued to widen 
the spheres of their operations, and with the rapid expansion of 
the scope of their operations, and development of their economic 
power, they have become an important pillar of the Fujian 
provincial economy, having a decisive effect on such fields as 
industry, real estate, hotel services, etc., and the city 
construction trade in Fujian province, and have been an 
indispensable force in Fujian's modernization. The 15 years of 
hard work not only embodies the hard work of vast numbers of 
cadres and masses, but also the enthusiastic support and 
contributions of compatriots in Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and 
also foreign investors, a positive development. The 
establishment and development of foreign investor groups has 
been a leading factor in our flourishing economy and our social 
development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59331 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Li Zehou Reflects on His Trip to Beijing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0025A Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] in 
Chinese No 10, Oct 93 pp 25-26 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0025A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Li Zehou: "Trip to Beijing"] </F>
  [Text] This trip back to Beijing was like "lightning," it 
took me in total not more than twenty days. Besides the one or 
two friends who knew about it, there was almost no one else who 
knew, which greatly surprised friends overseas and in the 
mainland. 
  Friends ask me: "Why did you go back to Beijing?" "To get 
some books, and second, to meet some friends, especially good 
friends," I answer half jokingly. In fact, there might be more 
important reasons, like checking out the atmosphere and seeing 
Beijing. 
  It is strange that while I was in Beijing I hated it there, 
but after being away, I always think back to Beijing. I remember 
once returning to Beijing from Singapore. I walked on Xiwaida 
street, and the crowded pedestrians and the noisy environment 
made me immediately feel warm and happy: I had come back home. I 
also remember that on 11 June 1989, I went to Guangzhou, and my 
Hong Kong friends there advised me to leave the country. I 
hesitated for a while, but eventually decided to stay and after 
a little while I went back to Beijing (Even though I was a bit 
regretful later on). There are many reasons I did this, but 
among them there was an unconscious reason, a fear of being 
parted from Beijing. Anyhow, I lived for forty years in Beijing. 
It seems strange that although the last several times I was away 
from Beijing were for less time than this one, when I walked 
into my living and study rooms I always had some familiar and 
strange feelings. This time when going back, I of course also 
expected this kind of feeling. I do not know why the similar 
feelings did not arise: Everything was still familiar, just as 
if I had only left for several days. 
  Sure, everything seemed as familiar as before, and 
everything 
seemed unchanged. Beijing was still as crowded as before, dust 
was still flying around, and the air was still so unfresh. These 
feelings were emphasized having come from an extremely clean 
country such as Switzerland, which has less people and more 
space. 
  It may not have changed overall, but there still may be some 
smaller changes: There are more vendor stands selling food and 
clothing, especially the small yellow "loaf of bread" taxis that 
are all over the streets, and will stop when you wave to them. 
The fare is reasonable and inexpensive, at ten yuan per ten 
kilometers. Before, I have always said that among the four 
essential items of food, clothing, housing and transportation, 
the first three are satisfactory for the people of Beijing, with 
only transportation posing a problem--it is particularly 
difficult for people to get onto the public buses. Today, it 
seems that this problem has been solved. My friends all say so, 
and I have been happy about this for a long time. Even though 
the yellow taxis may not look good in the scenery--this kind of 
extremely ugly bug crawling everywhere and polluting the air and 
environment badly--they benefit the people. 
  Over the course of a year, there have been some changes: 
More 
abundant commercial products, more crowded and noisy markets, 
higher quality clothes, more expensive restaurants, and more 
wealthy people. To get a haircut is seven yuan, but when I left 
the country it was only eight jiao. To take a shower is three 
yuan, but before it was six jiao. Of course the prices for 
grain, meat and vegetables, and clothes did not increase this 
much, and most of them did not increase by more than half. Thus 
it seems that my friends do not have many complaints. One friend 
told me that she earns six to seven hundred yuan per month which 
is enough to support a child. But I think that she cannot go to 
a restaurant on her salary. Even though not going to 
restaurants, she can still eat chicken, duck, fish and meat, 
which are not very expensive at market prices. Thus, let those 
who have the money and would like to pay for a restaurant go 
there. Also, there are different levels of restaurants. Even the 
food sold by the roadside is not completely inedible. I think 
this is very good and hope that the gap between rich and poor 
will not widen. Multiple life-styles, different options and 
levels of consumption are a healthy road for development. In 
this way the people who "would like to stay poor" have the means 
to "stay" poor; otherwise, if there is really no food to eat, 
how can those people carry out their studies? 
  Nevertheless, a lot of people still persuade me that I had 
better stay abroad, there is no research to do in China. Of 
course, I understand that in China to do research is not better 
than doing business. There will not be a "culture fashion," 
rather, the "doing business fashion" will continue to prevail. 
This is what I had expected, and I think this is a good thing. 
At the same time I also understand that there are still a lot of 
people who did not "jump into the ocean," or are unable to "jump 
into the ocean," or are not willing to "jump into the ocean," 
but are seriously pursuing their research. Moreover, there are 
younger intellectuals who are growing rapidly in number. They 
abandon politics, concentrating on knowledge. With strong 
ambitions and boundless enthusiasm, they came to see me. It 
seems that so long as you do not touch upon politics, and do not 
speak about human rights and democracy, you can read about 
Sarte, speak about Nitzche, and write about Hobbes. No one will 
interrupt you. Two years ago people criticized my left-wing 
opinions, now people hardly repudiate me. As for those points 
that have been criticized, there are still a lot of people 
writing about them, using them, and "spreading" them. They just 
don't mention my name. This is very ridiculous, but history and 
truth are often absurd and astonishing, especially in today's 
China. 
  Of course, my friends are still unhappy that the news is 
still in the same form, with politics and ideology showing no 
signs of freedom. To recover the relatively lenient situation 
and environment prior to "4 June" is not very easy. It still 
takes a lot of effort, and even a longer period of time. This is 
in my expectations. I also predict that there will not be a 
change for the time being. Changes come slowly, but I think that 
slow change also works as long as we do not go backward. Not 
going backward is going forward. Of course, that great change 
will come eventually. I still hope it will come gradually, step 
by step; if it comes too fast, too easy, too unbelievably, it 
may not be good. This year one of my students published an 
article that says that the object of philosophy is ideas, and 
"ideology" is already far removed from Marxist-Leninist 
philosophy; the article is written profoundly and logically. 
Thus it was published without questions, and nobody tried to 
stop it. Isn't this nice? Culture, knowledge and literature that 
were once denounced as "corrupt, anti- revolutionary, backward, 
modern western capitalistic" culture, are again circulated by 
publishing companies, isn't this good? 
  This trip to Beijing went very fast, altogether about twenty 
days. Besides Zaifu and one other friend who knew, there was 
almost nobody who knew before the trip, which greatly surprised 
my friends on the mainland and oversees. Since coming back to 
Beijing, I have of course returned to my previous unit and also 
met several institution directors. After some small talk, one 
person laughed at my "lightning" trip, and criticized my 
anti-leftist articles in the journal FANGZUO BEIWANGLU [PREVENT 
LEFTISM MEMORANDUM]. I said that I agree with the "non-argument" 
principle, but are not the leftists still constantly attacking 
me? I of course had a reason to rejoin with my article in the 
fourth issue of ZHONGLIU, and to take a "lightning" approach 
when visiting Beijing to "prevent unexpected events." The 
director is also my friend, who smiled embarrassingly and again 
pointed out that my trip was welcomed and assured me of the 
freedom to come and go. This is really funny. When I was in 
Beijing, I read the July issue of the journal ZHENLI DE ZHUIQIU, 
which still carried the article criticizing my views. It is 
ironic that the writer who criticized me in various ways in the 
article eventually went to the United States to look for 
democracy, and it seems that he will never come back. After I 
read about this, I could not help secretly laughing: Does this 
mean that Beijing will always remain as your world? Today, 
haven't I come back? Moreover, I will still come back in the 
future. Beijing's democracy, and China's democracy, are more 
important to me than American democracy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59332 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liu Guoguang on Modern Enterprise System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1201114594 Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 8 Jan 93 </F>

<F P=103> HK1201114594 </F>
<F P=104>  Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] What are the special characteristics of the modern 
enterprise system? How can modern enterprises be established? 
Liu Guoguang, a noted Chinese economist and vice president of 
the China Academy of Social Sciences, comprehensively elaborated 
his views and opinions on these questions this morning during a 
colloquium jointly sponsored by the provincial government 
general office and research center. 
  Liu Guoguang pointed out that the modern enterprise system 
differs from the conventional state-owned enterprise management 
mechanism in six aspects: 1) It operates on the basis of clearly 
defined property right relations; 2) it is characterized by the 
separation between government administration and enterprise 
management; 3) it is characterized by diversified investments; 
4) it is run to achieve a single objective--the very function 
and target of modern enterprises is to make profit; 5) it 
practices limited liability management; and 6) it pursues the 
principle of survival of the fittest and lets enterprises 
operate under a competitive mechanism. 
  Liu Guoguang also presented his opinions on the ongoing 
project to introduce the company system into state-owned 
enterprises and on other supporting reforms as well. 
  Executive Vice Governor Lu Ruihua presided over the 
colloquium today. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59333 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yu Guangyuan's Private Ownership Theory Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0035A Beijing ZHENLI DE ZHUIQIU [PURSUIT OF TRUTH] in 
Chinese No 10, 11 Oct 93 pp 14-19 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0035A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHENLI DE ZHUIQIU [PURSUIT OF TRUTH] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Huang Rutong (7806 1172 2717): "Discussion on </F>
Past and Current Private, Public Ownership in 
China--Consultations With Comrade Yu Guangyuan"] 
  [Text] "A Very Big Subject, A Very Short Article--Past and 
Current Private and Public Ownership in China," a written form 
of speech by Comrade Yu Guangyuan (abbreviated hereafter as Yu's 
article), was printed and circulated in early June 1993 at an 
inaugural meeting for the Chinese Society of Private Economy. 
After the meeting, it was published by ZHONGHUA GONGSHANG SHIBAO 
in June, and JINGJI RIBAO in August. Proceeding from the 
presupposition that the issue of public and private ownership is 
the theoretical basis for the private economy of China, Yu's 
article briefly analyzes the coexistent situation of public and 
private property in the history of human society and brings up 
some new views and ideas. I disagree with some of the viewpoints 
in Yu's article due to our differences in viewing the history of 
the founding of the Chinese socialist system and the current 
situation of the socialist society, in understanding and 
applying the tenets of Marxism and the theory of building 
Chinese-style socialism, and in interpreting the party's 
principles and policies. Pursuant to the "double hundred policy" 
of the party, I will present some of my opinions on the 
following issues and submit them to Comrade Yu Guangyuan for 
discussions. 
<H3>  I. Is Private Ownership an Intrinsic Quality of a Capitalist 
Society? </H3>
  Yu's article states: "Whether or not private ownership is an 
intrinsic quality of a capitalist society, like whether or not 
public ownership is an intrinsic quality of a socialist society, 
is a question that needs to be studied." Then, Yu's article 
quotes a paragraph from the "Critique of the Draft Program of 
the Socialist Democratic Party in 1891," which was published by 
Engels between 1901 and 1902: "As far as I know, capitalist 
production is a form of society and a stage of the economy, 
while capitalist private production is a phenomenon of one kind 
or another within this stage. But what is exactly capitalist 
private production? It is production managed by individual 
entrepreneurs. This kind of production has become more and more 
of an exception. Capitalist production managed by a corporation 
is no longer private production. Instead, it is production aimed 
to make profits for a group of people. If we look at the trust 
which controls and monopolizes the entire industry from the 
viewpoint of the corporation, we will know that not ony private 
production has ceased but...." By quoting this paragraph, Yu's 
article implies that after the emergence of social organizations 
like corporation and trust, capitalist production ceased to be 
private production. Because of this, private ownership is not 
necessarily the intrinsic quality of capitalist society and 
production. 
  If I have not misunderstood the original meaning of this 
paragraph, then I cannot agree with the point of Yu's article 
which doubts that private ownership is the intrinsic quality of 
capitalist society. There are mainly two reasons: 
  1. Yu's article quotes the above paragraph of Engels out of 
context. Regarding the fourth paragraph in the introduction to 
the abovementioned draft program--"the lack of planning derived 
from the intrinsic quality of capitalist private 
production"--Engels' critique is that the word "private,' should 
be deleted (Volume 22 of the Complete Works of Marx and Engels, 
page 270). Engels' reason is the same as the quote in Yu's 
article. This shows that according to Engels' viewpoint, 
capitalist production includes not only the capitalist 
production of individual enterprises but also the production of 
corporation and trust aimed to make profits for a group of 
people. Undoubtedly, the statement of Engels, after deleting the 
word "private,' is a more comprehensive and accurate depiction 
of the intrinsic quality of capitalist production. 
  Therefore, is it okay to draw the conclusion that the 
intrinsic quality of capitalist society is not necessarily 
private ownership from the abovementioned Engels' statement on 
the coexistence of individual enterprises and corporations? No, 
it is not. This is because Engels also clearly points out, when 
he critiques the sixth paragraph in the introduction of the 
draft program: "Material and ideological conditions needed to 
change capitalist production, which benefits individuals or 
corporations, to socialist production, which benefits society as 
a whole and is carried out according to advanced planning, are 
created precisely by capitalist society itself. Only through 
such a change can the working class, and still further, all 
members of society without exception, be liberated" (Volume 22 
of the Complete Works of Marx and Engels, page 279). This means 
that neither individual capitalist enterprises, nor corporations 
run by a group of capitalists, is engaged in socialist 
production that benefits society as a whole. Instead, they are 
engaged in capitalist production that benefits the bourgeoisie 
and is based on the capitalist private ownership of capital 
goods. What Engels stresses here is exactly the private quality 
intrinsic in the production of contemporary capitalism. 
  According to Marxist theory on the forms of social economy, 
capitalist society is the last society in human history where 
man exploits man. It is a society where the form of capitalist 
production occupies a dominant position, the capitalist private 
ownership of capital goods is the basis, and the objective is 
for the bourgeoisie to exploit the surplus value of hired labor. 
Marx said that the production of surplus value "is the direct 
objective and decisive motivation of capitalist production" and 
that "it must not be depicted as something it is not. In other 
words, we must never describe it as having the direct objective 
of enjoyment or producing goods of enjoyment for capitalists. If 
so, we will fail completely to see the salient feature in the 
entire intrinsic quality of such production." (Volume 25 of the 
Complete Works of Marx and Engels," page 272). This means that 
the essence of capitalist production is production of surplus 
value, whereas the precondition for the production of surplus 
value is the capitalist private ownership of capital goods. 
Because of this, we should say that private ownership is the 
intrinsic quality of a capitalist society. 
<H3>  II. In the History of Socialist Nations, Why Hasn't Private 
Property Been Eliminated? </H3>
  Yu's article states: "There has been only a vain hope of 
eliminating as soon as possible private property, in the history 
of socialist nations. There has been no evidence that private 
property has been eliminated." What kind of private property or 
ownership does the word, "private property," refer to here? This 
has to be clarified first. 
  Marx and Engels pointed out in the "Manifesto of the 
Communist Party": "The salient feature of communism is not to 
abolish general ownership. it is to abolish the ownership system 
of bourgeoisie"; communism "wants to eliminate the ownership 
which is preconditioned by the fact that the overwhelming 
majority of people in society do not own property"; and 
"communism does not deprive anyone of the right to own social 
products, it only takes away the right of using such ownership 
to enslave other people's labor." (Volume 1 of the Complete 
Works of Marx and Engels, pages 265 and 267). This means that 
the private property or ownership that socialism wants to 
eliminate is only the capitalist ownership system that uses the 
ownership of capital goods to exploit the surplus value created 
by hired laborers or the portion of bourgeois private property 
that belongs to the category of capital goods, not consumer 
goods owned and controlled by individuals in a capitalist 
society. 
  According to the above theories of Marx and Engels, whether 
or not the conclusion of Yu's article is correct should be 
obvious. In light of China's history, under the leadership of 
the Chinese Communist Party and through many years of struggle, 
the people of all nationalities in China reaped victory in the 
new democratic revolution, confiscated bureaucrat capital, and 
eliminated the bureaucrat-capitalist class (which will never be 
revived). Through the basic completion of socialist 
transformation of capitalist industry and trade in 1956, they 
further eliminated the capitalist exploitation system and the 
bourgeoisie, established a socialist system, and entered into a 
socialist society. Namely, China fulfilled the task of 
eliminating the private property of the bourgeoisie that 
exploits surplus value or the bourgeois system of private 
ownership of capital goods, which was the demand of Marxism. The 
reason that China had failed to fully develop socialist 
superiority after it established a basic socialist system is 
that the party committed "leftist" errors on the two major 
issues of how to build socialism and how to handle class 
struggle. It must not be blamed on the "so-called vain hope of 
the party and the state to eliminate as soon as possible private 
property," thus inadvertently playing down the great 
significance of establishing the socialist system in China. Like 
Comrade Deng Xiaopong pointed out: "Through many years of bloody 
struggle, our party and people established the socialist system. 
Although this socialist system is not yet complete and it has 
been undermined, it is after all much better than the capitalist 
system under which the weak are the prey of the strong and 
people harm others to benefit themselves. Our system will 
improve as each day goes by. It will absorb all progressive 
factors which we absorb from other nations and become the best 
system in the world." (Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping on 
the Theory of Building Chinese-Style Socialism, page 142). 
  Perhaps someone will ask: If the socialist transformation of 
capitalist industry and trade was basically completed in 1956 
and the capitalist exploitation system and the bourgeoisie have 
been eliminated, then why do we want to develop the private 
economy that has the nature of capitalism? Doesn't this prove 
that the conclusion of Yu's article is correct? My answer to 
this question is as follows: 
  In 1956, around the time of the Eighth Party Congress, after 
socialist transformation was basically completed and China's 
socialist system was established, central leading comrades such 
as Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, Liu Shaoqi, and Chen Yun, in view of 
the problems arising in the socialist transformation of 
captialist industry and trade and of drawbacks of China's 
economic system created by the joint management of public and 
private industries, put forth a series of new theoretical 
viewpoints and corresponding principles and policies, on the 
basis of combining theory and practice. At the Eighth Party 
Congress, Comrade Chen Yun brought up the principle and policy 
of "three main bodies and three supplements." At the 52nd 
Standing Committee Meeting of the National People's Congress on 
29 December 1956, Comrade Liu Shaoqi introduced the new thinking 
that "China is over 90 percent socialist. We should not be 
afraid to have a small percentage of capitalism as supplement 
and comparison." (See article by Hu Qiaomu 5170 0829 2606: "How 
Did China Choose Socialism in the 1950's," 3 October 89, RENMIN 
RIBAO) During his talks with responsible persons of the National 
Industrial and Commercial Association on 5, 7, and 8 December 
1956, Chairman Mao brought up the new idea of "practicing 
capitalism after eliminating capitalism." He said: "The 
underground factories of Shanghai and joint ventures are also 
antithesis"; "To legalize them, we may hire workers"; "We may 
run privately-owned large factories, sign contracts, and promise 
that they will not be confiscated in the next 10 or 20 years. 
Overseas investment should not be confiscated for 20 or 100 
years." "We can practice state and private ownership." "We can 
practice capitalism after eliminating it." (Bo Yibo 5631 0001 
3134: "Review of Several Major Decisions and Events," Volume I, 
pages 433 and 434) Of course, by saying "practicing capitalism 
again," here Chairman Mao did not mean developing capitalism 
extensively and reestablishing the social system of capitalism. 
Instead, he meant that with regard to ownership structure, we 
should appropriately preserve and develop some private and 
individual economies and bring in overseas Chinese investment 
under the prerequisite that state and collective economies 
occupy the dominant position. By doing so, we can provide an 
"antithesis" for state and collective economies and preserve a 
certain amount of competitive mechanism. These new ideas of 
Chairman Mao revealed, in the ownership structure, a valuable 
spark of ideology concerning the socialist economy with Chinese 
characteristics. 
  Unfortunately, these valuable special ideas and policies 
regarding the building of Chinese-style socialism were not put 
into effect. They were later interrupted by erroneous leftist 
policies. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee, after bringing order out of chaos, the party 
and the state, under the guidance of the theory of building 
Chinese-style socialism and the basic party line, implemented a 
structure of ownership system under which socialist public 
ownership is dominant, other economic factors are supplementary, 
and multiple economic factors coexist. This is the carrying on 
and development of the new ideas and policies put forth by 
central leading comrades before and after the Eighth Party 
Congress. In addition, the reform we are currently carrying out 
is not to "change the nature of our socialist system. It is 
self-improvement and development of a socialist system." Because 
of this, I think that the victory of new democratic revolution 
and the success of the 1956 socialist transformation enabled 
China to eliminate the capitalist exploitation system and the 
bourgeoisie. This is a historical fact proving that the 
socialist nation has eliminated the private property of the 
bourgeois class. Allowing and encouraging the development of the 
private economy in the current stage is precisely using the 
private economy to develop social productive forces after 
"achieving success in the revolution," thereby creating 
conditions for ultimately eliminating the exploitation 
phenomenon and transferring to a higher level of socialism. 
These two are not contradicting or opposed to each other. Yu's 
article states: "There have been vain hopes, but no evidence of 
eliminating as soon as possible private property." I think that 
these are only lies of Yu's article, not historical facts." 
<H5>  III. What Are the Characteristics of a Socialist Society? </H5>
  Yu's article states: "General public property is not a 
special feature of a socialist society. All societies in history 
have public property." This is another issue that needs to be 
clarified. 
  It is true that all societies in history have public 
property. But in a slave, feudal, or capitalist society, public 
property belongs to, serves, and benefits a few people of the 
exploiting class. It does not belong to, serve, or benefit all 
members of society. Take the state property of a bourgeois 
nation for instance. It does not have the "capital property of 
eliminating productive forces." The more "productive forces a 
bourgeois nation occupies, the more likely that it will become a 
general capitalist who will exploit even more of its citizens. 
Workers will remain hired laborers and the proletariat. Instead 
of eliminating capital relations, it will be pushed to the 
extreme." (The Selected Works of Marx and Engels, 
Volume III, page 436) Because of this, bourgeois national public 
property which is used as a tool for the dictatorship of the 
bourgeoisie does not deserve its name. It is in essence the 
private property of a few people of the bourgeoisie. On the 
contrary, in a socialist society, public property is owned by 
all members of society and it serves and benefits all members of 
society. Here, public property is public property both in name 
and reality. This is the fundamental difference between a 
socialist and capitalist society. Engels said: "The decisive 
difference between the socialist system and the current existing 
system is, of course, organizing production on the basis that 
all capital goods are owned publicly (first in individual 
nations)." (The Complete Works of Marx and Engels, 
Volume 37, page 443). Because of this, eliminating the private 
ownership and establishing the public ownership system of 
capital goods, namely establishing genuine public property owned 
by society as a whole, are the characteristics of a socialist 
society. 
<H5>  IV. Why Do We Need To Advocate "Sacred Private Property"? </H5>
  Yu's article states: "Only by regarding both public and 
private property as sacred can socialist society survive and 
progress." This concept needs studying. We all know that the 
Constitution of China stipulates: "The public property of 
socialism is sacred and inviolable." This is completely correct 
because China is a socialist country whose economic basis is a 
socialist public ownership system. Therefore, is it necessary to 
consider the private property of private economy with capitalist 
nature in China as sacred? My answer is negative. The reasons 
are as follows: 
  1. In Das Kapital and the Manifesto of the Communist Party, 
Marx set forth the historical mission of "exploiting the 
exploiter" and "eliminating the bourgeois ownership system." The 
ultimate goal of communists is to eventually reach communist 
society via socialist society. In China, a socialist society 
where the capitalist exploitation system and the bourgeoisie 
have been eliminated, it is very strange for someone to advocate 
"private property being sacred," which is similar to that 
advocated by the foreign bourgeoisie during the period of 
bourgeois revolution, in order to exercise their control. 
  2. Although the ultimate goal of Marxism is to arrive at a 
communist society via socialism, it has been clearly pointed out 
at the same time that communists cannot abolish private 
ownership overnight, that socialist countries can only gradually 
transform existing society, and that only after producing the 
large amount of capital goods needed to abolish the private 
ownership system can the private ownership system be thoroughly 
eliminated. 
  After the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, our party, following the tenets of Marxism on 
gradually eliminating private ownership, set forth the basic 
line of "one center, two basic points" and the structure of an 
ownership system under which the socialist public ownership 
system dominates, non-public ownership economy supplements, and 
multiple economic factors develop simultaneously for a long 
period of time. Our party also put forward the policy of 
allowing and encouraging the development of the private economy 
to achieve the goal of developing the socialist economy, 
increasing social productive forces, and creating material goods 
needed to enter into a high level of socialist society. Then, 
under this situation and condition, is it necessary to advocate 
"private property being sacred" to raise the enthusiasm of 
private entrepreneurs for investing in and managing the private 
economy and for serving socialist modernization? I think it is 
not necessary because the Constitution of China stipulates: "The 
state protects the ownership of lawful income, savings, housing, 
and other legal property of citizens"; and "the state protects 
the right of inheritance of citizens according to law." The 
temporary provisions of private enterprises further stipulates 
in concrete terms: "The assets of private enterprises belong to 
private individuals" and the "state protects the lawful rights 
and interests of private enterprises." All these laws and 
regulations are sufficient to protect the private property of a 
private economy from harm. There is no need to use the 
stipulation of "private property being sacred" used in foreign 
bourgeois laws to replace the Constitution and law of our 
socialist country. As for the concept that only by regarding 
"private property as sacred can socialist society survive and 
progress," it is even more impossible to find out what this 
means. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59334 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Gao Shangquan Views Decision on Socialist Market </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0231A Beijing JINGJI CANKAO in Chinese 5 Dec 93 pp 1,4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0231A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gao Shangquan (7559 1424 0356): "Guiding </F>
Principles For Economic System Reform in the 1990's; Lessons 
From the `CPC Decision On Certain Problems in Establishing a 
Socialist Market Economic System'"] 
  [Text] The "CPC Decision Concerning Certain Problems In 
Establishing a Socialist Market Economic System," passed at the 
3rd Plenum of the 14th Party Central Committee, completely 
reflected Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theories concerning building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. It made more specific 
and systematic the goal of a establishing a socialist market 
economy as proposed at the 14th Party Central Committee and is 
an important breakthrough and development in theory and 
practice; it will be the guiding principle for conducting reform 
of the economic system reform in the 1990's. 
<H3>  I. Draw Up the General Framework for Establishing a 
Socialist Market Economic System, Design the General Blueprint 
for Further Reform </H3>
  1. To establish a socialist market economic system is 
to make the market play the fundamental role in allocating 
resources under the State's macroscopic regulation and control. 
  The basic prerequisite for establishing the socialist market 
economic system is to associate the market economic functions of 
perfecting resource allocation and improving efficiency with the 
goals of public ownership to safeguard social justice and 
promotion of getting rich together. It should reflect the 
general regulation of the market economy, learning from and 
absorbing the successful experiences of foreign countries, as 
well as reflecting the essential characteristics of the 
socialist system. The general law of market economics is: All 
commodities and all key elements of production including land, 
capital, labor force, and technology should go into the market. 
The market operation system will play a basic function in 
allocation; property rights and relationships must be clear, 
profit substances pluralized, and enterprises become independent 
legal persons and chief entities in market competition with 
self-operation, self-responsibility for profits and losses, 
self-development, and self-restriction. The government will 
carry out indirect regulation and control through economic 
means, to foster a good market situation, protect society's 
overall profits, and accomplish the public's goals. Economic 
relationships must be legalized, enterprises must operate in 
accordance with the law, and the government administer by law. 
  For initial establishment of the socialist market economy 
system by the end of the century, there is much work which must 
be done, so we must grasp the key points, and first of all 
establish the basic framework of the new system. 
  2. The basic framework of the socialist market economic 
system is composed of five links. 
  A. Establish a modern enterprise system which is suitable to 
the market economy, forming a vigorous microscopic base in which 
public ownership is the main body, while multiple economic 
compositions develop in the interim. 
  B. Establish a national unified market system, to achieve 
close associations between rural and urban markets, connections 
between the domestic and international markets, and promote 
perfected allocation of resources. 
  C. Establish a perfect macroscopic regulation and control 
system which mainly uses indirect means, shifting the 
government's role of administering the economy, and guaranteeing 
healthy operation of the domestic economy. 
  D. Establish an income distribution system in which 
distribution by work is the dominant factor, giving priority to 
efficiency, giving consideration to fairness, encouraging part 
of our regions and part of our people to get rich first, going 
the way of getting rich together. 
  E. Establish a multi-level social insurance system, 
providing 
social insurance for urban and rural residents which is 
appropriate to China's situation, to promote economic and social 
stability. 
  Just as it is stated in the "Decision": "These principle 
links are organic main entities which are associated and 
mutually restrictive, and compose the basic framework of the 
socialist market economic system." Meanwhile, it also clarifies 
the basic special features of the socialist market economy. We 
must accelerate reform measures around these key links, to 
establish the basic framework of the socialist market economy. 
  3. Correctly learn and grasp the key and mutual links 
for establishing the socialist market economic system framework. 
  The basic and key link in establishing the socialist market 
economic system and a modern enterprise system appropriate to 
what the market requires is clarification of property rights and 
relationships. This is because the enterprise is the main entity 
of the market, and the modern enterprise system is the basic 
system in the socialist market economy system. Without a modern 
enterprise system, the socialist market economy would be a river 
without water, a tree without roots. Because the enterprise is 
an economic entity which is composed of the various key elements 
of production, key elements of the market, the whole market 
system including labor force, capital, and technology are 
prerequisites to establishing a modern enterprise system as well 
as the certain result of modern enterprise economic operation. 
Among these key elements of production, the person is the most 
vigorous element. To be complete in establishing a modern 
enterprise system, in order to arouse and bring into full play 
the enthusiasm, initiative, and creativity of labor, we must 
establish a reasonable income distribution system, smash 
egalitarianism, and implement earning more for more work. This 
will reflect the principle of giving priority to efficiency, 
giving consideration to fairness, and forming the market 
economy's system of operating by motivation. Only in this way 
can we improve labor productivity and economic efficiency. 
  We should realize that in the process of developing the 
socialist market economy, the market is not a universal: 
Establishment of a perfect and efficient macroscopic economic 
regulation and control and a social insurance system cannot be 
replaced by enterprise action and the market operation system, 
because enterprises and the market do not have, indeed cannot 
possibly have, macroscopic regulation and control functions, or 
a system of social insurance. The macroscopic regulation and 
control system is the regulator of the socialist market economic 
system, while the social insurance system is the market economic 
system's safety valve and stabilizer. It is only by establishing 
a perfect macroscopic regulation and control system in which 
indirect measures are the dominant factor, and by establishing a 
multilevel social insurance system, can we ensure that the 
socialist market economy will be systematic, complete and 
unified. By having this type of new system, we can enhance 
economic and social stability, and ensure that the domestic 
economy will operate regularly and healthily. 
<H3>  II. Give the Highest Priority To Arranging Property Rights 
and Relationships, and To Establishing Modern Enterprises; 
Clearly Set Forth the Concept of "Legal Person Property Rights" </H3>
  1. The market conditions required for state-owned 
enterprises to achieve self-operation, and self-responsibility 
for profits and losses. 
  In 1984, in the "CPC Decisions On Economic System Reform" it 
was made clear that state-owned enterprises should achieve 
self-operation and take responsibility for their own profits and 
losses, but so far this goal has not been accomplished, because 
two difficult points have yet to be resolved: One is that the 
market conditions required for enterprise self-operation have 
not formed, and the second is that we haven't found the specific 
pattern for enterprises to accomplish responsibility for their 
own profits and losses, so we haven't resolved the theoretical 
and practical problems concerned in enterprises' property rights. 
  Enterprises' self-operation requires a market condition, and 
establishment of that condition is the result of a series of 
reforms which support the system. To establish a commodity 
market, we must reform the planning system, the circulation 
system, and the price management system. Going a step further, a 
commodity market alone is not sufficient for enterprise 
self-operation; there must also be key element markets as well, 
chief of which are the capital market, the labor force market, 
and the technology market. This in turn calls for reform of the 
investment system, the financial system, and the labor and 
personnel matters system, as well as a social insurance system. 
  According to a survey by a relevant department, there are 
several basic special features in China's market conditions, as 
follow: 
  First, there is a very great difference in degree of 
development between the commodity market and the key element 
markets. The commodity market developed more rapidly, the key 
element markets more slowly. 
  Second, there is a considerable difference in market 
conditions confronting large, medium, and small enterprises. 
Small enterprises face better market conditions, so have greater 
rights to self-operation; the market conditions are worse for 
large and medium enterprises, especially backbone enterprises 
which produce important products, so they have a lesser degree 
of self-operation. 
  Third, there are sizable differences in the market 
conditions 
faced by enterprises' from different industries. Enterprises in 
industries which produce investment type products and 
manufacture consumer products enjoy better market conditions, 
since they have greater rights to self-operation; enterprises in 
sectors which produce raw materials and basic industries face 
less favorable market conditions, having fewer self-operation 
rights. 
  Fourth, there are major differences in market conditions 
across different regions. Markets in special economic zones and 
development areas developed better than did markets in other 
areas. 
  From the four differences listed above, we can see the 
achievements of past reform as well as the backward links in the 
reform process; we can confirm that there is a practical base 
for continuing to go forward as well as confirm the key points 
of further reform. On this basis, we can determine the channels 
by which to exchange the enterprise operation system. 
  2. Reform of state-owned enterprises demands a 
breakthrough in the theory of property rights. 
  Regardless of whether profit or loss, both are embodied in 
enterprise property rights. Enterprises must achieve 
self-responsibility for profits and losses, must become the main 
body of their property rights; if the property of state-owned 
enterprises comes into the category of public ownership, how can 
enterprises become the main body of property rights? This is the 
urgent problem we must resolve to realize the pattern of 
state-owned enterprise taking responsibility for their own 
profits and losses. 
  Theoretical circles and executive departments carried out a 
useful probe of enterprise property rights reform. Generally 
there are three ways in which it is worded: 1) Legal person 
property controlling rights; 2) legal person ownership; 3) legal 
person property rights. 
  Concerning enterprise legal person property controlling 
rights: According to the regulations of the "Enterprise Law" and 
"Transformation of the Public Ownership Industrial Enterprises 
Operating System," enterprises share ownership, using it and 
levying penalties in accordance with the law. Discussions have 
shown that many people are confused about this concept: Although 
the "General Regulations of Civil Law" confirmed that the right 
of separation was an independent property right of civil 
affairs, people still viewed it as an administrative right, 
which was an enterprise activity right not touching upon 
property rights and relationships. Therefore, it is difficult 
for enterprises to accomplish value-preservation and 
value-addition of state-owned capital, and self-responsibility 
for profits and losses. 
  Concerning enterprise legal person ownership: Legal person 
ownership, the structure which deals with shareholder rights in 
the legal relationship between enterprise and investor, is now 
the general rule of civil law and commercial law in each 
country. Enterprises share in legal person ownership as 
independent civil affairs main entities, and independently 
engage in legal activities, undertake legal responsibility, and 
can eliminate investor direct involvement in the enterprise's 
production and operations activities. Legal ownership is only a 
legal form; it cannot change the nature of the enterprise's 
ownership. That is determined by the characteristics of the 
shareholders who actually control the corporation. 
  Concerning enterprise legal person property rights: In this, 
the enterprise has independent controlling rights to property 
that the state has authorized the enterprise to operate and 
manage in accordance with law. Legal person property rights are 
an association of operational rights and the legal person 
system. Enterprise operational rights are spoken of in 
comparison with state ownership, setting the focal point on the 
relationship of property, rights and responsibilities between 
the enterprise and the state. Legal person property rights are 
spoken of in comparing the enterprise's other civil affairs 
rights, setting the focal point on the relationship of rights 
and responsibilities between the enterprise as an independent 
legal person and the enterprise's property. What is the 
difference between legal person property rights and enterprise 
operation rights? One is that operation does not include profit 
rights, while "enterprise legal person property rights" includes 
related content concerning profit rights. Another difference is 
that after affirming the concept of enterprise legal person 
property rights, the state will not accept responsibility for 
enterprise debts. Explaining enterprise legal person property 
right helps to understand correctly and implement further 
enterprise operational rights, and helps to clarify property 
relationships, protect state ownership, and accomplish 
value-preservation and value-adding for state owned assets. So, 
the "Decision" used the wording of "enterprise legal person 
property right." 
  3. Establishing the modern enterprise system is the 
direction of state-owned enterprise reform. 
  What is the modern enterprise system? What are its basic 
special feature? According to international experience and 
China's practical situation, it first of all clarifies property 
rights relationships. When an enterprise has the legal person 
property right, it can become a legal person entity, assuming 
responsibility for civil rights and responsibilities. Second, it 
permits enterprises to self-operate, taking responsibility for 
their own profits and losses in all legal person property, 
paying taxes in accordance with regulations, taking 
responsibility for asset value-preservation and value-adding for 
investors. Third, investors undertake limited responsibility in 
the amount of assets they invest. Fourth, enterprises organize 
production and operation according to market demand, and in 
market competition, only excellent will win while the bad will 
fall by the wayside; there will be no indirect government 
intervention in enterprise operations. Fifth, it will establish 
a scientific enterprise organizational structure and management 
system, establishing a mutual encouragement and restrictive 
operating system among owners, operators, and employees. 
  The corporation system is the major legal pattern of the 
enterprise system under the modern market economic system. The 
basic special features of the enterprise legal person are: One, 
it has the status of an independent legal person, the same civil 
action abilities as a natural person, to sue and countersue; 
two, it takes responsibility for its own profits and losses, a 
company of the shareholder investment form assumes independent 
civil responsibility; third, it is a totally independent 
economic entity for taxpaying; fourth, it adopts a regulated 
system of cost and financial accounting. 
  4. The fundamental conditions for enterprises to be the 
main entity of market competition. 
  The risky and competitive special features of a main entity 
in market economy activities determine that for the enterprise 
to be the main entity of market competition it should have two 
fundamental conditions. 
  One is that enterprises determine their own activity and 
direction according to market demand, determining its own 
combination of enterprise production key elements and 
operations. Enterprises determine as they will what to produce, 
what to operate, how to conduct production and operations. The 
second is that enterprises can independently bear the 
consequences of market activity, which is that the enterprise 
should become the main entity in legal property rights, having 
independent property rights and responsibilities. 
  5. The advantages and pattern of the corporation system. 
  In reorganizing the state-owned enterprises we can eliminate 
the original legal framework for public ownership enterprises. 
The advantages to this are: 
  One, the enterprise will take its own responsibility for 
profits and losses, getting out of the strange circle which 
confronts state-owned enterprise reform. State-owned enterprises 
are being remolded on the corporate system, in which the state, 
representing the public as shareholders, undertakes limited 
responsibility for enterprises according to the amount of its 
investment, and entrusts operations to directors; enterprises 
take responsibility for their profits and losses on the basis of 
legal person property right. The biggest restriction on 
enterprises is self-responsibility for profits and losses; this 
responsibility can prevent enterprises from abusing ownership, 
with loss of state owned capital. 
  Second, it helps in clarifying property rights 
relationships. 
Remolding into the corporate system requires clarification of 
property rights relationships between government and 
enterprises, confirms the government's ownership organs, and 
sends representatives of shareholders to attend board of 
directors meetings. 
  Third, it creates the conditions for separating enterprise 
from government and for enterprise self-operation. The corporate 
system remake requires separation of government from capital, 
unification of capital and enterprises, and this furnishes the 
preconditions for separating government from enterprises. 
Meanwhile, the separation of ownership rights from operating 
rights is assured by a clear, stable system of regulations and 
by the enterprises' internal organizational structure. It will 
provide reliable organization and system conditions for freeing 
enterprises from inappropriate governmental administrative 
interference, and will protect enterprise self-operation. 
  Fourth, it is only after enterprises have taken 
responsibility for their profits and losses that they will 
really be able to face the market. For public ownership 
enterprises, the state does indeed take joint responsibility for 
their profits and losses. Moreover, this is done without looking 
into the responsibility for profits and losses. Therefore, 
enterprises face more toward government rather than the market, 
so even should the government want to push them, they might not 
be able to. After enterprises assume responsibility for their 
own profits and losses, facing the market will become an 
internal requirement for an enterprise looking to survive and 
develop. 
  Fifth, the responsibility system for profits and losses by 
enterprise operators and employees will be better implemented, 
promoting enterprise efficiency and improved benefits. Because 
the owner goes into the enterprise, property rights restrictions 
will be more strict, making it easier to confirm responsibility 
for profits and losses of operators and employees, establishing 
a more efficient system for incentives and restrictions. In 
addition, it will serve to increase flexibility in enterprise 
operations and promote fairness in competition among various 
kinds of enterprises. 
  The corporate system can take a different pattern: A small 
number of natural monopoly industries and public welfare 
industries can be remolded into state single capital 
corporations and multiple investment entities can be remolded 
into limited responsibility corporations or joint stock 
corporations in accordance with law. The joint stock system can 
better regulate the relationships between the state and 
enterprises, and is the efficient form suitable for development 
of the market economy. We must create the conditions, positively 
and reliably extending the range of experimental sites, 
regulating it and letting it develop in a healthy manner. There 
can be only a small number of joint stock corporations in the 
market. Implementation of the corporate system should stress 
replacing the operational system, with steady expansion via 
experimental sites. 
<H3>  III. Current Emphasis Should Be on Developing a Production 
Elements Market To Establish a Unified Open Market System; 
Markets for Labor Force and Capital Are Important Components of 
the Elements of Production, With New Breakthroughs and 
Developments, Both Theoretically and Practically </H3>
  1. Current emphasis on development of a production 
elements market. 
  The "Decision" noted that "current emphasis must be on 
developing a production elements market." Why must this be 
emphasized? 
  The weak link in current market construction is the serious 
backwardness of the elements market, which does suit the needs 
of establishing the socialist market economic system. At 
present, direct financial markets occupy only about 10 percent 
of the gross capital used in China, with the capital market in a 
preliminary stage. The circulation of the labor force is still 
fundamentally unchanged from the pattern of the original system. 
The actual turnover rate of scientific and technical 
achievements is not very high; for example, only 5 percent of 
the scientific and technical achievements in the 
electromechanical industry received widespread popularization. 
Production elements bring a very low price in the market. This 
has become a barrier to the establishment of a national, 
unified, open market, a barrier to making maximum use of the 
market's fundamental role of resource allocation. 
  Bringing all production elements into the market is an 
essential requirement of the socialist market economic system, a 
vital part of establishing and perfecting the market system, as 
well as a key problem in perfecting resource allocation. The 
production element markets include those for capital, labor 
force, technology, and land. Without development of the element 
markets, reasonable circulation of production markets would be 
impossible to accomplish, and it would certainly be impossible 
to really achieve perfected resource allocation. 
  2. A clear proposal for the concept of a labor force 
market is an important breakthrough in economic system theory 
and practice. 
  In the past, theoretical circles, and especially economic 
departments, always used such concepts as "labor services 
market", the "labor market" and "labor employment market." The 
"Decision," clearly proposed the concept of the "labor force 
market." Actually, the labor force market is one type of 
production element market, an important component of the market 
system; only when the labor force market is proposed with 
perfect assurance can we accelerate the establishment of the 
socialist market economic system. 
  Now that the people are the masters of the state, how can 
the 
labor force be seen as a commodity property? The chief reason 
such a problem exists lies in confusion over the two ideas of 
labor force and worker. 
  In fact, the labor force is not equivalent to the worker. 
The 
concepts of labor force and worker have connections as well as 
differences. Labor force refers to labor capability of the 
worker; worker refers to the main entity of labor which is the 
person. The workers exchange their labor abilities in the labor 
force market but not their persons. In the process of this 
exchange, the two sides negotiate supply and demand equally and 
make mutual choices for mutual benefits. 
  Workers have different levels of personal talent, so they 
have different levels of working ability. Ownership of the labor 
force lies with the main entity of labor, that is, the person, 
and this supplies both the possibility and the practical base 
for the existence and development of the labor force market. As 
the only active element, the labor force plays an important role 
in production elements. If the other production elements go into 
the market, with only the labor force kept out, it will be 
impossible to establish a unified open market system. Only when 
the labor forces goes into the market, and the qualifications 
and value of workers receive a fair evaluation, can enterprises 
and workers carry out two-way selection on a free will basis, 
and thereby promote perfected allocation of labor resources and 
the entire resources of society. 
  It is irrefutable that there actually exists a considerable 
amount of the labor force market in our economic life. 
  China has a big population, an abundant labor force 
resource, 
so the contradiction of labor supply exceeding demand will exist 
for a long time. According to figures supplied by relevant 
departments, by the year 2000 China will face the employment 
pressures of 320 million people, so it is urgent and essential 
that we speed up the creation and development of a labor force 
market. 
  At present, China's labor force is still in a stage of 
preliminary development. Looking at the main entity of market 
competition, establishment of this has been blocked in all 
state-owned sectors, due to the fact that the labor and 
personnel system has not yet implemented complete reforms. There 
is still basically a lack of guaranteed rights and benefits for 
the market main entity. Looking at the market operating system, 
the pricing standard for the labor force lacks unity; over quite 
a large area, wages reflect neither the cost of the labor force 
nor the labor force supply and demand situation, so the 
operating system for market regulation does not function. 
Looking at market competition order, there is a lack of 
essential measures to protect competition, regulate and control 
the market, and provide legal supervision. Looking at the market 
service system, the social protection system is not completely 
established, with a very low degree of social benefits, such as 
employee training, medical benefits, job-related injuries, 
retirement insurance, and unemployment compensation. Therefore, 
it is only through further reform, accelerating the creation and 
development of a labor force market, that we can possibly deal 
with the massive employment pressures in future economic 
development. 
  Affirming the concept of a labor force market will not 
affect 
the working class's master position. Admitting a labor force 
market does not mean that workers are a commodity. Workers have 
the right to exchange and retain their labor force, have the 
freedom to choose jobs; this merely reflects the fact that 
workers are masters of their own labor force, so as to 
accomplish equal labor and employment opportunities. Under 
capitalism, private ownership of the means of production brings 
a separation of the workers from the means of production, 
obliging workers to sell their labor force to become employed, 
so the individual ownership rights of the labor force change in 
nature. Under socialism, workers exchange their labor force with 
collective workers, and participate in democratic management, 
achieving true private ownership of the labor force. When we 
speak of the master position of the working class, we mean the 
whole working class, and the individual worker is not equal to 
the whole working class. The individual worker's exchange and 
retention of his own labor force doesn't mean he has lost the 
status of being a part of the working class. 
  3. Positively and reliably develop the capital market, 
to promote socialist modernization. 
  A. Capital must be converted into social wealth. 
  Is capital allowed to exist in the socialist market economy? 
This is a big and important problem which must be resolved in 
economic reform and development. Since the "three big 
remoldings" in China, the economic category of capital has 
almost been cancelled, replacing it with funds, viewing capital 
and the capital market the same as capitalist and capitalism. 
  In a situation where multiple economic compositions 
simultaneously co-exist, admitting the existence of capital is 
helpful to development of the domestic economy. At present, the 
different development speeds of the different economic 
components is closely relate to whether they operate according 
to the regulations on capital circulation. For example, some 
enterprises earn fake profits while actually losing, some "three 
forms of capital enterprises" have fake losses while actually 
earning profits. Privately owned enterprises seek as much 
depreciation as possible, while some state owned enterprises 
rarely mention it if they mention it at all, with the result 
that some state owned enterprises "rest on their laurels," their 
capital funds going down while their assets to liabilities ratio 
rises greatly, their average profit level dropping, and the 
capital value-addition increases slowly. This is one important 
reason why in recent years there has been a steady decline in 
that proportion of the domestic economy that is state owned. 
  Under capitalism, currency is converted to capital, with 
capitalists use this capital to occupy surplus value. Under 
socialism, the question is not whether to create surplus value, 
but who will possess the newly increased surplus value? Will it 
be converted to social property? Will it benefit the people and 
society? When we engage in the socialism market economy, capital 
value-addition means the expansion of owners' capital which 
includes, chiefly, public ownership. It is helpful in developing 
socialist productive forces, in increasing the comprehensive 
national power of socialist countries, and in improving people's 
living standards. 
  Converting national funds into national "capital" 
establishes 
the relationship between the state and enterprises according to 
"capital" ownership rights. This aids in separating enterprises 
from government, in managing enterprises well, and also helps 
the state strengthen macroscopic regulation and control of 
enterprises through the economic means of investments and loans. 
Enterprises engage in operational activities through the means 
of capital, and have to make up losses through capital; if they 
make profits, it will become the owner's benefits. The 
enterprise's purpose is to capital value-addition. The initial 
step in establishing a system which keeps enterprises within 
boundaries is to have powerful restrictions on capital. This is 
the only way to avoid the phenomenon of "eating up all the 
benefits" and an "enterprise tending to be a empty box." 
  Allowance for the existence of capital must create changes 
in 
the ownership pattern. As positive promotion is provided for the 
state ownership economy and the collective economy, there must 
at the same time be encouragement for development of individual, 
private, and foreign investment joint ventures in order to 
establish a pattern of taking public ownership as the dominant 
factor, absorbing the simultaneous development of multiple 
economic components. Some public ownership enterprises which 
took in investment from employees and collective enterprises, 
issued B stock and H stock, the enterprises and the legal person 
blended as one. This is just as the "Decision" said, that "with 
property rights moving and reorganizing, more and more economic 
units will have mixed property ownership, and will establish new 
a property ownership structure." This is a development in 
ownership theory and practice. 
  Allowance for the existence of capital must create changes 
in 
the distribution system as well. The "Decision" declared: 
"Encourage deposits and investment by urban and rural residents, 
allowing production elements which are a part of individual 
capital to participate in distribution of profits and benefits." 
We must adhere to a system in which distribution according to 
labor is at the center, with simultaneous existence of a 
multiple distribution pattern. This requires that two 
relationship problems be handled well: One, the relationship 
between distribution by work and distribution by capital; and 
two, the relationship between state owned capital and privately 
owned capital. Not only should we encourage a part of the people 
in some areas to get rich first, but we must also try to avoid 
division into two opposite extremes, while we gradually 
accomplish getting rich together. 
  B. The capital market should positively and reliably develop 
security and stock capital. 
  The capital market can also be called the long term fund 
market, which is the market for fund debits and credits or 
security exchanges of medium and short term capital markets over 
one year. The money market can also be called the short term 
capital market. Since reform, there have been major changes in 
the domestic income distribution pattern. The proportion of 
resident deposits in national gross deposits has risen to its 
current figure of more than 70 percent from 23.55 percent in 
1979. The huge amount of resident savings are largely in the 
form of deposits. Thus, at the same time we are stabilizing 
savings, we should positively and reliably develop security and 
stock capital. Regulate the structure of the capital market, 
with step by step regulation of stock market expansion. This 
will improve the proportion of enterprise self-owned capital, 
which can appropriately strengthen enterprises' ability to 
undertake financial regulations by the central bank. Currently, 
banks bear most of the debt load for state-owned enterprises, so 
when money is tight, there is a direct effect on enterprises' 
production and operational actions. Because China's state-owned 
enterprises do not now have a true self-restrictive operations 
system, in their pursuit of output and development speed, 
enterprises do not consider the costs of collecting capital in 
the market; but financial macroscopic regulation and control is 
direct control of credit and not indirect control of the 
currency supply. In this situation, it is easy to keep direct 
investment separate from changes in market demand, so the 
market's perfected resource allocation function cannot be 
brought into full play. We must establish a credit rating 
system, and regulate the issuance of stocks and securities to 
promote healthy development of the capital market. 
<H3>  IV. Macroscopic Regulation and Control Is Chiefly Through 
Economic Means, Bringing Into Full Play the Enthusiasms of 
Central Authorities and Localities </H3>
  1. The socialist market economy requires a perfect 
macroscopic regulation and control system. 
  The socialist market economy system must emphasize bringing 
the market's basic resource allocation function into full play. 
But on the other hand, it must be understood that the market is 
not universal; it is spontaneous, blind, and sluggish, so we 
must strengthen macroscopic regulation and control. Establishing 
a macroscopic regulation and control system will compensate for 
the market's shortages. Therefore, the market mechanism function 
and macroscopic regulation and control are linked to one another 
and they supplement each other; each is indispensable. 
  The "Decision" stipulated that macroscopic regulation and 
control must stress "maintaining a general equilibrium in the 
gross economic total, to perfect the economic structure and lead 
to steady, rapid, and healthy development of the domestic 
economy while promoting comprehensive progress of society." In 
addition, it made it clear that "macroscopic regulation and 
control is chiefly by economic measures," establishing a 
macroscopic regulation and control system by means of further 
reform, without reverting to the old, planned economic system. 
  To establish a macroscopic system for regulation and 
control, 
it is necessary to establish a system which is both mutually 
supportive and mutually restrictive among plan, finance, and 
revenue and expenditures, to strengthen combined coordination of 
economic operations. A very important question is just what kind 
of role will the central bank play in macroscopic regulation and 
control. At present, the policy objectives of the central bank 
are not only to assume the huge burden of supporting economic 
growth, it is also responsible for stabilizing currency. In 
addition, it must always make economic development its highest 
priority, with an expansion tendency in currency policy, and 
this weakens its function of stabilizing currency. The 
"Decision" specified quite clearly that: "The prime objective of 
the central bank is to stabilize currency value, regulate the 
total currency supply, and maintain the international balance." 
Confirming the central bank's policy objectives was beneficial 
to stabilizing currency and controlling inflation. 
  2. In the near future, we must take major, important 
steps in revenue, finance, investment, and planning system 
reform. 
  The key points of revenue system reform are: 1) Establish a 
tax division system; that is, change the current local revenue 
contracted system into one that establishes a central tax, 
shared tax, and local tax on the basis of an equitable division 
between the central government and localities' rights; 2) reform 
and perfect the tax system, and spread more widely the 
circulation tax system in which the value-added tax is the 
dominant factor, on the principle of a unified tax law, a fair 
tax burden, a simplified tax system, and an equitable division 
of power; 3) reform and regulate the double entry budget. 
  The focal points of financial system reform are: 1) The 
People's Bank of China must operate as a true central bank, 
regulating and controlling the currency supply primarily through 
economic means; that is, changing from relying chiefly on 
management of the scale of credit to the use of such measures as 
the deposit reserve rate, the central bank credit interest rate, 
and open market business to conduct management; 2) the current 
specialized banks must be converted into commercial banks; 3) we 
must organize policy type banks, separating policy type business 
and commercial type business; 4) reform the foreign exchange 
management system, and with the market as the foundation, 
establish a controlled system for a floating foreign exchange 
rate with a unified and standard foreign currency market. 
  The focal points of investment system reform are: 1) Change 
the main entities of investment in competitive type projects 
from government to enterprises, giving enterprises 
self-determination in policy and strategy, and gradually 
establishing risk responsibility for legal person investment and 
bank credit; 2) replace the current administrative examination 
and approval with a system of registering projects and putting 
them on file, a major and important reform in the transition 
from the planned economy to the market economy; 3) encourage and 
take in investment from every sector for the construction of 
fundamental projects. 
  The focal points of planning system reform are: 1) The plan 
must be based on the market, usually an oversight plan; 2) The 
mission of planning work is to establish a logical development 
strategy, achieving the purpose of regulation and control and 
industrial policy, with accurate economic forecasts; 3) Put 
macroscopic, strategic, and policy-oriented key points in 
prominent positions in medium and long-range planning; 4) 
Establish new domestic economic business accounting and a 
macroscopic system for economic oversight and estimates. 
  3. Alter the role of government by reasonably dividing 
the central government's rights and the economic management 
rights of localities. 
  Is it first level macroscopic regulation and control or 
second level macroscopic regulation and control? What we refer 
to as macroscopic regulation and control is regulation and 
control of the gross economic output. Therefore, macroscopic 
regulation and control rights must be concentrated in the 
central government; localities should not be making decisions 
concerning the issuance of currency, setting fundamental 
interest rates, and regulating and controlling major tax rates. 
This is the only way that we can assure a balanced gross 
economic output, perfect the economic structure, and establish a 
national, unified, open, market system. To maximize the 
enthusiasm of localities, the "Decision" set essential 
management rights for each province, autonomous region, and 
municipality directly under the central government: 1) Fix 
regional laws and regulations, policies and plans which are in 
accord with the nation's laws, regulations and macroscopic 
policies; 2) replenish local taxes, increase local revenue, and 
regulate activities in these localities through local revenues 
and budgets; 3) fully exploit local resources, promoting 
economic and social development in these localities; 4) organize 
and construct rural and urban cooperative banks to support 
regional economic development. 
  Transforming the role of government and reforming government 
organs is urgently needed if we are to establish the socialist 
market economic system. The "Decision" set out clear regulations 
on the function of government economic management, that it is 
"chiefly, to establish and carry out macroscopic regulation and 
control, do a good job of constructing the infrastructure, 
cultivate a market system, regulate societal distribution and 
organize social insurance, control population growth, protect 
the environment, and manage state owned assets in order to 
accomplish the objective of developing the national economy and 
society. We must transform the role of government administrative 
departments, simplify the administrative structure, strengthen 
the role of social administration, and not intervene directly in 
the production and operational activities of enterprises. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59335 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Type B Stocks' Performance `Weak' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0134A Hong Kong PAI-HSING HSIN-WEN CHOU-K'AN [PAISHING 
NEWSWEEK] in Chinese No 30, 22 Oct 93 pp 35-37 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0134A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong PAI-HSING HSIN-WEN CHOU-K'AN [PAISHING 
NEWSWEEK] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chung Nai-wen (6945 0035 2429), Ch'en Yung-yen </F>
(7115 0737 3601), and Chung P'ei-ch'ing (6945 0160 0615): "With 
China's Stock Markets in a State of `One Country, Five Systems,' 
Type B Stocks Will Have To Be Abandoned"] 
  [Text] As China is going to administer the future Hong Kong 
SAR in the form of "one country, two systems," China's current 
stock world has set a precedent by practicing "one country, five 
systems:" 1) Type-A stock transactions in RMB; 2) Type-B stock 
trading in U.S. dollars; 3) Type-H stock trading and investment 
on Hong Kong's stock market in Hong Kong dollars; 4) State-stock 
issues; 5) Corporate-stock offerings. But as the type-B stocks 
supplied for transactions by foreign investors in China have a 
small trading volume and are inconvenient to trade, figures in 
Chinese securities circles have been holding recently that the 
type-B standing is very likely to be eliminated, to be replaced 
by the type-H, or even for all five types to be consolidated 
into one. 
<H5>  China's Stock Markets: "One Country, Five Systems" </H5>
  While Hong Kong's stock market is repeatedly setting new 
records, China's Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets are 
continuing to fluctuate at a low level, down nearly one-half 
from their peaks. And China's type-B stocks have nothing good or 
unusual to be reported about, performing even more weakly in 
Shenzhen than in Shanghai, generally reflecting even less 
strength. 
  On 18 October 1993, the Shanghai B-share index stood at 
73.45, which closing price was down 24 percent from its high of 
96.68 on 24 February, but up 43 percent from its low of 51.39 on 
27 July. And the Shenzhen B-share index's closing price of 
113.58 was down 38.75 percent from its high of 185.44 on 8 
February, but up 40 percent from its low of 80.63 on 6 August. 
  K'uang Wei-t'ien [6782 4850 3240], managing director of the 
New China-Hong Kong Finance Corp Ltd and the New China-HK 
Financial Advice Corp Ltd, tells PAISHING, "As a commercial 
bank, New China-HK can concentrate its attention to China's 
stock markets only on A and H shares, with B shares having 
limited growth prospects, so that the `one country, two systems' 
is quite adequate, and there is no need for `one country, 
multiple systems.' It would be best to replace B shares with H 
shares while the B-share market has not yet grown to maturity." 
<H5>  Shanghai B Shares Beat Out Shenzhen B Shares </H5>
  Supposing a consolidated stock system, Huang Pin-yuan [7806 
2430 0337], director of the New Hungchi Investment Service Corp 
Ltd, holds that two conditions must be met: 1. The authorities 
must allow A shares to be provided for trading by foreign 
investors, to attract foreign investment funds. 2. The renminbi 
must be made freely convertible to foreign currencies, so that A 
and B shares can be merged. And the H shares listed in Hong Kong 
must have a secondary-listing status equal to that of Chinese 
enterprises outside of China. 
  B shares have never had a brisk trading volume on either the 
Shenzhen or Shanghai stock exchanges. As to B-share prospects in 
these two places, Huang Pin-yuan holds that the short-term 
B-share prospects differ for Shanghai and Shenzhen. 
  He points out that as Shenzhen has a weaker economic 
setting, 
plus mostly real estate speculation business, foreign capital is 
less interested. But as Shanghai has a 5- to 6-decade history of 
economic development, as well as a better industrial and 
commercial base than Shenzhen, it can attract a certain amount 
of foreign investment capital. 
<H5>  B Shares Are Only "Second-Squad" </H5>
  Liu Wei-kang [0491 4850 0474], research department director 
of the Paota Securities Corp Ltd (Hong Kong), also says that as 
B shares per se have a low issue volume, an inadequate trading 
volume, little fundraising capacity, and not much impact, they 
should be gradually eliminated and replaced in the long term. 
  Liu Wei-kang explains that while B shares, just like on a 
soccer team, originally wanted to be promoted to the "A team," 
they were too weak, being merely the first-kick "B squad," to be 
promoted to the "A team" only at the right time in the game. So 
B shares used Shenzhen and Shanghai as "practice fields," hoping 
for further development only by waiting for growth to maturity. 
  Liu Wei-kang holds that as 1997 approaches, the already 
low-impact B shares will have steadily less impact. So he 
believes that B shares should be gradually replaced by H shares. 
  Huang Pin-yuan tells PAISHING that on 18 October in 
Shanghai, 
the market value was 83 billion yuan for A shares, but 5.8 
billion yuan for B shares. In Shenzhen, this was 54.7 billion 
yuan for A shares, but 6.95 billion yuan for B shares. This left 
the B-share market value temporarily one-half to one-third that 
of A shares. 
<H5>  B Shares Are Likely To Be Replaced by A and H Shares </H5>
  While China's economic drive comes from its own investors, 
meaning that the status of A shares is most important, A shares 
are subject to the temporary defect of not being able to compete 
for foreign exchange. K'uang Wei-t'ien points out, "While 
Chinese A shares cannot yet compete for foreign exchange, they 
can use other forms, such as directly listing their companies in 
Hong Kong, in either A or H form. In addition to Hong Kong, they 
can also consider listings in London, England and New York, 
U.S.A." 
  As Hong Kong's stock market system, time lag, 
communications, 
and transportation are all fine and suited to China, Chinese 
stock listings should first consider Hong Kong. K'uang 
Wei-t'ien says, "If A shares could be listed also in Hong Kong, 
they would not only have a larger circulation volume, but also 
would be subject to easier operation. Once Hong Kong reverts to 
Chinese sovereignty in 1997, commercial banks should concentrate 
on expanding A- and H-share markets." 
<H5>  B Shares Should Be Eliminated While They Are Still Immature </H5>
  The conversion of B shares to H shares is a general trend. 
K'uang Wei-t'ien states, "As Chinese B shares number only some 
30+, this means that it is necessary to use a better system to 
handle their replacement in the current stage." 
  Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp holdings also include 
the 
two types of "Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp 
London-registered" shares priced in either Hong Kong dollars and 
British pounds, with some companies also having set the 
precedent of converting preferred to common stock. K'uang 
Wei-t'ien says, "The conversion of B to H shares is not as 
simple as the conversion of preferred to common stock, as 
China's conditions differ somewhat from Hong Kong's. And while 
each company's structure and conditions also differ, meaning 
that listings must conform to Hong Kong standards, the listing 
of quality Chinese enterprises in Hong Kong is an inevitable 
trend." 
  In addition, the market-profit-rate of Chinese B shares also 
differs from that of A shares, with K'uang Wei-t'ien admitting 
that the B-share market-profit-rate does not reflect market 
conditions. 
  In the conversion of B to H shares, the prices of B shares 
might come under pressure. K'uang Wei-t'ien points out that 
"lower stock prices, as long as they are a normal market 
activity, would not be too great a problem." 
<H5>  Overseas Capital Does Not Favor B Shares </H5>
  The listing of B shares is of a short-term nature, never 
having had much circulation volume. As to overseas investors, a 
larger trading volume causes sharp volatility in stock prices, 
meaning also taking greater risks. Due to this inherent 
shortcoming, B shares have never been preferred by foreigners. 
But Huang Pin-yuan points out that as B shares bring nice 
profits in Shenzhen, as well as having a lower market profit 
rate, it is believed that they still have certain short-term 
prospects. While Huang Pin-yuan predicts that achieving a 
uniform shareholding system cannot be accomplished in a few 
short months, he believes that it will certainly be resolved 
within a decade. And state and corporate shares will also have 
to be converted to A shares. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59336 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Credit Investments `Lose Control' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0077C Hong Kong CHIU-SHIH NIEN-TAI [THE NINETIES] in 
Chinese No 10, 1 Oct 93 pp 54-55 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0077C </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHIU-SHIH NIEN-TAI [THE NINETIES] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Chin-nien (3769 6855 1628): "Credit </F>
Investments Largely Out of Control"--First paragraph is 
introduction.] 
  [Text] In the past year, bank credit investments have 
lost control. Zhu Rongji recalled all loans that did not conform 
to regulations within a definite time limit. Actually credit 
that conforms to regulations also is out of control. Bank loans 
cannot be decided by banks. They must be in accordance with the 
mayor's directives. All new projects have "gravy" added. No one 
is responsible for repayment. 
  The first of the three "draconian" measures that Zhu Rongji 
devised when he appeared on the scene to rectify the economy was 
to require all local banks to recall all loans that did not 
conform to regulations before 31 August. It is estimated that 
this involved 160 billion yuan. By the beginning of September, 
Zhu Rongji had extended the date for the recall of the loans to 
the end of this year, because only 20 percent of the loans that 
should have been recalled actually were recalled in August. 
  How has 100 billion or 200 billion been loaned out? In 
addition to the loans that do not conform to regulations, there 
are the regulation bank loans. Why has bank credit gone out of 
control in the past year or so? There are a few specific facts 
here from which we can view the credit investment situation. 
<H5>  People On All Sides Contending for a Sum of Money </H5>
  Since last spring and summer, localities have been 
contending 
one after the other to take on projects and economic development 
regions. Those who are equipped come forth as well as those who 
are not equipped. The banks faced with so many "hungry monks" 
and "so little gruel," are often in an awkward situation. 
Sometimes they have no choice. They can only treat everyone 
alike. This situation has occurred in a certain region. Three 
large enterprises urgently needed a large loan to replace 
equipment. When they suddenly heard that the bank had a sum of 
money, the three almost simultaneously crowded in to contend for 
the loan and none would relent. Finally, the bank had no choice 
but to give in to the quarreling and divide it equally "one bowl 
of gruel to a person." 
  Logically, whom to give loans to and whom not to give them 
to 
should be decided by the banks themselves after a detailed proof 
of the use to which the borrowing unit would put the loan. But 
this is actually very hard to do. In one area this type of 
incident occurred. The bank decided to give a loan to a rather 
efficient baby food factory, but the mayor decided to give the 
loan to a refrigerator factory with rather serious losses, 
because it was a key enterprise in the city. Ultimately, the 
bank could only shift the abacus beads to the refrigerator 
factory. A township enterprise in a certain locality, because 
its products were of high quality and had a good reputation and 
it strongly broke into the international market, earned $2.55 
million in foreign exchange annually. But because the factory's 
current equipment was limited, it urgently needed a sum of money 
to replace its equipment. If its equipment were replaced, it 
could more than triple its production capability and it could 
earn at least $7.1 million in foreign exchange. But just because 
it was a "township enterprise," it ran all over and still could 
not borrow the money. 
<H5>  Much Gravy in the Budget, Black Holes Know How Much </H5>
  The money is the state's and everyone spends the money. So, 
in the investment budget of almost every new project there is 
quite a bit of "gravy." Increasing the "gravy" in new projects 
has become a "legal" method for a great many units and regional 
leaders to seek state funds. "Am I not doing the unit (or 
region) good? In any case, I am not filling my own pockets." 
  City A is constructing a large luxury hotel and needs a new 
type of decorative material. The unit in charge of construction 
budgeted for 8,486 meters, but after repeated detailed 
calculation by technical engineers of the department concerned, 
it was determined that they could get by on 842 meters. The 
reason was quite simple. After the fact, the leaders concerned 
laughed and said, "We intended to do a little something else 
with that bit of money." 
  A certain county was constructing a key middle school and 
budgeted several 10,000 yuan. But with careful accounting by the 
department in charge, no matter how many times they figured it, 
it was nearly 40,000 yuan. When that county's education office 
was asked, the head of the office boldly and self-assuredly 
said, "So, that was money to invite guests, send gifts, make 
connections, and do public relations!" Consider that this cost 
also must be borne by the state. The state's money is constantly 
sliding down innumerable "black holes" in this way. 
<H5>  Stop and Start Projects and Stop and Start Development Zones </H5>
  The so-called stop and start projects stop and start 
construction. Stop and start projects also can be said to be a 
characteristic of China. Stated a little more clearly, it is the 
product of the cleverness of local leaders or unit leaders in 
contending with the banks. 
  A few years ago, quite a few of these stop and start 
projects 
were stopped. By last spring and summer, the stop and start 
projects were finally "successfully completed." But new stop and 
start projects also appeared. According to statistics from March 
of this year, in 1992 there were a total of 88,531 new capital 
construction starts by state units throughout the country, a 19 
percent increase over 1991. The average planned total investment 
for each project is 3.38 million, a 45.7 percent increase over 
the previous year. Because the excessively fast growth of these 
new starts spurred the rapid growth in the need for investment, 
it caused the prices of related capital goods to continue to go 
up. Some exceeded market demands, but "they could prohibit them, 
but it was hard to stop them." 
  Actually, "stop and start projects" are nothing compared 
with 
the "stop and start development zones." Since last year's wave 
of layer after layer of development zone started, it has 
seriously impacted on current economic development. The greatest 
problem with the development zone craze is, whether they are 
prepared or not, everybody comes forward. The provinces come 
forward, the localities and cities come forward, the counties 
come forward, and even the townships come forward, to the point 
that whether or not they can "be developed," that many cannot be 
attended to. 
  Presently, there are more than 6,000 of various types of 
development zones throughout the country. A 300 million yuan 
investment is required to do the "seven connections and one 
leveling" on one square kilometer. Of this 300 million yuan, the 
state normally invests 100 million and for the remaining 200 
million they must go to the bank themselves for a loan or raise 
the money themselves. (Actually, it is still the state's money.) 
Not to have 450 billion for 15,000 square kilometers of 
development zones throughout the country is unacceptable. But 
where does the state go to find so much money?! The total of 
more than 700 billion annual national capital construction 
investment is all used to make development zones, and it is done 
for six years. In these six years, it cannot be used for 
anything. 
<H5>  If I Cannot Pay Back, What Can They Do To Me? </H5>
  "One must pay back the money that he borrows." This is 
justice. But today in the mainland debtors are extremely 
relaxed. The wife and children live in the house and use the 
car, the electricity, and the telephone; eat, drink, and sleep, 
and it has no affect---after all, it is all the state's money. 
  A certain steel enterprise group to put up a new steel 
rolling plant borrowed 30 million yuan from the bank. Because of 
a policy error, they did not roll a single piece of steel. When 
they had to pay back, they did not have a single cent. What 
could they do? In any case you cannot make a deduction every 
month from the factory head's 400 yuan salary. Ultimately, there 
was no way. They could only transfer the factory head to a 
municipal economic committee as vice chairman to act as an 
official in another place. As to that 30 million yuan, who 
knows. . . . . . 
  A certain township even exceeds this joke. The township 
borrowed 2 million to construct a silkworm station and a base to 
raise silkworms. For various reasons, the situation failed. When 
the loan expired and the bank came to press for repayment, the 
township head concerned could not be found. That afternoon a 
call came from the county procurator saying that the township 
head, carrying a bed roll, had come to "report." He claimed that 
if they wanted money, he did not have it and would have to give 
up his life. What could be done? After all you could not shoot 
him. That evening, the township head was let go by the county 
magistrate. 
  Specific debtors are this way. So, what about the officials 
who gave the approval at that time? Now it is even more 
difficult to find them. Why? Because they have changed office. 
The mayor of a certain city approved this type of loan. But over 
a year later, this mayor had gone to be a vice chairman in the 
People's Congress. There is a saying, if he is not at his post, 
he does not run the government. If I am not now in charge, go 
find the new mayor. 
  Whenever this time comes, it is the person in charge at the 
bank that has the greatest headache. When he first loaned the 
money the person who borrowed it bowed and scraped and wanted to 
call him "grandpa." Now when it is time to pay back, he becomes 
the "grandpa." No matter how much you run around and press him, 
in any case he does not have it. The person in charge at the 
bank jokes that he is "the grandpa turned grandson." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59337 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Experts' Suggestions on Financial Reform </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0135A Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] in 
Chinese No 35, 6 Sep 93 pp 24-25 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0135A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chin Hsuan (6855 5503): "Chinese Financial </F>
Circles Discuss Orientation of Chinese Financial System Reform 
and Make Concrete Suggestions"] 
  [Text] In China's recent 
increased macrocontrol, financial reform is an issue of general 
concern. Since we entered the summer, Chinese financial circles, 
led by the People's Bank of China [PBOC], have conducted 
wide-spread discussions centering on this issue and it has 
received serious consideration from the upper echelon of the 
Chinese government. It is reported that a plan for reform of the 
financial system is being firmed up and will be implemented next 
year. 
<H5>  Direction of Financial System Reform </H5>
  In the discussions, consensus has been obtained that 
financial system reform should properly determine the 
relationship between the central government and the central bank 
and should properly determine the relationship between the 
Ministry of Finance and the banks. We should establish a 
commercial banking system, while accelerating the development of 
financial laws and regulations. 
  Based on the consensus discussed above, it is generally 
recognized that the direction of reform should be to establish a 
central bank that can independently implement a monetary policy; 
establish a separation between policy finances and commercial 
finances with state commercial banks as its mainstay and a 
financial organizational system where numerous financial 
organizations coexist; and establish a centralized financial 
market system that is strictly administered with open, orderly 
competition. 
  The PBOC as the central bank should convert from its present 
function to become an authoritative organ for the state to 
administer finances and to take control of currency issuance, 
basic currency income and outgo, and adjustment in the scale of 
credit to conduct a unified national currency policy. 
  One suggestion believed that the central bank should report 
directly to the People's Congress and break with the structure 
of having the central bank set up under the leadership of the 
State Council and change the past procedure of the central 
government sometimes relaxing its authority and sometimes 
tightening its authority. Although it is estimated that this 
kind of suggestion would now still be difficult to realize, 
clearer provisions should first be made on such issues as how 
the State Council directs the central bank, giving the central 
bank greater authority, and the relations of the central bank 
with various departments of the State Council. Certainly at the 
same time, the central bank itself should improve its ability to 
manage finances, especially its capability for comprehensive 
macroeconomic analysis. It also should be supervised to better 
carry out its own functions. 
  If we are to establish a central bank with strong control 
functions, we also must have an improved currency policy system 
and a complete set of financial laws and regulations as a base. 
  As regards reforming and improving the currency policy 
system, it was recognized in the discussions that in formulating 
a currency policy three goals can be determined. The ultimate 
goal is to maintain a stable currency and use that to promote 
economic growth; the intermediate goal is to control the 
currency supply; and the operational goal is to regulate the 
ratio of bank reserves. At the same time, the clarified choices 
that the central bank should have regarding such currency policy 
tools as deposit reserve rates, rediscount interest rates, 
credit limits, central bank deposit interest rates, central bank 
loans, and central bank foreign exchange operations, and 
operation of the open market should be more fully utilized. 
Correspondingly, the central bank also should enhance its 
macroeconomic analysis and forecasting and establish an improved 
statistical survey system and currency policy advance warning 
system to provide a scientific basis to the formulation of 
currency policy. 
  Financial circles also are paying attention to the 
formulation, improvement, and enforcement of financial laws and 
regulations. It is reported that among the laws that they are 
preparing to pass next year are a Central Bank Law, a Commercial 
Banking Law, a Negotiable Instruments Law, and an Insurance Law. 
Various oversight and administrative standards and regulations 
also are being firmed up. In the discussions, it was believed 
that as to how to ensure the enforcement of financial laws, the 
central bank should improve its investigative and oversight 
forces and effectively supervise and administer banks and 
non-bank financial organizations. 
<H5>  Establish Policy Finance Organizations </H5>
  In the discussions three suggestions were proposed: 
  The first was to establish a national long-term development 
credit bank, the main task of which would be long-term policy 
loans and using state allocated capital for equity investment in 
key state construction projects and exercising the functions of 
a holding company. It is reported that the bank could be ready 
to be established by the last half of this year. In the initial 
stage the People's Construction Bank of China would temporarily 
assume the task. 
  But on the issue of who would select what projects to invest 
in, there is a difference of opinion. One opinion is that the 
selection of investment projects would still be determined by 
the government planning commission. But some financial people 
believe that this would cause responsibilities to be unclear. If 
a problem came up, who would take responsibility? But this 
suggests that the banks also should be responsible for the 
selection of projects. At the same time, the point that profit 
taxes should not be levied on policy banks, but it should take 
the form of government interest deductions also needs to be 
further clarified. 
  The second suggestion is that the current Agricultural Bank 
of China be converted to the Rural Policy Bank of China. In 
addition to treasury appropriations, its capital could mainly be 
raised from financial bonds issued by financial organizations. 
It is reported that its former tasks will be undertaken by the 
newly organized Chinese Agricultural Cooperative Bank. 
  The third suggestion is that an import-export credit bank be 
established. This is a policy bank that would provide credit for 
buying and selling imports and exports and provide credit 
guarantees for imports and exports. But it must be separated 
from the Ministry of Foreign Trade and could not engage in 
commercial banking. 
<H5>  Sound State Professional Financial Organizations </H5>
  In the discussions it was suggested that after policy 
financial tasks are divided, the Industry and Commerce Bank of 
China and the Bank of China again be converted to state 
commercial banks and operated in accordance with modern 
commercial bank operating mechanisms, while coming under the 
supervision of the central bank. This demands that these banks 
establish new mechanisms, engage in autonomous operations, take 
responsibility for their own profits and losses, seek their own 
balancing funds, take responsibility for operating risks, have 
their own self-restraint mechanisms, and seek their own 
development opportunities and levels of development. But the key 
to this reform is the need to resolve the issue of property 
rights. 
  At the same time, such current commercial banks as the 
Jiaotong, Zhongxin Shiye, Guangda, Huaxia, Zhaoshang, Fujian 
Xingye, Guangdong Development, Shenzhen Development, and Pudong 
Development must be further developed. 
  It also was recognized in the discussions that when 
conditions are ripe, we also should gradually develop a new 
group of commercial banks. But it should be emphasized that 
commercial banks themselves are only short-term currency markets 
and the main object of their services are industry and commerce 
and they cannot rush into the investment market. Otherwise it 
could be chaotic. The present tendency of some commercial banks 
to convert to a pattern approximating professional banks should 
be corrected. 
  It was affirmed in the discussions that commercial banks are 
a product of reform, that their operations suit the demands of 
the market economy, and that they make a contribution to 
economic development. It is just that their own mechanisms still 
are not sufficiently perfected and they are limited in several 
respects, affecting their further development. So, not only must 
we have a correct understanding of commercial banks, but we also 
should give them a great deal of support and provide them with 
the opportunities and the environment for fair competition. And 
in constantly perfecting themselves, commercial banks should 
strive to gradually link up their internal system and business 
operations with international practice. 
<H3>  How To Establish a Strictly Administered Centralized 
Financial Market With Open and Orderly Competition </H3>
  The suggestions in this aspect of the discussions can 
generally be summarized as: 
  1. Increase control of the currency market and sever the 
direct connection between the currency market and the capital 
market so that the currency market can become a currency policy 
tool for the central bank to use and the main place for the 
adjustment of the base currency and the money supply. 
  2. Reasonably resolve the issue of the relationship among 
savings deposit interest, loan interest, and interest on 
negotiable securities and gradually form an interest system with 
central bank interest as the base. 
  3. Increase supervision of financial activities among 
financial organizations. 
  4. Gradually improve the state bond market and the stock 
market. 
  Some people in financial circles believe that the present 
development of China's financial market mechanisms is still very 
weak and some are still shrinking. Reform should be increased 
and limitations reduced to help the financial market to develop 
and enliven finances. 
  As regards marketization of foreign exchange controls, it 
was 
proposed in the discussions that a national network with a 
unified price and a foreign exchange adjustment market for 
centralized exchange be established. Later when conditions are 
ripe, the Bank of China, the Chinese Industry and Commerce Bank, 
and Jiaotong Bank, already converted to commercial banks, would 
be permitted to engage in foreign exchange market business for 
themselves and as agents. 
  As to how to further develop non-bank financial 
organizations, it was proposed in the discussions that with 
clear-cut requirements regarding the funds and administrative 
personnel and the scope of the business of various types of 
non-bank financial organizations, and with strict approval and 
control, various types of financial organizations such as 
professional insurance companies and insurance funds, securities 
companies, trust investment companies, financial leasing 
companies, and enterprise group finance companies could be 
developed as appropriate. Branches could be formed in the 
insurance business, the securities business, the trust business, 
and the banking business. 
  The continued introduction of foreign investment financial 
organizations and the establishment of joint venture financial 
organizations also were talked about in the discussions, along 
with other issues related to reform of the Chinese financial 
system. 
  In the discussions, quite a few people brought up that 
reform 
of the Chinese financial system should begin from reality. The 
current situation is that the Chinese economy is becoming more 
marketized every day, the prices of productive elements are 
generally freed up, and enterprises are beginning to enter the 
market. With this background, reform of the financial system 
cannot simply stop at tightening or loosening authority, nor can 
it stop at some temporary measures of the current rectification 
of the financial order that only cope with the symptoms. We 
should pay attention to eliminating the influences of the 
planned economy and achieving radical changes in the financial 
system. Certainly financial reform cannot be separated from 
improving the entire economic environment. So, it should be a 
part of a series of reforms, including that of the public 
finance system, and we need to have sound laws and regulations 
to set standards for our conduct and comprehensive oversight 
mechanisms (some have proposed the establishment of a bank 
oversight system). In the discussions, it also was proposed that 
in reform of the financial system sufficient consideration be 
given to the degree of openness of finances and their tie in 
with international finances. Shanghai especially should be 
established as a financial center. Without some special 
policies, it would be difficult to accomplish this. Some people 
also pointed out that in reform of the financial system, we 
should give serious consideration to cultivating talent and 
developing modern methods. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59338 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serious Corruption in Financial Institutions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0118A Hong Kong CHING PAO [THE MIRROR] in Chinese No 10, 
5 Oct 93 pp 44-46 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0118A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHING PAO [THE MIRROR] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wei Chang-yao (7279 4545 1031): "Fierce Jaws of </F>
the Mainland's `Silver Dragon'"] 
  [Text] Anti-corruption departments on the Chinese mainland 
are facing a rigorous new situation. It is only by starting from 
a study of the system, rules, policies, regulations, and 
safeguards that we can acquire a deep knowledge of the causes of 
corruption and perfect these things through deeper reform; it is 
only in this way that we can accomplish dealing with both the 
objective and its causes, implement comprehensive 
administration, and fill in all the loopholes. There is no other 
way out. 
<H5>  "Financial Border" Existed Early On </H5>
  The rapid economic development of Mainland China has 
attracted the world's attention, but so has the expansion of 
corruption in every industry and circle. So, investigating graft 
and other anti-corruption work, and encouraging clear and honest 
administration has become a major item on the Chinese 
Government's agenda. The "lifeblood" of mainland economic 
operations, the financial industry, has over 17,000 grass-roots 
units, over 800,000 employees throughout urban and rural China, 
controlling the currency circulation business of all units on 
the China mainland. It is just because this industry is in such 
an important and special position that on 16 January 1990 
Premier Li Peng issued this warning at the National Bank 
Presidents Conference concerning a group of cases of graft, 
accepting bribes, and theft which had appeared in financial 
circles. The Premier said that: "Information from every locality 
shows that money worship is growing among some cadres and 
employees on bank staffs... Some people inside the banks have 
been corrupted by money, with frequent occurrences of graft, 
theft, bribe-taking, and fund diversion. This kind of corruption 
phenomenon deserves the strong attention of leaders at every 
level. To push the anti-corruption struggle, they must adopt 
efficient measures, conduct inspections, and deal with specific 
cases, to expose a group of big and key cases..." This has been 
going on for more than three years. The presidency of the 
People's Bank of China was changed from Li Guixian [2621 6311 
7639] to a concurrent appointment for Vice Premier Zhu Rongji; 
during that time, has the unhealthy tendency of "financial 
termites" been stopped efficiently? The answer is 
disappointing. Although the leaders of the Chinese Government 
have worried so much, issued repeated warnings at all sorts of 
conferences, and urged them time and again with good intentions 
to investigate graft and clean up corruption, still, at the 
National Financial Order Reorganization Conference in July of 
this year, it was authoritatively disclosed that the corruption 
phenomenon of some persons in the bank system taking advantage 
of the industry to embezzle public funds was still expanding, 
and the case of the "silver dragon" was quite prominent, leading 
to extreme public dissatisfaction. Therefore, high ranking 
leaders in China have repeatedly ordered the launching of 
another anti-corruption struggle in financial circles in 1993: 
"We must determine to give considerable attention to making 
major achievements," and "lead the anti-corruption struggle into 
a deeper level." 
<H5>  "Silver Dragon" Shows New Characteristics </H5>
  If we say that in the earlier years the "thieves inside the 
banks" had grafted or taken bribes amounting for the most part 
to several thousand yuan, or several ten thousand yuan, while 
under the affects of the "gold wind" of "seeking money" by every 
possible means in society, it has now developed to several 
hundred thousand, several million, and even up to the insane 
degree of several ten million yuan, which shows that the 
corruption problem inside Mainland China's banks has indeed 
reached a degree more serious than ever before. A document 
issued jointly by the Supreme People's Procuratorate of China 
and The Central Discipline Inspection Committee disclosed that 
in the past three years, 37 new cases of graft were discovered 
and handled within the banking system, involving a total of 220 
million yuan. For ordinary graft, bribe-taking, embezzlement of 
several thousands or several ten thousands, however, is flowing 
in an endless stream, and it is hard to count the total amount 
of money involved. The People's Bank of China, the Industrial 
and Commercial Bank, urban credit unions, rural credit unions, 
and insurance companies of financial units--none of these have 
been involved in cases of this kind. For some "silver dragons," 
their "fierce mouths," which are swallowing huge sums of the 
nation's prosperity, tend to be bigger each passing year, and 
the records they have created grow more shocking year by year. 
In 1990 there were nine especially large cases of graft, with 
embezzlement of over 5 million yuan. The biggest case was the 
Huzhou Industrial and Commercial Bank's Fenyang graft case in 
Zhejiang, with graft amounting to 5 million yuan; in 1991, it 
rose to 12 cases, an increase of three cases over the year 
before. This time the person with the "fierce mouth" was Guo 
Tingfeng [6753 1694 1496]: In his graft case in Cangnan County 
Agricultural Bank in Zhejiang, the graft amounted to 14.28 
million yuan. In 1992, it rose to 15 cases, an increase of three 
cases over the year before; this time, the "champion" was Xue 
Genhe [5641 2704 0735] of the Haikou Municipal Industrial and 
Commercial Bank, with a graft amount of 33.44 million yuan. 
Compared to him, criminals of the past two years suddenly look 
like "small wizards meeting big wizards." 
  The current problem is, while these especially big criminals 
have been discovered or dealt with, there are still a 
considerable number of banking corruption phenomena of wide 
scope which have yet to be discovered. The perpetrators continue 
to change their strategems, pursuing personal gain through their 
authority, exchanging that authority for money, extorting money 
by means of their authority, falsifying records for the benefit 
of relatives or friends, embezzling to make themselves rich, 
taking sales commissions which are highly duplicitous, and 
engaging in corruption. Here are some examples: 
  First, under the rubric of invigorating the economy and 
supporting enterprises which invigorate capital, those who 
extort money have developed from operating underground to 
semi-overt. Many mainland enterprises lack capital and have 
to pay "labor fees" in the thousands, even tens of thousands of 
yuan when banks conduct "inquiries"; this is then remitted into 
the small treasuries of bank units, and is then distributed 
underground under a collective title. In this way, time and time 
again, units and their employees are tempted. A lot of "first to 
be rich" employees of banks made more than 1,000 yuan a month 
from various sources of income. No wonder a bank cadre told a 
good friend privately that he "only need use a little authority, 
and we needn't worry about lack of money." 
  Second, if benefits are not offered to those who want 
to trade their authority for money, then they won't do business 
with you. As a monopoly financial trader, such matters as 
fixing project capital, giving loans, fund raising, collecting 
and distributing foreign exchange, allocating circulating money, 
issuing securities to the market, and discounting are all inside 
its business scope. Since these units alone offer these 
services, and no other agency, so they are sought out by 
everyone. They charge for approving a document, and take "labor 
fees" sales commissions for a signature, giving "information," 
and stamping documents. If you do not give some side benefits to 
bank representatives, even though your business is completely 
legal and your reasons are abundant, it is still hard to pass. 
So, exchange of authority for money has continued to rise in 
recent years. It has risen from asking for dishes or sending 
cigarettes to accepting valuable securities and financial gift 
cards, and has now risen to take thousands and tens of thousands 
in cash. There is a great deal of anger in enterprise circles, 
but they find it difficult to speak out. 
  Third, the covert occupations of extortion and 
blackmail. With the development of the mainland economy in 
recent years, there has been an expanded demand for capital 
requirement from all sides, with a growing tendency to ask for 
credit loans, short term rebate loans, and fund raising in which 
banks serve as representatives. Once an enterprise is able to 
get an amount of money, the banks then demand one-thousandth of 
the amount in cash as a "service fee," which actually is a type 
of disguised confiscation, with the excuse for collecting it as 
so-called bank employee welfare. The mass of the people are 
strongly dissatisfied with this kind of extortion activity. 
  Fourth, embezzlement of public funds for use in stock, 
land, and real estate speculation. This is the most 
outstanding phenomenon taking place in "trust investment 
corporations" and "security services corporations" which are 
attached to banks. 
  Fifth, investment in established companies, in the 
attempt to make money in every way possible. In recent 
years, there has been a "craze for engaging in business 
nationally" on the Chinese mainland. This has also caused 
confusion and disorientation among banking system cadres, who 
feel "they can't be rich if they don't engage in business," and 
it became their way to "pursue wealth." So, all over the 
nation, banks have gone into operating all kinds of "companies" 
and "centers" by using public funds; a lot of these suddenly 
established companies got a "lucky open." Of these people who 
"plunged into the sea," some are current cadres, some are 
retired cadres, or even their relatives and children. They not 
only get the wages due them, which are perfectly justified, but 
they also obtain various "subsidies," "labor fees," or 
"profits," which arouses jealousy among ordinary factory 
employees. It is hard to determine the exact number of these 
front companies, or just how many bank employees are involved 
with them, even for high level leaders of the People's Bank of 
China. 
<H5>  "Inside Job" Thieves Tend To Be Younger </H5>
  An upsetting trend is that criminals in mainland financial 
circles tend to be younger. In the last five years, the mainland 
bank business has developed rapidly, absorbing many young 
workers who usually come to the bank through school allocation 
or by social employment, filling their retired parents' 
positions. They have not been subjected to strict examination, 
training, or intensified education, so the quality of their 
business and their work ethic is not satisfactory. The rapid 
development of domestic and overseas financial business put some 
of them in certain leadership positions early, while some of 
them never worked as leaders before, and now undertake 
independent work assignments in a particular department. In 
addition, although they lack social experience and a work ethic, 
they deal with money every day, just at the time "money worship" 
is popular on the Chinese mainland. They always want to "be 
wealthy first of all." It can be said that the greedy desire for 
and pursuit of money are the most fundamental roots of increased 
instances of corruption among young criminals in banks. Among 
the 37 especially large cases mentioned above, over four-fifths 
involved people less than 35 years old. The youngest one was 
surnamed Jia [6328], a cashier at the International Trade Agency 
of the Shenzhen Construction Bank, who when only 17 years old 
grafted a total of more than US$27,000, HK$1.07 million, and 
over 400,000 yuan. After the crime was discovered, the criminal 
fled with this huge amount of money, and so far is still at 
large. A cashier named Wu [0702], of the Rongqi Agency of the 
Bank of China in Suide, Guangdong, only 26 years old, at one 
time or another within a 40 day period stole over 500,000 yuan 
RMB and HK$570,000, all of which went for gambling and leading a 
life of debauchery. He was deserving of the term "big termite." 
<H5>  Weak Laws and Regulations </H5>
  Financial work is done by accepting deposits, extending 
credit, and settling accounts; it does these things by means of 
currency, account matters, and documents. What is involved are 
such forms of hard currency as currency, gold, and foreign 
exchange. It is therefore extremely important to establish 
perfect laws and regulations, efficient administrative rules, 
and a strong system of administration. What upsets people is 
that in the mainland banking system, which should be very 
strictly managed, such phenomena as rules violations, ignoring 
instances of these violations, lax management, and weak 
supervision are common occurrences, shortcomings which can be 
exploited in many places. An example is an accountant named Xue 
[5641] of the Dongfeng Agency of the Haikou Municipal Industrial 
and Commercial Bank, who took advantage of leadership trust, 
chaotic management in the industry, and a lack of strict rules 
to swallow up 250,000 yuan through three blank drafts. Initial 
success made him bolder, so he took advantage of his position in 
checking receipts, and arranged for a sealed secret escort. Over 
time, he stole more than 20 blank bank drafts, as well as the 
associated bank seal which was kept by a colleague. He then gave 
these bogus bank drafts to outside criminals allied with him, to 
secure payments from over 20 banks in more than 10 provinces and 
municipalities, ultimately grafting funds totalling 33.44 
million yuan. A cashier named Gu [7357] was Section Chief of the 
No 1 Business Department of the Fuyang branch of the Anhui 
Industrial and Commercial Bank, who shared the privilege of 
entering and exiting the treasury house at will; even the rule 
"two people must be in charge of the treasury house," usually 
absolute, was no restriction on him. After he acquired the bad 
habit of gambling, he began thinking about the treasury house 
and embezzled 7.70 million yuan. After the crime was discovered, 
he said, very upset, "If the bank management were a bit more 
strict, I couldn't have pulled it off so smoothly." So, we can 
tell what degree of laxity exists in the mainland bank 
management and supervision system. 
<H5>  Corruption Developed in Relationship Network </H5>
  Although there has been definite reform of the banking 
personnel system on the mainland in recent years, and there has 
been a start on publishing invitations for jobs; still, 
director-level positions at the provincial, municipal, and 
county level are still assigned by higher level authorities. 
Many people have done everything they can to remain in this 
"land of wealth" after becoming financial officers, installing 
their children and good friends in banking positions. Even if 
they have received a public invitation for a job, some people 
make certain arrangements under the table to let their 
relatives, friends, or children of their superiors get through 
the financial gate smoothly. From this, they form a network of 
authority and money which influences mutual benefits, a network 
in which if one is injured, all will be injured; if one goes 
boom, all will, so much of the graft and corruption cannot be 
exposed and dealt with efficiently. When several banks in 
Beijing, Guangzhou, and Baotou were looking into questionable 
persons, they all received telephone calls on these people's 
behalf, hinting that there might be consequences for the banks. 
So, behind some cases, there is not only just the ethics problem 
of crime itself; the bigger problem of the relationship network 
of appointing people by favoritism also plays a role here, and 
this has developed their recklessness. 
  Obviously, as the mainland is in a transitional period of 
changing from a planned to a market economy, the supporting laws 
and regulations are not perfected yet, some policies are not 
correct, and there are many weak links and shortcomings in the 
work. All these things give "bank termites" a host of 
opportunities to exploit for their own advantages, and the 
anti-corruption struggle is facing a new, more serious 
situation. It is only by starting from a perfected system of 
rules, policies, laws and regulations and preventative measures 
that we can then learn the deep-rooted causes which produce 
corruption. Then we can make it perfect through deeper reform, 
dealing with both the cause and the effect, and reorganize 
comprehensively to block all loopholes. There is no alternative. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59339 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Heilongjiang Improving Declining Industry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0176A Harbin HEILONGJIANG JINGJI BAO in Chinese 6 Nov 93 
p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0176A </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG JINGJI BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Tao (1728 1718) and Wang Huaijian (3769 </F>
2037 1696): "Measures To Improve Heilongjiang's Sluggish 
Industrial Growth"] 
  [Text] Looking at Heilongjiang industries' "northeast 
phenomenon," the only way to vitalize them is to focus on the 
key links that are holding back industrial development and 
achieve major breakthroughs in the system. 
  1. Restructure the tax system to achieve major 
breakthroughs in expanding local financial power. Looking 
at the current situation, the financial system that lets the 
central and local governments "eat out of separate pots" no 
longer meets the needs of our economic development. It is 
imperative that we separate state and local taxes. Therefore, we 
must seize the opportunity before us to make a breakthrough in 
the financial system. The provincial party committee and 
provincial government must diligently review the experience and 
lessons in the second phase reform to substitute taxation for 
profit delivery and "eat out of separate pots" and, in light of 
Heilongjiang's own realistic situation, gather the relevant 
departments to conduct an in-depth investigation and study to 
sort out the situation and forecast the future and come up with 
some suggestions and a program to separate state and local 
taxes. They should actively report to the central authorities 
and, in separating state and local taxes, strive to keep the 
share of local financial power at or near the nation's average 
level, so as to lay the foundation for industrial development. 
  2. Further restructure the system of planning to make a 
breakthrough in retaining a larger percentage of the raw 
materials: 1) Reduce the scope of mandatory planning with 
regard to petroleum. First, it will be unrealistic to completely 
change the production pattern already set up under the planned 
system, but we can use 50 million tons of petroleum as base and 
allocate it according to state plan; the remaining portion 
should be kept by the localities. Second, with regard to 
petroleum gas, the province should be allowed to work with 
Daqing in its comprehensive development and utilization. Third, 
while Daqing expands its new oil fields, the localities should 
be allowed to buy shares and make investments; oil should be 
allocated according to the number of shares. Fourth, local 
governments should be allowed to invest in and exploit odd-lot 
oil fields around Daqing and engage in the deep-processing work. 
Fifth, the localities should have priority in projects 
complementing the initial processing of new crude produced in 
Daqing. 2) Reduce the scope of mandatory planning with respect 
to timber. The state's reduced timber index for 1992 should be 
used as base, and the entire contract should be taken over by 
the year 2000. While balancing tree-cutting and tree-planting, 
any out-of-plan timber should be deep-processed by the 
localities. 3) Continue to reduce the fixed quota procurement of 
grain. To reduce fixed quota procurement, the current 10.6 
billion jin should be cut to 8 billion jin. The remaining 
portion should be deep-processed or marketed by the localities 
themselves. 4) Reduce the large and medium-sized enterprises' 
share of mandatory plans, gradually decontrol product prices, 
and allow the large and medium-sized enterprises to purchase raw 
materials in the market--letting them "buy high and sell high." 
Only by gradually reducing the state's mandatory planning can a 
chain of upstream, midstream, and downstream products be 
produced to achieve breakthrough in Heilongjiang's industrial 
development. 
  3. Restructure the financial system to make a 
breakthrough in credit funds: Seizing the opportunity of 
the central bank's imposition of macro control and the 
separation of the state's policy-oriented banks from commercial 
banks at this time, we should expand the scope of local credit 
funds. First, taking advantage of Heilongjiang's fine industrial 
structure, we should strive to win credit support from the 
state's policy-oriented banks. Second, we can use selective 
products that are profitable and competitive to win commercial 
bank loans and help develop industries. Third, while meeting the 
conditions of the state's financial policy, we should actively 
develop local banks and raise capital on our own. Fourth, we 
should take advantage of our border trade and set up bank organs 
aboard to gather international funds. 
  4. Restructure the investment system and make a 
breakthrough in readjusting the industrial structure: To 
restructure the investment system, we must begin with the 
province's economic development and the layout of the productive 
forces, formulate central and local investment plans, and 
coordinate the development. One, while the state's investment 
focus is on coal, timber, and petroleum, it should invest in 
transportation and power supply and other basic industries, and 
it should also invest in light industrial products that meet the 
state's industrial policy requirements and are profitable. While 
the provincial government and governments at all levels invest 
in the development of light industry that makes use of 
agricultural products as raw materials, they should gradually 
shift more emphasis on light industry that utilizes 
non-agricultural raw materials. We must improve Heilongjiang's 
lopsided industrial structure and its outdated basic industry. 
Second, given that the central and local authorities share the 
same development goals, they should work in concert and 
cooperate with each other. For example, the province can work 
with Daqing to produce 800,000 tons of ethylene, which not only 
will facilitate the development of state-affiliated enterprises 
but also the creation of local-led industries. The two should 
make a joint investment to accelerate the realization of this 
project. 
  5. Reform the management system and make a breakthrough 
in giving play to the province's overall industrial productive 
capacity and efficiency: First, the central government 
should continue to decontrol enterprises, and except for the 
state-monopolized trades, it should hand down most enterprises 
to the localities and promote the cooperation between the 
state's large and medium-sized enterprises and local 
medium-sized and small enterprises, so that they no longer 
pursue separate development. Second, enterprises that cannot be 
handed down to the lower levels should work closely with local 
industrial enterprises. By forging lateral economic ties and 
through the proper circulation of factors of production, we can 
help forge the internal organic link between central enterprises 
and local industrial enterprises and create proper division of 
labor and improve the province's overall industrial productive 
capacity and efficiency. 
  6. Promote reform that focuses on "enterprises' 
property rights system" and make a breakthrough in the operating 
mechanisms: Deep-seated conflicts in the industrial economy 
are reflected in enterprises, and the solution lies in the 
reform of the property rights system to resolve the issues of 
enterprises' ability to pursue their own development, their 
ability to take responsibility for their profits and losses, and 
their self-discipline, and in addition, we must change the 
operating mechanisms and push enterprises toward the market. 1) 
We should continue to expand the enterprise shareholding system. 
First, we should set up and develop a "workers' cooperative 
fund" to gather the enterprise workers' scattered funds and turn 
them into legal person shares, so that the workers can take part 
in the shareholding companies and help forge lateral ties. 
Second, shareholding companies that have already been approved 
should set up windows and counters to accelerate the transfer of 
enterprises' internal workers' shares to enliven the 1.2 billion 
yuan's worth of stocks in the hands of stock investors. Third, 
we should actively develop directional capital-raising companies 
to absorb corporate funds and entice enterprise workers to buy 
shares. Funds should be spent on expanded reproduction. Fourth, 
we should help enterprise be better prepared when listing their 
stocks in the market and help more enterprises list their 
securities. Fifth, we should continue to convert some industrial 
enterprises to the shareholding system and accelerate 
enterprises' technological transformation. Sixth, all newly 
undertaking industrial projects should generally be converted to 
the shareholding system. 2) We should give more weight and add 
more depth to state-owned, civilian-run operations. Most 
medium-sized and small state-owned enterprises should become 
market-oriented through one of the following ways: Convert to 
the shareholding system and sold by the share or as a whole, 
broken up and managed as separate entities, leased out, operate 
as "one enterprise under multiple systems," declare bankruptcy, 
merge, or form alliances and so on. 3) We should put enterprises 
in the property rights exchange markets and let the superior 
eliminate the inferior companies. We should accelerate the 
promotion of free circulation and optimal combination of key 
factors of production. While continuing to set up markets for 
capital goods, personnel, labor and services, technologies, and 
information, we should accelerate the improvement of the 
province-wide market for exchange of property rights and 
management rights. Enterprises that are chronically losing money 
should be publicly auctioned off, merged, leased out, or 
contracted out. Through enterprise reform that focuses on 
property rights, we can push enterprises toward the market, 
radically change their management mechanisms, and increase their 
ability to compete. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59340 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Success, Problems of Anhui Private Economy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0201A Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 7 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0201A </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ge Shiping (2047 0013 1627), Deputy Director of </F>
Provincial Bureau of Industry and Commerce: "Anhui's Individual, 
Private Economic Sector Must Leap Forward Once Again"] 
  [Text] Since the beginning of 1993, an unprecedentedly good 
situation prevails in the development of individual and private 
economic sector in Anhui. As of the end of August this year, the 
number of rural and urban individual commercial and industrial 
establishments reached 706,000 in the province with 1.21 million 
employees, marking increases of 26 percent and 32 percent 
respectively over the same period in 1992. The number of 
registered private enterprises in Anhui reached 3,995 with 
50,000 employees, marking increases of 79.8 percent and 63.9 
percent respectively over the same period at the end of 1992. 
The rank of the number of individual industrial and commercial 
establishments and private enterprises in the country also rises 
from the ninth and 18th at the end of 1992 to the eighth and the 
17th, while the rates of growth rank second and third 
respectively. However, Anhui still lags far behind the coastal 
areas in individual and private economy. First the number of 
individual and private-owned establishments is far less, and the 
per-capita output value is much smaller. Only 2.08 percent of 
the population in the province are working for the individual 
and private economic sector. Second the overall scale of the 
individual and private economic sector is small, and it is not 
so strong in strength. Third the development of this economic 
sector is not well balanced. There are not enough business 
establishments in production and processing, while the 
development is not so fast in rural and remote areas. Therefore, 
Anhui must energetically develop its individual and private 
economic sector and turn it into a major pillar of Anhui's 
economy. 
  I. It is necessary to correctly understand the 
important role of the individual and private economic sector in 
social and economic life and increase the sense of urgency in 
developing it. In recent years, the individual and private 
economic sector has played an ever-increasing important role in 
Anhui's political, economic and social life. It is manifested in 
the following aspects: 
  A. It has developed the productive forces in society. 
According to statistics, the total output value of all the 
individual industrial and commercial establishments in Anhui 
totalled 2.78 billion yuan in 1992. About 70 percent of 
industrial and commercial establishments participated in the 
4,126 trade fairs and markets with their volume of business 
transactions making up 85 percent of the total volume of 
business in the province. In addition, about 600,000 people 
travelled a long distance in doing businesses. Facts prove that 
the individual and private economic sector is a significant 
force that should not be neglected and a sector which has plenty 
of room for improvement in the development of the productive 
forces. 
  B. It has successfully made explorations to change the 
system 
of planned economy to one of market economy. The individual and 
private economic sector has withstood the test of the law of 
competition in market economy such as the law of value and the 
law between supply and demand, and shown it abilities to compete 
with others in the market and its flexibility in business 
management . This has played a significant role in helping 
enterprises change the way they operate and reforming the 
socialist market economy system. 
  C. It has helped readjust the rural industrial structure. In 
1992, the number of industrial and commercial establishments in 
Anhui's rural areas totalled 451,000 with a total employment of 
774,000 people, accounting for 65.2 percent and 65.4 percent of 
the total number of establishments and employees in the 
province. The development of the individual and private economic 
sector in Anhui's rural areas has changed the unitary industrial 
structure and quickened the pace in shifting the rural labor 
force, in spreading the concept of commodity economy among the 
peasants and in building small towns and cities in the 
countryside. 
  D. It has promoted social stability. A large number of 
people 
awaiting jobs and surplus labor forces in urban and rural areas 
work for the individual and private economic sector. This is 
conducive to achieving stability and unity and promoting social 
stability. 
  E. It has helped poverty-stricken areas become well-to-do. 
Practice proves that the development of the individual and 
private economic sector is an important way to shake off 
poverty. It may help some people to make use of local resources 
to develop diversified industries and become well-to-do. 
  F. It has helped increase the state revenue. The individual 
and private economic sector needs no state investments. It helps 
increase the state revenue. In 1992 alone, the total amount of 
taxes collected from individual industrial and commercial 
establishments and private-run enterprises totalled 506 million 
yuan in the province, accounting for 11.6 percent of Anhui's 
industrial and commercial taxes. 
  However, we must fully realize that right now there are some 
people in the society who have prejudice against the development 
of the individual and private economic sector. Especially the 
traditional system somewhat restrains the rapid development of 
such an economic sector in the following aspects: 
  1. People do not fully understand the concept in developing 
the individual and private economic sector. Influenced by the 
ideas of the traditional planned economy, some areas and 
departments have not regarded the practice of allowing all 
economic sectors to develop side by side as a long-term project. 
They do not fully understand and firmly implement the policy of 
the party and the state in developing the individual and private 
economic sector. They do not treat all those who engage in 
individual and private businesses on an equal basis in extending 
loans, issuing business licenses and helping individual and 
self-employed businessmen look for places to run their 
businesses. The social environment for the development of 
individual and private economic sector is not so favorable. 
  2. The problem of "three disorders" has not been thoroughly 
solved. The burdens of those who engage in individual and 
private businesses remain heavy. According to a survey conducted 
by a certain city, the miscellaneous expenses an average 
individual establishment has to pay reached 2,000 yuan in 1992. 
There are more than 60 items, both legal and illegal, for 
unreasonable service charges in the city. 
  3. Fake collectives are formed by "forming chain stores." 
This has affected the development of individual and private 
economic sector. Some enterprises use preferential treatments in 
loans, taxation, business sites, and the use of water and 
electricity as a bait to lure some individual and private 
businessmen to become affiliated in name. This practice not only 
reduces the state tax revenue and harms the formation of the 
socialist market economy which advocates competitions on an 
equal basis among all economic sectors, but also prevents the 
individual and private economic sector from improving itself. 
  Therefore, we must fully realize that the factors that 
restrain the development of the individual and private economic 
sector remain. Only by fully understanding the significant role 
of the individual and private economic sector in social economy 
and production, continuously increasing our sense of urgency and 
carrying out work in a down-to-earth manner, will it be possible 
to further speed up the development of the individual and 
private economic sector. 
  II. It is necessary to relax our policy while 
strengthening control in order to rapidly develop the individual 
and private economic sector. To develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must rely on flexible environment 
and policy as well as effective supervision and administration. 
That is to say, we must adhere to the principle of attaching 
importance to persistently developing this economic sector while 
placing such development under control. Only by doing so, will 
it be possible to develop this economic sector healthily and 
steadily. The main points to achieve this goal are as 
follows: 
  A. In order to energetically develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must understand fully, in an overall 
manner and correctly the guideline laid down by comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's talks which he gave during his inspection tour in 
South China, and firmly implement the principle formulated in 
the related documents issued by the provincial CPC committee and 
the provincial government. All this requires us to further 
emancipate our thought, change our concepts, continuously adopt 
a series of flexible policies and vigorously support efforts in 
developing the individual and private economic sector. For 
example, we must not limit the number of employees to be hired 
and encourage them to become shareholders. Encouragement should 
also be given to running shareholding enterprises and forming 
shareholding enterprise groups. In the scope of business, 
individual and private-owned enterprises should be allowed to 
produce or handle commodities and means of production, of which 
the state has lifted its restrictions or has not explicitly 
forbidden any enterprise to manufacture. With regard to the 
registered capital, all private-owned limited-liability 
companies in remote poverty-stricken areas and those companies 
for consultation services and technical and scientific 
development for the production of export-oriented products 
should be allowed to register as long as they can raise 50 
percent of their registered capital. They should be permitted to 
raise the remaining amount within one year. In addition, 
restrictions on the use of the name of the province ahead of the 
name of an individual and private industrial and commercial 
establishment should be relaxed. Only by continuously relaxing 
the policies, firmly protecting the legal rights and interests 
of the individual industrial and commercial establishments and 
private enterprises and whipping up their enthusiasm in carrying 
out production and doing business, will it be possible to 
develop the individual and private economic sector in Anhui. 
  B. In order to energetically develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must continuously implement the 
principle of grasping both ends. On the one hand, we must deal 
with and prosecute, in accordance with law, those who violate 
laws and regulations; while on the other hand, we must severely 
strike at those who monopolize the market, mix the real with the 
fake, sell shoddy merchandise, smuggle or peddle smuggled goods 
or carry out other lawless activities. We must protect all fair, 
just, and legitimate competitions, while prohibiting illegal 
business activities. Only by continuously strengthening our 
control, will it be possible for us to maintain the normal 
social and economic order and promote the healthy development of 
the individual and private economic sector. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59341 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sichuan's Private Economy Tax Losses Addressed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0174A Chengdu SICHUAN RIBAO in Chinese 23 Oct 93 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0174A </F>
<F P=104>  Chengdu SICHUAN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporters Xie Zhi'an (6200 3112 1344) and Ding </F>
Daishu (0002 0108 2579): "Clear Choice for Reducing Losses of 
Individual Enterprise Tax Revenues: Individual Tax Revenue 
Avoidance Schemes and Corrective Policies"] 
  [Text] With the rapid expansion of the individual economy 
we have had on the one hand incessant growth in individual tax 
resources which has created excellent conditions for the 
expansion of individual tax revenues. According to statistics, 
in 1992 the Chengdu individual economy (individual industrial 
and commercial households, private enterprises, market fairs) 
provided tax revenues of 180 million yuan, approximately 8 
percent of that city's revenues. Individual tax revenues 
represent about 10 percent of the province's 
industrial-commercial tax revenues: Last year alone the province 
took in 820 million yuan in taxes (excluding Chongqing). On the 
other hand, because some of these entrepreneurs do not pay much 
attention to taxation, the market mechanisms are not fully 
developed, tax collection policies and collection methodologies 
are less than perfect, and because of the number and quality of 
our tax collectors, the phenomenon of "avoiding, cheating, 
minimizing and evading" taxes is commonplace among 
entrepreneurs, and seems to be growing as well. 
  What is needed is to promote the healthy growth of the 
individual and private economy on the one hand and on the other 
to reduce to the lowest level possible all losses in state tax 
revenues. This is presently the most prominent and most pressing 
problem awaiting solution in the area of individual taxation. 
Some days ago these reporters visited the provincial and Chengdu 
city tax departments and discovered that at the present time 
there are the following four main problems in individual 
enterprise taxation. 
  1. The collection of individual enterprise taxes is very 
difficult, our ability to levy and administer taxes is very 
weak. To avoid taxes, some individual and private enterprises 
use such tricks as not keeping records of income, false 
registration of ownership, bogus contracts, falsification of 
rents and leases, falsification of joint operations, and so 
forth. And the inadequate resources for levying and 
administration exacerbates the difficulty of collecting 
individual enterprise taxes. According to statistics, the 
Chengdu Tax Bureau handles taxes for some 150,000 individual 
enterprises, but they only have 410 tax department cadres 
responsible for the direct administration or the shared 
administration of individual enterprise taxation, so each 
officer administers an average of 390 enterprises. At the 
Hehuachi Market in Chengdu, the average tax cadre administers 
427 enterprises. The uneven ideological and cultural 
qualifications and temporary nature of the 1,300 plus auxiliary 
tax officers also exerts a certain influence on the normalized 
development of individual enterprise taxation. 
  2. Some individual and private enterprises are changing into 
cooperative-run, state-run, or foreign-funded enterprises. In 
the past several years the concerned departments in this 
province have time and again attempted to clean up the "four 
false enterprises" (false cooperatives, false state run, false 
foreign invested, false subsidiaries) but their numbers continue 
to grow. In 1990 alone the Chengdu City Tax Bureau uncovered 
over 4,000 "four false" enterprises within the city. At 
present, many individual and private operators, in order to cut 
their taxes, are changing themselves into cooperatives, or 
state-owned, or foreign-funded enterprises, and registering 
subsidiary ownership, thus causing severe losses in individual 
enterprise tax revenues. (There is also the fact that some 
street management offices are requiring individual enterprises 
to change to cooperative enterprises in order to increase their 
own management fee income.) Three of Chengdu's major areas -- 
Qingnian Road, Ranfang Street, and Nanshuwa Street -- have been 
affected by the change from individual to cooperative 
enterprises. In 1992 there was a decrease of 190 individual 
enterprises, and the tax revenue for the three districts dropped 
410,000 yuan. 
  3. Interregional operations currently represent one of the 
big drains of tax revenues. Over the past several years the 
economic contacts and exchange of products between regions, 
between city and countryside, between the interior provinces and 
the outlying regions have become more closely linked day by day. 
However, the tax collection and tax administration departments 
of the various localities only pay attention to the end of the 
operation in their location; add to this all the trouble caused 
by regional protectionism, and a huge leak in individual and 
private enterprise tax revenues is created. Some individual 
household and privately run operations are registering as 
subsidiary operations under state-owned and cooperative 
enterprises, nominally opening offices or warehouses in Chengdu 
or other districts but in reality they carry out independent 
operational activities; some so called non-independent 
accounting units in reality have no accounting relationship with 
any parent organization; some register as branch operation 
subsidiaries of special economic zone companies or enterprises, 
but in reality neither end of the operation pays income taxes. 
For instance, early last year a Guangdong individual enterprise 
entrepreneur, nominally registered as a subsidiary joint 
operation of a certain Chengdu electrical equipment company, in 
actuality was just an individual household operation, and was 
responsible for some 100,000 yuan in lost tax revenue. 
  4. False use of an enterprise's name, operating without a 
license. Some individual entrepreneurs have no operating 
license or tax registration, falsely use the name of some 
state-run enterprise (that is, of some duly licensed state run 
enterprise, but with which it has no accounting relationship and 
is not a branch organ) to carry on operations and avoid taxes 
for long periods of time. For instance, a certain Chengdu 
private enterprise operator used this method to operate without 
a license from July 1991 to March 1992; she was investigated and 
punished and made to pay over 53,000 yuan in back taxes. 
  Experience has proven that if we want to promote the growth 
of the individual and private economy and also want to reduce 
state tax losses to the lowest level possible, then the key is 
the strengthening and reform of tax collection work. At the 
present time, the administration of individual taxation is in 
the form of democratic evaluation, tax bureau approval and 
periodic collection. With the expansion of the market economy, 
this formulation no longer meets the requirements of the 
developing situation. A somewhat better method would be, for 
the individual and private enterprises, to set up accounts and 
establish licenses, collect taxes according to the account 
audits. We should strengthen the license issuing administration 
system, truly implement figuring taxes according to rates and 
collecting taxes according to the laws. At the present stage, 
because a lack of understanding of the idea of taxation 
according to law among the individual and private enterprises, 
plus the inadequate collection and administrative force of the 
tax departments, it will be difficult to render the system 
scientific, standardized and systematic in a short period of 
time. At the present stage we could implement quota-determined 
tax calculations, appraise and fix a base figure and then in 
succeeding years calculate and levy taxes according to a certain 
ratio, modifying treatment according to differences and changes 
in the different districts, different businesses, different 
ports and markets. Use a "give the fish plenty of water" policy 
to cultivate tax revenue resources. The second is that the 
preferential tax treatment policies enjoyed by all the economic 
elements of all types of ownership systems in the same region 
should be equitable and rational, avoiding lopsidedness of too 
much or too little. Thirdly, hire ample tax collection and 
administration personnel for handling the individual 
industrial-commercial households and privately run enterprises, 
gradually achieving a level where each official on the average 
handles 100 enterprises. At the same time, bolster the ranks of 
the auxiliary tax force, set up a full fledged network for 
aiding and protecting the tax workers, overcoming the abuses of 
taxation by whim and the seeking of personal benefit that still 
exists in the tax collection process. 
  Looking at the long term, we should take a cue from 
international examples, push for the modernization and 
socialization reforms of tax collection and administration. In 
this regard, the Haikou City Tax Bureau in Hainan supplied us 
with an experience worth examining. Their method is this: they 
have abolished the traditional method of a specialist tax 
officer being in charge of the tax collection and administration 
of each household and changed from administration by household 
to administration by category; they have changed from having the 
taxpayer report in to pay taxes to having the taxpayer 
initiating the payments, and being held responsible for the 
contents of her tax report. Components of the tax departments, 
in order to meet the requirements of specialized division of 
labor, have devised a administration by category method of 
operation, eliminating the investigation units in the 
sub-bureaus and having the city-level investigation unit provide 
uniform leadership and control. At lower levels they instituted 
various and numerous smaller units having investigative powers, 
authority to open case files, and authority to levy and accept 
registration fees, and so gradually moving toward 
specialization. The main responsibility of the tax sub-bureau 
is the collection of tax moneys, and tax law propaganda work; as 
for enterprise tax collection, it is all done under computer 
control, the tax collector directly collecting taxes or carrying 
out taxation through some social intermediary organization 
acting as agent. At the same time, they have strengthened tax 
collection audit work, and set up tax law offices. They are 
gradually setting up a new tax system wherein the tax offices 
levy taxes by computer according to the law, the taxpayers 
themselves report and pay their taxes, there are social 
intermediary organs to act as tax agents, and the judicial 
organs handle tax law violation cases according to the law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59342 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hainan Establishing Market System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0188A Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] in 
Chinese No 44, 8 Nov 93 pp 25-27 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0188A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gan Lin (3927 7207): "Renewing Hainan's </F>
Strength: From Policy to Institutions"] 
  [Text]Most Extensive Preferential Policies No 
Guarantee of Status As Largest Special Economic Zone 
  Hainan, the newest province in the country, is associated 
with the title "China's largest special economic zone [SEZ]" by 
virtue of the fact that it offered the most extensive 
preferential policies back when the province was founded. 
  No doubt Hainan's preferential policies were the most 
attractive in the entire country, including the 15 percent low 
tax policy, foreign exchange retention, and the policy that 
allows personnel, funds, and goods to enter and leave China 
freely. All that had simply been unthinkable on the mainland. 
The policies set off a round of "Hainan fever": "100,000 
qualified personnel crossed the strait and companies from all 
over congregated in Qiongzhou." 
  Successive Hainan leaders have worked hard in the past few 
years "implementing the policies and laying the foundation." 
Since 1992, however, especially after Deng Xiaoping toured the 
south, the Chinese economy has been on a fast track. Cities 
along Chang Jiang have been opened up, so have those along the 
border. Many of the preferential policies that Hainan was once 
so proud of can now be found elsewhere. The policy edge of 
Hainan over other places is eroding by the day. 
  Hainan is faced with a grim fact; no longer is it enough for 
it to rely on the "most generous preferential policies" to 
retain its position as the "largest SEZ." 
<H5>  From Policy Advantage to Institutional Advantage </H5>
  Under these circumstances, an advantage that Hainan has 
always had but was not sufficiently noted in the past now looks 
enormously attractive, namely its institutions. 
  When Hainan was founded as a province, the central 
government 
made it clear that it wanted Hainan to take the lead in 
implementing the "small government, large society" model. 
Accordingly, Hainan went in for bold reform when it put together 
its machinery of government. Altogether 26 departments and 
bureaus were set up under the government protection system, 
administrative affairs and social service system, economic 
supervision and regulatory system, and consulting system. That 
was a reduction of 20 administrative organs from the 
administrative setup in the Hainan administrative region. The 
number of personnel also fell by 200. Compared to the province 
of Ningxia in the interior, which has more or less the same area 
as Hainan, the latter has 90 fewer administrative organs and 31 
percent fewer workers. At the same time, market regulation is 
allowed to play the key role in Hainan's economy and no 
artificial restrictions are placed on the ratio of the various 
economic components. Fair competition is encouraged. For 
instance, all enterprises, whether state, collective, private, 
or wholly or partially foreign-owned, pay income taxes at the 
rate of 15 percent. 
  By rolling back government regulation and control, the 
implementation of the "small government and large society" model 
has freed ample room for the creation and development of 
enterprises, the cells of the economy. Already 30,800 companies 
had been created by the first half of 1990. Before it became a 
province, there was just one private enterprise in Hainan. By 
the first half of 1990, the number had increased to 1800. 
Statistics from the departments involved show that Hainan has 
more companies on a per capita basis than any other province in 
China. Given the emphasis on market regulation, the development 
of a host of markets for capital goods has been most rapid. A 
labor market and a skilled personnel market have taken shape. 
Almost 100 percent of the total labor demand is now met through 
market regulation. The lending and borrowing of short-term funds 
is no longer the only game on the funds market; instead it has 
been developing into a comprehensive market where bonds, notes, 
and foreign exchange regulation exist in balance. The state 
bank, foreign-funded banks, urban credit unions, as well as 
non-bank financial institutions have developed in a big way. 
Haikou is now one of the cities in the country with the highest 
bank concentration. In January 1990, Hainan led the nation in 
slashing the supply of low-priced grain by 20 percent. This one 
piece of reform alone enabled Hainan to reduce the supply of 
low-priced grain by 60 million kilograms a year and save 66.8 
million yuan in government subsidies. Subsequently, Hainan 
became the first in the nation to totally abolish low-priced 
grain, thereby severing the linkage between permanent registered 
residency and grain and oil. Nowadays most capital goods and all 
articles of daily use in Hainan are market-regulated. According 
to a Western observer, the prices in Hainan are regulated by the 
market to a greater extent than those in Brazil, a free market 
economy. 
  This system has invigorated the development of Hainan like 
never before. According to statistics from the departments 
involved, in the three years since Hainan became a province, 
more was invested in capital construction than in the entire 
40-year period following 1949. About 70 percent of these 
investments came from the various enterprises in society and 
have played a notable role in improving Hainan's investment 
climate. The new system has also helped Hainan tide over the 
difficult period with some success. As the nation entered a 
period of economic retrenchment and grain, steel, and coal 
became scarce, Hainan managed to fare quite well by putting to 
use its multiple channels as a large society with small 
government, its diverse sources of funds, and its strong 
adaptability. By creating ample room for the unhindered growth 
of enterprises and individuals, Hainan has made possible the 
emergence of a number of outstanding enterprises and capable 
individuals, including large-scale shareholding companies with 
hundreds of millions of yuan in capital. One example is the 
Hainan New Energy Co. Ltd. Starting out with just 500,000 yuan 
in capital, it has been developing by leaps and bounds, buying 
up state shares and social shares and becoming the first private 
shareholding enterprise in China to reorganize itself through 
share standardization. 
  The magical hand of the market has also guided the leaders 
of 
Hainan to make wise policies. Soon after it became a province, 
Hainan did consider emulating the Zhu Jiang delta and achieving 
economic take-off by going all out to attract foreign capital 
and develop the three kinds of enterprises either wholly or 
partially foreign-funded. Of the four major sectors, tourism 
came in last, after industry, trade, and agriculture. What was 
unexpected was the upsurge in social investment in tourism, 
despite minimal government inputs in that sector, in response to 
the fact that Hainan boasts the most beautiful tropical seascape 
in the nation and is largely free from pollution. The payoffs 
took everybody by surprise. By April last year, that is, four 
years after Hainan achieved provincial status, 4.5 million 
tourists, both Chinese and foreign, had visited the province, 
including 774,000 from overseas, generating $140 million in 
foreign exchange. In both the amount of foreign exchange 
generated and the growth rate, tourism outperformed the three 
kinds of enterprises either wholly or partially foreign-funded. 
  While still in the experimental stage, the new market 
economy, bursting with life, further opened the eyes of the 
decision-making echelon in Hainan to the possibility of and need 
for renewing its strength. After the 14th CPC National Congress 
unequivocally set the goal of establishing a new market economy, 
in particular, they realized that now is the time to make Hainan 
live up to its name as China's largest SEZ. 
<H5>  Reforms in Hainan: Tough Choices But Revenue-Boosters </H5>
  Hainan has successively unveiled nine pieces of reform since 
the beginning of this year. As these are all major reforms, 
their introduction was immediately greeted immediately with 
strong reactions at home and abroad. 
  1. In project registration, a direct registration system has 
replaced the traditional project examination-and-approval 
system. Under China's traditional industrial and commercial 
registration system, a project must first obtain permission 
before it could proceed with registration. In advanced 
countries, in contrast, it is just the opposite. You must first 
register the company as a legal person and then apply to have 
the project approved. The most essential characteristic of the 
new enterprise registration system is that it adopts the direct 
registration system commonly in use in the world to facilitate 
enterprise formation as much as possible: 1) 24 kinds of 
enterprises, including financial and insurance institutions, 
must still go through the examination-and-approval process in 
accordance with the appropriate state regulations. All other 
enterprises, however, can directly register with the industry 
and commerce administrative bureau, bypassing the department in 
charge. 2) The paperwork involved has been cut drastically. 
Nowadays two sets of documents are required, instead of the 
traditional nine. It used to take several months to go through 
the process. Today it takes just seven days. 3) State 
enterprises, collective enterprises, private enterprises, and 
foreign-funded enterprises are put on a level playing field and 
treated similarly. In effect Hainan has become the place in 
China where enterprise registration is at its simplest. 
  2. Enterprises within the budget have been abolished. No 
longer are enterprises that are mismanaged and have been losing 
money for a long period of time being subsidized. They are 
allowed to go bankrupt or be merged or acquired as the case may 
be. 
  3. Land is allowed to change hands through open bidding and 
auction. To begin with, Hainan did a good job in land value 
assessment and came up with proper base prices so that different 
kinds of land parcels are priced differently and industrial land 
remains low-cost. The next step is to replace the renting system 
with a bidding and auction system. 
  4. Export quotas are allocated through bidding. 
  5. Factory directors and managers are recruited openly. 
  6. Hainan has abolished the tax levy system, first trying it 
out in Haikou. The special tax commissioner system, in effect 
for decades, was abolished in favor of modern computerized 
collection. A tax court was also set up to handle cases of tax 
cheating and tax evasion in accordance with the law. 
  7. The shareholding system has come to the infrastructural 
sector. The myth that only the state can take on infrastructural 
projects because of the size of the investment required and the 
long turnover period has been exploded. Society is given a free 
hand to raise funds to develop the infrastructure. 
  8. State enterprises are encouraged to adopt the 
shareholding 
system. State-enterprise legal persons are encouraged to own a 
piece of one another by buying one another's shares. This is one 
way to stimulate the flow of capital among such enterprises. 
  9. Planning work is no longer "cage" management but track 
management. Provided something is in the right direction and is 
in line with the industrial policy, people should be given a 
free hand to do it. 
<H5>  Building the Market-Economy "Iron Triangle" </H5>
  The reforms mentioned abov are major revenue-boosters, as 
demonstrated by a wealth of data: 
  The drive now under way to reduce the money supply and 
tighten credit has slowed development in some areas, including 
the coastal region. Yet the momentum in Hainan to import from 
abroad and develop cooperative ties with the interior has not 
abated. During the months of April and May, just as Hainan 
introduced a new enterprise registration system, over 5,000 
enterprises were registered in the province with combined 
registered funds amounting to 20 billion yuan. If all 
enterprises come up with 25 percent of their funds within one 
month as required under the regulations, there will be an 
infusion of at least 5 billion yuan into Hainan. Between January 
and August, the province approved over 2,000 foreign-funded 
enterprises with a total contractual investment of $4 billion, 
up 160 percent and 200 percent, respectively, over the same 
period last year. 
  On 15 May, the Haikou municipal government put a total of 40 
acres of land in the financial and commercial district along the 
waterfront on the block. Dozens of companies took part in the 
open bidding. In the end there were two successful bidders, who 
paid 4.9 million yuan and 6.8 million yuan per acre 
respectively, enriching the municipal coffers by 243 million 
yuan. There is an interesting contrast here. In the past five 
years the city sold 20,000 acres of land but netted just 997 
million yuan from the transactions. 
  Between January and July this year, the province of Hainan 
collected over 1.5 billion yuan in revenue, more than doubling 
that for the corresponding period in 1992. During the same 
January to July period, the city of Haikou collected 840 million 
yuan in revenue, a gain of 118 percent over the same period a 
year ago. 
  It should be pointed out that revenue-boosting reform 
measures were not something that came about overnight. 
Consideration had been given to them and the appropriate 
documents prepared soon after the province was created. The 
proposal of allocating export quotas by bidding, for example, 
was put forward back in April 1988 and the necessary regulations 
were issued in August of the same year. It was made much of in 
the official documents of the first provincial party congress 
held in September. 
  The actual implementation has been much more difficult. One 
reason is the emphasis a few years ago on Hainan's policy 
advantage and the neglect of institutional advantage. Another 
crucial factor is that these reforms have been resisted by 
forces inside the government, by vested interests that have 
profited handsomely from illegitimate competition. Broadly 
speaking, the experiment to set up a new market economy in 
Hainan in the past few years can be divided into two stages. 
Before this year, Hainan concentrated on nurturing a variety of 
markets for capital goods and worked hard to make the market the 
principal regulator of economic operations. At the same time, it 
hammered out the basic framework of a "small government and 
large society" model. Since the beginning of this year, the 
province has graduated from the kind of reform that is concerned 
mainly with quantitative indicators--small government, large 
society--to a concerted effort to transform government functions 
and build up the capacity of society for self-rule and 
development. The implementation of the enterprise registration 
system, for example, is an indication of the effort to remove 
government from administrative affairs it should not and cannot 
handle and truly return enterprises to the people. Introducing 
the shareholding system to infrastructural build-up and 
encouraging state enterprises to adopt the shareholding system 
are precisely the very things that would create an even more 
favorable climate for the all-out drive by society to develop 
the economy. Meanwhile, a major effort has been under way to 
create a level playing field for enterprises in all economies. 
There is absolutely no doubt that abolishing enterprises within 
the budget effectively weans state enterprises from the 
privilege of depending on the state and putting them on a level 
playing field with enterprises from other economies. As for the 
use of public bidding in the allocation of export quotas and the 
transfer of land, it closes the "door of convenience" for 
"special people" who only know how to pull strings instead of 
using their own skills. 
  In reality Hainan's revenue-boosting reforms are very tough 
reforms. They constitute a high-level decisive battle in the 
campaign to create a new market economy. Look closely at 
countries around the world with a successful market economy and 
you can readily discover that the market economy never exists in 
isolation. Most of us realize that economic operations depend on 
market regulation. That aside, there are two other things which 
are absolutely indispensable. One, small government and large 
society. Two, fair competition among all economies. These two 
things constitute the "iron triangle" of a market economy. 
Remove any one of them and the other two will not be able to 
really survive. 
  After waging the tough battle, Hainan has basically created 
an iron triangle for its market economy. When it comes to the 
creation of a new market economy, Hainan no doubt has placed 
itself at the forefront of the nation. Meanwhile, the largest 
SEZ, which used to pride itself on its "most extensive 
preferential policies," has sought to replace its old advantage 
with its institutional strength. The message to the world is in 
China the era of using preferential policies to affirm the 
extent of China's openness is over. Today, the race to come up 
with the most preferential treatment is giving way to a contest 
to see whose reform is better. Whoever does the best job in 
putting together a new market economy is driving the fastest 
train. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59343 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> POPULATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Market Population Development Theory Analyzed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0157A Beijing QIUSHI [SEEKING TRUTH] in Chinese No 128, 
16 Oct 93 pp 12-17 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0157A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing QIUSHI [SEEKING TRUTH] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wu Cangping (6762 3318 5493), member of the </F>
Standing Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference and professor at the Chinese People's 
University: "Theoretical Population Research Must Answer New 
Questions as They Are Posed by the New Situation"] 
  [Excerpts] Since control of population growth was first 
proposed 20 years ago, the planned economy had all along been 
its objective foundation. It was the believed that as the 
economy was planned, population growth had also to be planned. 
In this way it had been a matter of course to make control of 
population growth part of all plans for the national economy and 
for social development. The report of the party given at its 
14th National Congress then declared: "Purpose of the reform of 
China's economic structure is achievement of a system of 
socialist market economy." This compelled people to make a new 
appraisal of the relationship between control of population 
growth and planned economy. Family planning has been one of 
China's fundamental policies, its main purpose being the control 
of population growth. What, then, should be its objective 
foundation? To this question, population theory must provide 
the answer. 
  According to the epistemology of Marxism, existence 
determines consciousness. China's national condition is 
objective existence; it is primary. Economic planning and 
population control policies as well as all other planning are 
things within the sphere of consciousness; they are secondary. 
It is understandable that planned economy demands planning of 
the labor force; however, planned economy per se cannot by 
itself put forward the demand for population control. Only on 
the foundation of a thorough knowledge of national conditions is 
it possible for a people to determine its population policy, 
and, furthermore, possible to set forth the specific population 
targets for a year (or five or 10 years). 
  National conditions are the result of the objective natural 
conditions and of the activities of our predecessors; our 
present generation has no other choice in this matter; we just 
have to take this state of affairs as starting point in our 
creation of new history. Decisions can only be accurate if they 
are based on the foundation of an accurate knowledge of the 
national conditions. Family planning and control of population 
growth, being major Chinese policies, must both start out from 
China's national conditions. National conditions are very broad 
in scope; they involve considerations of political, social, 
economic, cultural, and historical aspects. However, within the 
national conditions, the components that are most closely linked 
with the question whether China's population growth should be 
controlled are population, natural resources, environment, and 
the economy, and among these, again population is the most 
directly involved component. China is still in the initial stage 
of socialism, and people frequently quote Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's "large country, huge population, weak foundation" to 
express summarily this stage of China's national condition. The 
fact that China has a limited area of arable land, but a huge 
population, especially peasants, is a fact that is hard to 
change. It is a characteristic circumstance that must be taken 
into consideration in China's modernization efforts. The 
objective fact of China's large population determines the 
necessity to control China's population growth and the 
protracted and arduous nature of the endeavor. 
  In a letter written on 9 March 1991 to the leading comrades 
of the National Education Committee on the topic of education on 
national conditions, Comrade Jiang Zemin wrote: "Its huge 
population is a conspicuous characteristic of China's national 
condition." He thereby scientifically pointed out the basic fact 
for China's efforts at family planning and population control. 
However, for a long time nobody dared to directly express this 
very obvious fact. The reason was, one, the deep-rooted 
influence of the traditional "population determinism." This 
so-called "population determinism" is taking the total number of 
the population, population density, and population growth rate 
as the only factors that determine the overall features and 
development of a society. This is of course a one-sided and 
erroneous attitude. It is quite a different matter from our now 
taking the large population as the foundation for family 
planning. Second, it is the effect of the following argument. It 
assumes that the population problem is an economic question; if 
the economy prospers, there is no population problem. Some even 
go further, there are indeed people in China and abroad who 
believe that China is making the population problem the 
scapegoat for its inability to achieve an upswing in its 
economy. The essence of the second argument is that it will not 
recognize the negative effects its huge population for the 
survival and development of China. Its large population is a 
unique characteristic of China, and one in which the various 
countries of the world have no actual experience. Only by 
starting out from China's realities can we fully grasp the 
situation. 
  Many compare China with Japan, Holland, Belgium, and 
especially with the "four little dragons" of Asia. They state 
that population density in these countries and territories is 
much higher than in China, they also have few natural resources, 
and they are still capable of rapid development and have higher 
living standards than China. The purpose of this argument is to 
show that survival and development is unrelated to the 
population issue, that as soon as the economy flourishes, all 
problems are readily resolved. In their opinion China's problems 
are problems of politics, economy, and its managerial system. 
The point that these people do not understand is that China has 
a population of 1.1 billion, and that this makes it quite 
different from Japan, Holland, Belgium, and the "four little 
dragons." Survival and development in those countries depends on 
foreign resources and markets, but for China it is a matter of 
reconstructing the country through self-reliance, reliance 
primarily on domestic resources and markets, and regarding 
foreign resources and markets only as supplementary factors. 
Because China's population accounts for 22 percent of the world 
population, it can hardly rely on import and export trade, or on 
foreign resources and markets to solve the problem of its own 
survival and development. 
  Control of population growth has a bearing on such major 
issues as the right to independent existence and 
improvement-of-life quality for China's huge population. 
Speaking of the population's living conditions, China is a huge 
country with 9.6 million square kilometers of land, but because 
of its large population, the land available on a per capita 
basis is only one-third of the world's average. To be also 
considered are the high mountains, high plateaus, and many 
desert regions, such as the Gobi Desert, leaving only 10 percent 
as plains. This makes it unavoidable that a considerable portion 
of the population must live in areas with rather unfavorable 
living conditions, also in high altitudes and mountainous 
regions. In these areas temperatures are generally low, soil is 
poor, and most are arid or semi-arid regions, with scarcity of 
water and no transport facilities. According to the general 
census of 1982, 20.3 percent of China's population live in areas 
above 500 meters altitude, and half of these in areas of over 
1,000 meters, while throughout the world only one-tenth of the 
population live in areas of over 400 meters elevation. 
Obviously, the large population and the insufficiently developed 
economy leaves China's population little space for survival. 
Without population control, it will not only be impossible to 
improve the subsistence conditions for a large part of China's 
population, but these conditions will even further deteriorate. 
  Again, considering, for example, eating and providing 
foodstuffs. China has only 7 percent of the world's arable land 
available to feed 22 percent of the world's population. China's 
territory is about equal to that of the United States, but 20 
percent of land in the United States is arable, while it is only 
10 percent in China, and China's population is 4.5 times that of 
the United States. As a result, per capita arable land in China 
is only one-fourth of the world average and one-ninth that of 
the United States. China must under no circumstances depend on 
foreign supplies for its grain supply, because this would be 
unreliable and lead to foreign political control. It could 
threaten the nation's sovereignty and independence. For the 
survival of the Chinese nation and for the enhancement of the 
quality of life, China must highly cherish every inch of arable 
soil, must resort to intensive cultivation, to economizing in 
grain, and must promote its excellent tradition of building up 
the country through thrift and hard work; another imperative 
requirement for China is population control. 
  Control of population growth will also have a direct effect 
on China's continued development. Continued development is 
primarily economic development, social progress, raising the 
quality of the people, and the continued exploitation of natural 
resources. Effective population control has also a bearing on 
the right scale of available manpower and on the increase or 
decline of surplus manpower, on the raising of labor 
productivity, and on the appropriate resolution of 
contradictions in the social distribution. It has also a bearing 
on the appropriate resolution of such other contradictions as 
the contradiction between China's large population and the 
supply of and demand for commodities, between people's 
livelihood and state construction needs, and between the large 
number of its population and the need to raise population 
quality. In view of China's huge population, effective 
population control will therefore be beneficial for the 
resolution of all the above-mentioned contradictions and for the 
continued development of the country. 
  The possibility of building up China into a prosperous, 
strong, democratic, and culturally rich country, with 
accomplished socialist modernization, will depend to a very 
large extent on whether it will be possible to have the rural 
areas and the old liberated areas, the areas inhabited by 
national minorities, the border regions, and poverty regions 
extract themselves as quickly as possible from the state of 
poverty, gain prosperity, and achieve modernization of all the 
people living there. If population growth is controlled in the 
rural areas and in some backward regions, there will be hope to 
achieve a shift in the population toward nonagricultural 
pursuits and toward urbanization. However, if population is 
allowed to inflate in these regions, it would be idle to talk 
about achieving a state of modest prosperity and modernization 
for China. Family planning will therefore have to be a 
protracted endeavor. 
  Population growth is exercising pressure on the entire 
environment and on all environmental resources. Following 
economic development and rising living standards, per capita 
consumption of resources is bound to increase. The huge mass of 
population that there is already in China, combined with the 
many-times-over increase in per capita consumption of resources, 
will of necessity reduce the resources that will be available 
per person, and will even have some resources dry up. Population 
control and economic use of resources are by now constituting 
two indispensable preconditions for China's continued 
development. 
  The most convincing part in the argument that the large 
population has a bearing on the right to existence and 
development of the Chinese population, and that population has 
to be controlled, is the environmental capacity for China's 
population (also called life-sustaining capacity). The 
traditional theory does not acknowledge a set environmental 
capacity for a population: 
  1) It believes that human initiative can expand what volume 
of population the environment can absorb; 2) it believes the 
environmental resources comprise many indefinite factors; 3) it 
believes that because human living conditions differ in a 
thousand ways, environmental capacity is an indeterminable 
factor. 
  However, judging by the continuity in population development 
and considering the present state of science, a rough 
approximation of environmental capacity is possible. After 
prolonged on-the-spot investigations and research, the Center 
for Research on the National Condition and the Natural Resources 
Investigation Contingent of the Chinese Academy of Sciences came 
up with the figure of 1.5 to 1.6 billion people as the highest 
figure that China's entire natural environment could 
accommodate, and that the capacity would be below 1 billion, if 
there were shortage of some resources. China's population, which 
is now 1.1 billion people, will increase by sheer inertia to at 
least 1.5 to 1.6 billion at its peak in the next century, 
according to forecasts accepted by the majority of experts. This 
allows the assumption that the scope of China's population will 
in future reach the upper limits of what resources and 
environment can accommodate. The argument that its huge 
population justifies China's control of population growth is 
thus being supported by the intelligence of natural scientists. 
The proposition that scientific and technological progress can 
expand the life-supporting capacity is correct, but such 
expansion has its limits, the more so since at present it does 
not yet manifest that ability. 
  For the last 10-odd years, theoretical base for China's 
family planning and population control has all along been the 
Marxist theory on the two kinds of production. According to this 
theory, the ratio between the increase of human reproduction and 
the increase in the reproduction of material resources is the 
most fundamental proportion in human affairs, as both kinds of 
production must be in a state of mutual congruity. Prior to 
reform and opening up, China's average annual rate of economic 
growth was around 6 percent, while average annual population 
growth was 2 percent, so that the ratio between the two was 
about 3 to 1. In certain years, economic growth rates had slowed 
down, while population growth rate had risen to above 2.5 
percent, so that the ratio became one of 2 to 1, or even less. 
At that time, it was very convincing to say, based on these 
figures, that the two kinds of production were mutually 
incongruous, while family planning and control of population 
growth were yet very smoothly being carried out. After reform 
and opening up, China achieved a new and higher level of 
economic growth, maintaining annual averages of around 9 
percent. Family planning was also very successful. During the 
third period of peak births, the population's birth rate and 
fertility rate showed a declining tendency; the average annual 
rate of population growth was around 1.5 percent. At that time 
the ratio between the growth rates of the two kinds of 
production was about 6 to 1, or about double the former ratio of 
3 to 1. In 1992 the situation was particularly striking. The 
economic growth rate was 12.8 percent, while the rate of 
population growth declined to 1.28 percent, so that the ratio 
between the two kinds of production was 10 to 1. In the face of 
this new situation, people can't help asking whether congruity 
between the two kinds of production has already been achieved, 
and if not, when would such indeed be achieved? On the problem 
of how congruity is to be computed between the two kinds of 
production, there has never been a clear explanation since the 
start of the theory, and it should now be the time to answer 
this question. Actual practice and the many questions and 
perplexities in people's perception demand that theory provide 
the answer, and that a scientific and convincing exposition be 
produced. 
  It seems the only feasible way, and the one that is most 
commonly used, is to study the proportional relationship between 
human reproduction and material production and to subject the 
growth rates and the speed in both to a comparison. However, 
using this method to assess whether there is congruity between 
the two kinds of production also has its limitations: 
  1) It can only reflect the speed of growth, but will not 
reveal the original levels; 2) It cannot reflect the present 
levels attained by the two; 3) It will only reflect the ultimate 
production figures, but cannot reflect the relationship between 
population and the various key elements of production 
(especially the various natural resources) and environmental 
resources. 4) It is unsuitable for cross comparisons of domestic 
and foreign conditions. 
  In my opinion, the best yardstick to check whether the two 
kinds of production are mutually congruous is still the per 
capita index. 
  The per capita index is the link between human reproduction 
and material production. As a most direct and the simplest 
indicator, it equitably separates product volume, gross national 
product, and reflects the conditions of material production 
(such as fixed assets, infrastructure, motive power assembly, 
installed capacity, etc.) according to the total population 
figures for the various time periods. A larger population causes 
the per capita index to get smaller; this, then, is the 
population's "denominator effect." The reason for China's low 
per capita index is, first of all, the backwardness of its 
productive forces, or, one may say, the insufficiency of this 
numerator, while the excessively large population and the 
continuous population inflation in the denominator are elements 
that will undoubtedly prevent the per capita index from going up 
for a long time. Some believe, that population is insignificant 
as denominator, if only the volume of the numerator is 
increased, that this will possibly raise the per capita index. 
Of course, it is correct to pay great attention to the 
denominator (i.e. production volume). Developing production 
(increasing the denominator) by every possible means is a key 
demand in China's economic construction, as without such effort 
raising the per capita index would be like water without a 
source. However, disregarding population as effective in the 
denominator would disregard the eminent effect of the huge 
population volume on the per capita index. Many of China's 
products have been developed very rapidly, for instance, grain, 
meat, aquatic products, cotton, cotton cloth, coal, cement, 
steel, glass, etc. and their production ranks at the top or 
among the top levels of world production, but computed on a per 
capita basis production is low in world ranking, a fact that can 
only be attributed to the excessively large denominator 
(population). The per capita index reflects the relationship 
between the two kinds of production, and also shows that it is 
the huge population volume that is the fundamental cause for 
China's low per capita index. Fast economic development combined 
with slow population growth can bring about a rise in the 
originally backward per capita index. On the other hand, China's 
per capita resources index, which is so very far behind the 
average world levels (arable land, forestry land, sweet water 
resources are only one-third, one-ninth, and one-quarter, 
respectively, of average world levels) will steadily deteriorate 
further because of the increases in population. It is not 
difficult to foresee that the day will come before the middle of 
the next century when the per capita arable land in China will 
be below 1 mu. The huge population volume will lead to an 
incongruity between population and resource utilization, and 
this will be an even greater challenge for China's survival and 
development. 
  The party report at its 14th National Congress stated: 
"Assessing the right or wrong, the success or failure, in the 
performance of any sector must, in the final analysis, accept 
the criterion of whether it has contributed to the development 
of the productive forces of the socialist society, to the 
overall enhancement of the national strength of the socialist 
state, and to the improvement of the people's living standard." 
This criterion is also completely applicable when we examine the 
mutual congruity between China's human reproduction and material 
production. China's present gross national product, averaged 
out according to its population, is, for certain important 
products and for the infrastructure, for fixed assets, etc., at 
the bottom of world rankings, and some do not even attain the 
levels of the developing countries. This clearly indicates that 
there is still a large disparity to overcome, if China is to 
attain mutual congruity between the two productions. 
  When family planning was first started in China in the 
1970's, the most effective argument in its propaganda was that 
China already had a very large base population figure, its 
population growth was rapid, and the age structure of its 
population was a youthful one. At that time, women in the rural 
areas gave birth on the average to five children, and children 
below 15 years of age accounted for over 35 percent of the total 
population. When it comes to our present days, effective 
implementation of family planning has very effectively reduced 
the birth rate, and nationwide average is already approaching 
"replacement level" (i.e. maintaining the level of simple 
reproduction). In the cities, especially in the large cities, 
and in some provinces it is already well below the "replacement 
level." The rate of annual natural population growth has also 
declined from above 2 percent to 1.5 percent, which is a very 
favorable level in the Third World. In some provinces, cities, 
and counties there are already symptoms of a negative population 
growth. In some regions the population of below 15 years of age 
accounts for only one-quarter and even only one-fifth of the 
total population, figures which are among the lowest figures 
throughout the world. In the above-stated three terms used to 
characterize the situation in China, the statement about China's 
very large basic population figure is the only term that is not 
yet outdated, but the explanations given for the nature of 
China's family planning, its purpose and its task, are, we feel, 
somewhat oversimplified and require new supplementations and a 
systematic exposition. 
  China's family planning has Chinese characteristics, and 
must 
not be considered as identical with family planning in other 
countries, although in translation the same word is used; this 
is indeed a loss of "truthfulness" that occurs here in the 
translation. 
  First, in China, the scope of family planning is one that 
covers the entire society. It starts out from a macro-overview 
and from considerations of the interests of the entire society. 
Family planning in other countries starts out from a microscopic 
view and from the particular number of children and particular 
birth intervals in the planning of individual families and 
individual persons. 
  Second, in China, family planning is conducted as one of the 
functions of government, while abroad it is mostly undertaken by 
private organizations. 
  Third, in China, family planning starts out from the 
realities of China, always regarding control of population 
volume and raising the quality of the population (this mainly 
refers to eugenic excellence and excellence in child raising) as 
one uniform entity, which is different from family planning 
abroad, where restriction of births is the one and only 
objective. In China, eugenic excellence and excellence in child 
raising are indispensable preconditions for the consolidation of 
the low birth rate, and this is becoming more and more important 
following the actual achievement of low levels of births. 
  Fourth, in China's family planning, the overall total of all 
births is the result of macro-consideration, and is therefore, 
objectively, producing a cushioning effect in the distribution 
and sexes of the population and on the adjustment of the age 
structure at different times, between urban and rural regions, 
and between different districts. 
  Judging by its objectives, tasks, and methods, family 
planning with Chinese characteristics is an organic component of 
the construction of socialism with Chinese characteristics. It 
is an indispensable link in the efforts to build up China into a 
prosperous, strong, democratic, and culturally rich country, 
with accomplished socialist modernization. The deeper and more 
remote objective of China's family planning is to render service 
to the modernization of China's population. This demands that it 
make contributions toward modernization of the type of 
population reproduction, modernization of the population 
quality, modernization of the type of population structure, and 
toward a healthy ageing of the population. The burden of this 
work during the entire initial stage of socialism will be heavy 
and the endeavor will be a protracted one. Family planning is a 
basic project in the struggle of the Chinese people for their 
right to exist and develop. Under no circumstances must there be 
any relaxation because an extremely small group of foreigners 
obstinately lump it together with questions of human rights; the 
work must be resolutely continued and perfected. 
  In recent years, implementation of the Central Committee and 
the State Council resolution for a strengthening of family 
planning work and strict control of population growth has 
resulted in a remarkable reduction of the Chinese birth rate. To 
have achieved this success during periods of peak births is 
highly commendable, but must certainly not be a reason to relax 
further efforts. 
  First, one of the major reasons for the present decline in 
birth and fertility rates is the elevated marriageable age for 
women of childbearing age and the reduction of repeated births, 
but after some time there could be a relapse, and there are 
indeed still many areas of high childbirths, so that we must not 
lower our guard in this respect. 
  Second, China has a population of over 300 million women of 
childbearing age. The social, economic, and cultural situation 
has not yet reached the turning point when fewer childbirths 
would be demanded spontaneously. Consolidating the past 
achievements of family planning still requires much 
propagandistic work and work in service to society. One must not 
expect that the work has now been done once and for all. If a 
relapse would be allowed to occur, the task would require double 
the effort for only half the result. 
  Third, population growth develops in a wave pattern. After a 
peak occurs, there is bound to be another peak 20-odd years 
later. We are presently at the top of the third peak of 
childbirths, and in the next century there is bound to occur the 
fourth peak of childbirths, though of a somewhat more moderate 
dimension. We must under no circumstances be shortsighted about 
it. 
  Fourth, population growth possesses its own inertia. Even if 
the birth rate arrives at the "replacement level," population 
may still continue to grow. When the birth rate in the present 
developing countries reaches "replacement level," it will take 
another 30 to 50 years until zero population growth is achieved. 
  Since reform and opening up, some labor and talent markets 
have appeared in the urban and rural areas of China, and by 
having a direct meeting of supply and demand, it was possible to 
channel some manpower and some talents to places where they can 
be more effective. This is beneficial for the development of 
productive forces and is a start in breaking down the pattern of 
manpower distribution of the planned economy. China is in the 
process of establishing a system of socialist market economy. 
This new situation is also posing new challenges for our 
population theory: 
  1) Population reproduction is the natural foundation for 
reproduction of the work force population. If the work force is 
subject to market regulation, must population births also be 
regulated by the market economy? 
  2) All developed countries, without exception, are operating 
under the system of market economy. Without government 
interference in population reproduction, they all have low birth 
rates, and some have reached, or are about to reach zero 
population increases. Finally, opinions are voiced in China and 
abroad that after China has instituted market economy, it will 
only require the proper development of its economy to have its 
birth rate quite naturally go down, and population growth to be 
low or even zero. In 1984, at the Second International 
Population Conference in Mexico, the U.S. delegate openly 
declared that China will only be able to resolve its population 
problem by instituting a free economy. His purpose was 
obviously to have China abandon its present family planning 
policy and have China adopt a laissez-faire attitude in matters 
of birth control, but there is absolutely no way that we could 
be duped into doing that. 
  Under the new situation, there has to be a further 
emancipation of minds and renovation of concepts in our research 
of population theories. Judging by the actual conditions 
prevailing in China, regulation by the market of population 
reproduction is definitely not an objective or demand of the 
establishment of a system of socialist market economy. 
  First, in China family planning and population control is 
viewed from the angle of the society as a whole, while the 
market mechanism can regulate only a part of the work force, and 
cannot directly influence births of the entire population. There 
is, furthermore, a "time gap" of at least 15 to 20 years between 
the birth of a population and its having grown up into work 
force. In our fast changing times, it would be unrealistic to 
consider manpower needs 20 years hence on the basis of present 
manpower needs. Actually, what the market primarily influences 
is population movement and the demand for training a population 
of working ages, but not the problem of reproduction of the work 
force population. 
  Second, the labor market is presently not yet sufficiently 
developed in China at the present stage, and information is also 
not effectively spread. Some directives are false and erroneous. 
It is therefore not possible to guide family by family, 
household by household, toward spontaneously restricting births; 
there will always be a part of the people that will not exercise 
restraints in childbirths. In a macro-overview of the situation 
we see that China has already a huge contingent of surplus 
manpower. Relying only on market regulation to slow down the 
manpower increase, and as a consequence automatically reduce the 
birthrate, is unrealistic. 
  Third, population reproduction is not at all completely 
restrained by economic factors, but to a considerable extent 
influenced by social and cultural factors, and by the forces of 
ethnic customs and habits. This is so because market economy 
relies on such economic elements as the supply-demand relations, 
which frequently do not have a regulatory effect, the more so 
since many regions in China are economically not sufficiently 
developed. If the macro-guidance is lacking, and if there is 
also no propagandistic education for family planning and no 
coordinated social services, and if, furthermore, the said 
social and cultural factors and traditional customs are allowed 
free rein, the population inflation is bound to continue for a 
long time to come. 
  The practical experiences of the Western developed 
countries, 
where the population growth rate declined spontaneously, are of 
no reference value for today's China, because the national 
conditions are so different, and also because of the differences 
of the eras concerned and the stages of development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59344 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> POPULATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Changing Perception' of Childbearing Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0207A Beijing RENKOU YU JINGJI [POPULATION AND 
ECONOMICS] in Chinese No 80, 25 Oct 93 pp 63-64 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0207A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENKOU YU JINGJI [POPULATION AND 
ECONOMICS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ye Mingde (0673 2494 1795): "Summary of a </F>
Seminar on Changes in the Perception of Childbearing Among 
People in Poverty Regions"] 
  [Excerpts] Under item P04, entitled "Study of Population 
Problems in 23 Poverty Counties in China," a "Seminar on Changes 
in the Perception of Childbearing Among the People of Poverty 
Regions in China" was held, 5-11 April 1993, at Guilin City. 
[passage omitted] 
<H3>  III. Reasons for the Change in Perception of Childbearing 
Among People in Poverty Regions </H3>
  At the hand of a large array of examples, the participants 
showed that although economic development was the ultimate cause 
that led to the change in the people's perception of 
childbearing, there was not at all a simple linear relation 
between economic growth and the change in the people's 
perception of childbearing. Under certain circumstances, 
economic growth would even stimulate the desire to have more 
children. As things are today, the limited economic growth in 
poverty regions is not sufficient to induce changes in the 
people's perception of childbearing. People in some poverty 
counties have been comparatively quick to change their 
perception of childbearing, mainly because of ideological 
education and the guidance of government policy. For instance, 
in the Longsheng Multinational Autonomous County of Guangxi 
Province and in Panan County of Zhejiang Province, the leading 
cadres at all levels had paid most serious attention to 
population control affairs and had devoted considerable manpower 
and material resources to propagandistic education. In the 
Longsheng Multinational Autonomous County, per capita investment 
in family planning is in excess of seven yuan. Moreover, the 
change in perception of childbearing among the people of poverty 
counties is also due to such factors as the development of 
educational and public health affairs, a relative opening up of 
society, and the spreading influence of the large and 
medium-sized cities. 
<H3>  IV. Factors Restraining the Change of Perception of 
Childbearing Among People in Poverty Regions </H3>
  In the opinion of the participants, there are in the poverty 
regions more than in ordinary regions factors extant that 
restrain a change from the traditional perception of 
childbearing to its modern perception. The following are some of 
such restraining factors: 
  1. Poor natural conditions, backward productive forces. 
Production methods and tools are rather primitive in poverty 
regions, mechanization is at a low level, production relies 
mainly on human labor, and there is, therefore, indeed, 
objectively a need for many childbirths. 
  2. The educational level of the population is very low. For 
instance, in Luchun County of Yunnan Province, over 70 percent 
of the population are illiterate or semi-illiterate. Add to this 
the fact that as a society they are also isolated, a fact which 
seriously impairs their ability to accept new knowledge and new 
concepts. 
  3. The unitary system of the production structure has a 
detrimental effect on the employment of women. Women are 
occupying a very low economic and social position. 
  4. The weak social security system and the traditional ways 
of family-oriented care for the elderly has people believe in 
the need to "raise sons to provide for old age." 
  5. The very deep-rooted influence of traditional culture and 
customs. For instance, the people of Hani nationality in Luchun 
County of Yunnan Province have the customs of early marriages, 
of free premarital sex, the system of inheritance by the 
youngest son, the belief in the transmigration of the soul, and 
in the theory of the life-shortening effect of childbirths. All 
this makes people desirous of early births and many childbirths. 
The main group of Uygurs living in Shufu County of Xinjiang 
Province are mostly following the rules of the Islamic religion 
in matters of marriage and childbirths. 
  6. Some poverty regions have been receiving state relief for 
a long period of time, and this has some people develop a 
dependent mentality, which to some degree is hindering a change 
in their perception of childbearing. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59345 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> POPULATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Population Statistics `Inaccuracy' Analyzed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0207B Beijing RENKOU YU JINGJI [POPULATION AND 
ECONOMICS] in Chinese No 80, 25 Oct 93 pp 53-56 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0207B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENKOU YU JINGJI [POPULATION AND 
ECONOMICS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Xiaojun (3769 2556 6511), Population </F>
Institute, China People's University: "Study of Improving the 
Quality of Population Statistics as Related to the Regularity of 
Family Planning Statistics"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] II. Analysis of the 
Reasons for Inaccuracy in Population Statistics and Regularity 
of Family Planning Statistics 
  There are many reasons for the inaccuracy in population 
statistics and in the regularity of family planning statistics. 
Some are due to the statistics themselves, but others are due to 
non-statistical aspects. For a clear analysis of the reasons for 
the inaccuracy of population statistics in relation to the 
regularity of family planning statistics, we shall here 
distinguish, according to whether the errors are man-made and 
intentional, between unintentional and intentional errors. 
  A. Unintentional Errors 
  Unintentional errors are then those that are not man-made 
and 
not intentionally caused by human action. This kind of error may 
be due to statistical or also due to non-statistical causes. The 
following are some circumstances that generally cause such 
errors: 
  1. One of the major reasons for statistical omissions and 
reporting errors are the disfunctional conditions of basic 
statistical recording and in card management. Some regions have 
not yet set up basic statistical records and cards. Others, that 
have already set up statistical records and cards, are 
disorderly in keeping these records, or, having set them up 
once, neglect keeping them up-to-date. These records will then 
be as at a standstill and useless. In some cases they are also 
not kept properly classified by items. 
  2. Inappropriate statistics organization, incompetent 
statistics personnel. Statistical work requires a statistical 
organization and statistical personnel at six levels, namely at 
the state, provincial, prefectural, county, town, and village 
levels. At present, many localities do not fulfill these basic 
requirements. Below the town level there is on the whole no full 
time statistical personnel, and statistical affairs are taken 
care of concurrently by cadres in charge of family planning, or 
by people who are not released from production or other duties. 
Most of these people are poorly educated, they have also 
generally not received the necessary training and are hardly fit 
for what is a fairly complicated job. 
  3. Lack of a scientific and rational system of population 
and 
family planning indices. Certain indices which should not be 
included within the scope of family planning, are listed as 
important indices in some localities. For instance, it is for 
the civil administration or the public security agencies to 
register divorces, deaths of spouses, and remarriages, while 
family planning work is mainly to guide people to reproduce 
according to plan. Besides, there are large differences between 
different localities in some indices concerning the same matter. 
For instance, for the index to show multiple births, what are 
actually used are indices called rate of multiple children, 
extra-plan multiple children, number of extra-plan pregnancies, 
number of multiple children, etc. Furthermore, the rate of 
plan-conforming childbirths are given different meanings. Some 
places take as plan-conforming childbirths those that have been 
arranged for according to the present year's plan and for which 
childbirth certificates have been issued, while others take as 
plan-conforming births those that conform with the state and 
local family planning plans. Others again consider the first 
childbirth at mature age and the second childbirth permitted by 
state policy, that conform to the plan, as plan-conforming 
childbirths. These differences make comparisons between 
districts very difficult and at the same time hinder examination 
and checking of indices at the various localities. 
  4. Statistical methods and methods of checking the quality 
of 
statistics are comparatively backward. Registration of original 
data and much of the summarizing of statistical data from all 
levels below the provinces (municipalities), prefectures, and 
counties are carried out by hand, and the original records at 
many places are not taken down whenever events happen, but are 
done in a rush at the end of the month. It is very easy for 
mistakes in recording and summarizing to occur in this manner. 
There is also no efficient method for an effective check of the 
quality of the statistical data, and any examination and 
supervision of the quality of the statistical data will 
therefore hardly help control statistical errors. 
  5. Leading cadres in charge of family planning at all levels 
and personnel engaged in family planning work are still not yet 
fully aware of the important meaning of population statistics as 
related to the regularity of family planning statistics, and 
they do not attach sufficient importance to the quality of 
regularity statistics. These too are important reasons for the 
untruthfulness of statistics. There is also the fact that the 
"Law Governing Statistics" has not been seriously implemented. 
There is a law, but it is being disregarded, and as a result the 
law concerning population regularity statistics cannot fully 
exert its efficacy. 
  B. Intentional Errors 
  Intentional errors are man-made and purposely created 
errors. 
They have to do with the ideological and moral qualities of 
persons, and are not due to the statistics in themselves. They 
generally comprise the following kinds: 
  1. Due to the comparatively serious social, economic, and 
educational backwardness in China's rural areas, the desires of 
many peasants with regard to childbirths are not in conformity 
with what government policy demands. As a consequence, an 
excessive population is being created in violation of government 
policy on planned childbirths. To evade punishment, the peasants 
will conceal facts by every possible means. Personnel in charge 
of family planning work will thus be left ignorant of the true 
situation and will submit incomplete reports. 
  2. Family planning statistics at the basic level in the 
rural 
areas are in general prepared concurrently by cadres in charge 
of family planning. In order to ensure fulfillment of the plan 
handed down by higher authority, and in order to get credited 
with good achievements, these cadres will conceal some facts and 
omit them from their reports. In actual work situations, there 
are in general two circumstances that will have basic level 
personnel in charge of statistics intentionally submit 
incomplete reports. One is that work at the basic level is of 
poor quality, that great difficulties are encountered, and that 
it is impossible to fulfill the plan, or that some higher 
ranking family planning department, to retain some extra margin 
within the plan norms at its own level, when distributing 
population plan norms, will retain a margin for itself at every 
level, thus making basic plan norms excessively high and tight, 
to satisfy the plan, and will then intentionally compile 
incomplete reports to evade responsibility. The other kind is 
the effect of unhealthy tendencies in society and consists of 
the intentional omission of registrations in order to be 
credited with better achievements. 
  3. Some cadres in charge of implementing government policy 
or 
some leading cadres, especially those at the village level, are 
affected by unhealthy tendencies and submit false reports of 
achievements. It was particularly after it was pointed out in 
the "Resolution on Strengthening Family Planning Work and on 
Strict Control of Population Growth," passed May 1991 by the CPC 
Central Committee and the State Council: "We shall make 
effective family planning work and fulfillment of population 
plans important indices in the assessment of official 
achievements of party committees and governments at all levels," 
that family planning work could be "one count against" in the 
assessment of an agency's achievements. Thus, population as 
related with family planning became of crucial importance in the 
assessment of governments and of the achievements in the 
official careers of major leading cadres at all levels, which 
would then also be critical for their promotions or demotions. 
Some leading cadres of less than perfect character would then 
resort to deception and falsify or forge statistical data. This 
is the main reason for intentional false reports. 
  The above-mentioned three kinds of intentional false reports 
are usually interrelated and made use of together. Because 
incomplete and false reports occur at the three levels, namely 
with individuals among the general public, with statistics 
personnel, and with leading cadres, taking all these together, 
the intentional false reports have become the primary cause for 
the inaccuracy of population statistics as related to family 
planning statistics. At the same time, their joint occurrence 
has the effect of increasing the obstruction against the 
elimination of false reports and of increasing the difficulties 
of such efforts. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59346 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Grain Storage, Procurement </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181X Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 19 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181X </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 10 December, Anhui Province had put 
5,278,500,000 kilograms of grain in storage, an increase of 82.5 
million kilograms over 1992. At present, Anhui has procured 10.5 
billion jin of grain at state-set and negotiated prices. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59347 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Rural Savings </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181Y Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 14 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181Y </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 20 November, rural saving deposits in 
agricultural banks and rural cooperatives in Anhui Province 
totaled 11.86 billion yuan and 10.26 billion yuan respectively, 
increases of 1.79 billion yuan and 2.26 billion yuan over the 
beginning of 1993. From January to October, agricultural banks 
and rural cooperatives allocated 5.5 billion yuan in loans, an 
increase of 900 million yuan over the same period in 1992. By 
the end of October, agricultural banks allocated 8.4 billion 
yuan in procurement funds, a 42 percent increase over the same 
period in 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59348 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Heilongjiang Grain Procurement </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181W Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 26 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181W </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 24 November, Heilongjiang Province had 
procured 944 million kilograms of wheat, fulfilling 84.1 percent 
of the task; 472 kilograms of soybeans, fulfilling 44 percent of 
the task; 100 million kilograms of rice, fulfilling 17 percent 
of the task; and 145 kilograms of corn, fulfilling 1.2 percent 
of the task. Heilongjiang plans to procure 5 billion kilograms 
of grain at negotiated prices, at present 50 million kilograms 
have been procured. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59349 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jiangsu Autumn Grain, Rape Area </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181V Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO in Chinese 25 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181V </F>
<F P=104>  Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] The autumn grain and rape area in Jiangsu 
Province is 3,092,000 hectares. The autumn rape area is 542,400 
hectares, an increase of 80,000 hectares over the summer area. 
The grain area fulfills 95.6 percent of the guidance plan. The 
wheat area has declined, but the barley and broad bean area have 
increased. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59350 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jiangsu Rice Procurement </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181U Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO in Chinese 25 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181U </F>
<F P=104>  Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 21 November, Jiangsu Province had procured 
665 million kilograms of rice, fulfilling 24.3 percent of the 
task, and was a decline of 800 million kilograms procured during 
the same period in 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59351 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Book Chronicling `Youth Resistance' Reviewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0105A Hong Kong CHIU-SHIH NIEN-TAI [THE NINETIES] in 
Chinese No 11, 1 Nov 93 pp 97-99 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0105A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHIU-SHIH NIEN-TAI [THE NINETIES] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pi Hua (3880 5478): "The Frontier Corps' Bloody </F>
Archives--A Study of Dreams of Educated Chinese 
Youth"--First paragraph is introduction.] 
  [Text] An authentic literary work recording the 
suffering of educated Chinese youth reveals the little-known 
inside story of the cruel history of educated Chinese youth and 
their uprising in resistance. The reclamation corps regarded 
human life as worthless. The parading of a corpse touched off an 
earthshaking storm, awakening educated Chinese youth to rise in 
resistance. 
  In the over four decades since the founding of the PRC, the 
CPC has practiced a brutal dictatorship, believing that it could 
rely on its powerful state apparatus to force its people into 
submission. While conscientious Chinese writers and artists 
would have reported this social reality in their works on behalf 
of the people, the PRC's literary and arts policy that permits 
eulogies but no exposures has long kept many writers afraid to 
touch such sensitive topics. 
<H3>  A Work Recording, Exposing the Brutal Treatment of Educated 
Chinese Youth </H3>
  The recent appearance of the long literary record by the 
young Sichuan writer Deng Xian [6772 6343]--Dreams of 
Educated Chinese Youth (carried in the No 5, 1992 issue of 
the literary bimonthly TANG TAI, and published in a separate 
edition by the People's Literature Publishing House in April 
1993)--has broken this taboo. Dreams of Educated Chinese 
Youth recounts the story of Mao Zedong's sending of 
educated Chinese youth down to the countryside and border areas 
for "reeducation," and their subsequent tide of demanding to 
return to the cities. In the words of this book's "synopsis," 
the author "uses full and accurate data and powerful artistic 
expression to reveal for the first time the inside story and 
whole course of the great [struggle to] return to the cities by 
educated Chinese youth, as well as the Frontier Corps' bloody 
archives." 
  This book is also significant in that: 1) It expresses in a 
work for the first time, through a record of the facts, the 
surging spectacle of the Chinese people's demonstration and 
stand for their lives against CPC tyranny. Even more rare is 
that the resistance ended in victory, demonstrating the theme 
that "tyranny must lose and the people will win." 2) Since the 
failure of the 1989 student movement, ultra-leftists have 
resurged, doing their utmost to defend past CPC crimes. So this 
book is also a forceful attack on such attempts to rewrite 
history. 
<H3>  The Construction Corps Was More Like a Reform-Through-Labor 
Camp </H3>
  The policy of forcing large numbers of educated Chinese 
youth 
to the countryside, to submit to so-called "reeducation," was 
set forth by Mao Zedong in an editorial note in RENMIN RIBAO 
[PEOPLE'S DAILY] on 21 December 1968: "Educated Chinese youth 
going to the countryside, to be reeducated by poor and 
lower-middle peasants, is very necessary." 
  Once Mao's "imperial edict" was issued, it immediately 
touched off the campaign of going to work in the countryside and 
mountain areas, which affected almost all urban families. The 
data show that by the end of 1978, 20 million educated Chinese 
youths had been sent down to the countryside or off to border 
areas. While Mao's slogan sounded very pleasant, the so-called 
"reeducation" was in fact consistent with his hostile actions 
against learning and intellectuals. His expelling of educated 
Chinese youth to the countryside was in fact consigning them to 
purgatory. Dreams of Educated Youth authentically 
recounts the many hair-raising crimes committed by Mao Zedong's 
cadres in tormenting the educated youth. 
  At the end of May 1973, XINHUA SHE [NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY] 
reporter Li Ming [7812 2494] inadvertently saw in Jinping 
County, the encampment of the 18th Regiment of the Yunnan 
Production and Construction Corps, many prisoners laboring under 
escort by the People's Armed Police [PAP]. These convicts were 
very young and unkempt, sweating away at hard labor. When one of 
them asked a guard for a drink of water, not to speak of the 
excoriation, several militiamen also rushed over and beat this 
prisoner to the ground with their rifle butts. Then, his 
pitiful cry rang out in the boiling hot air: "PLA uncles, spare 
my life! Please spare my life...." Even more shocking were the 
female prisoner ranks that this reporter saw, with 17 and 18 
year-old educated girls escorted by fiendish militiamen to hard 
labor in rock quarries. What he could not understand was: Why 
was the air there laden with such a bloody smell? Why was this 
construction corps more like a huge reform-through-labor camp? 
<H5>  A Uranium Mine With No Safety Measures </H5>
  Here are the true facts. In the 18th Regiment, these 
soldiers 
had long since treated educated youth as prisoners to be 
wantonly hung up and beaten, humiliated, and even raped. One 
camp boss openly asserted: What have you come to the frontier 
for? To be remolded as "disloyal reform-through-labor convicts!" 
  According to a report (No 241) issued by the New China News 
Agency on 4 July 1973, 23 of the 18th Regiment's 31 units saw 
the occurrence of varying degrees of tying up, hanging up, and 
beating of educated youth. There were over 30 types of 
punishments, such as being roasted in the sun in the summer, and 
being doused with cold water in the winter. Some were beaten 
into cripples, some went mad, and others committed suicide. Many 
of the cadres in the Yunnan construction corps were sex fiends 
who ravaged educated young girls. 
  Even worse, Corps cadres acted with utter disregard for the 
lives of educated youth. In the late 1960s, a uranium mine was 
discovered in a desolate mountain pass of high mountain ridges 
in Western Yunnan, which was taken over by the Construction 
Corps in 1970. Educated youth from the Corps' Fifth Division, 
21st Regiment (Menggang farm) were sent there. While the mine 
had over 400 educated youths, whose main jobs were mining, 
picking, storing, and shipping, it had absolutely no safety or 
protective equipment, leaving many educated youths subject to 
long-term radiation that took their lives. 
<H5>  Educated Youth Parade a Corpse </H5>
  "If the people do not fear death, how can they be cowed by 
it." As educated youths had limited patience, their discovery 
that their lives were being treated with utter disregard (with 
statistics showing that in the first 10 months of 1978 alone, 
the Yunnan Reclamation Area experienced as many as 153 unnatural 
deaths of educated youths, and other reclamation areas 
experienced many suicides as well) finally set off a wave of 
strikes and demonstrations. 
  The book relates in detail three later-publicized 
disturbances by educated youths in 1978 and early 1979. 
  The first was the parading of a corpse on 13 November 1978. 
This demonstration occurred in the Yunnan border region on the 
Ganlan Plains. The corps authorities' lack of concern for human 
life, plus bad doctoring by barefoot doctors, who acted 
irresponsibly by actually getting drunk and leaving during a 
difficult labor by an educated young woman, resulted in the 
pregnant female losing so much blood that both mother and child 
died. The unexpected death of this educated young woman left 
the other educated youth so in grief that their resentment 
quickly grew into resistance over the fate of educated youth in 
general. 
  This time, the CPC's consistently-utilized formula of 
pressure tactics did not work. As the camp's public security 
body and PAP were going into emergency action in preparation for 
forced disposition of the corpse, hundreds of educated youth who 
had heard the news rushed up, confronting the armed personnel 
with hoes, long knives, and iron clubs. Finally, they lifted up 
the corpse on their shoulders and set out for Jinghongzhen (the 
capital of the Xishuangbanna Autonomous Prefecture). They 
neither chanted radical slogans, presented vehement views, nor 
committed any violence. Rather, they simply bowed their heads, 
carrying the corpse of their companion who had died such an 
unfortunate death, in an attempt to win some basic human rights 
for both the living and the dead. Like an endless river, they 
flowed along slowly beneath the dark and gloomy November sky, 
finally sitting down for several days in front of the 
Prefectural Party Committee gates. 
  Only 24 hours after the occurrence of this incident, the 
news 
of it appeared through telegraphic dispatch in writing on the 
Xidan Democracy Wall in Beijing. Meanwhile, it affected all 
reclamation areas in the southwest. In a few short days, all of 
the eight large farms in the Banna Reclamation Area were faced 
with a serious situation of educated youth being out of control 
emotionally. Educated youths from all of the farms went into 
action, contacting each other, establishing secret ties, and 
responding by the hundreds to a single call. 
<H5>  Victory of the Resistance Changes Their Fate </H5>
  Who would have thought that the chance incident of an 
educated young woman's tragic death would become the fuse to set 
off an earthshaking wave of return to the cities by educated 
youth, to become the first roll of thunder that would result in 
hundreds of thousands of educated youths on Yunnan farms and 
even throughout China awakening in bold resistance. 
  The educated youth won a great and complete victory, in 
which 
the prefectural party committee met all of their demands: 1) It 
dealt severely with the doctors involved in the incident, 
investigating and affixing responsibility; 2) It treated the 
educated young woman as if she had died in public service, 
agreeing to hold a memorial meeting; 3) It better implemented 
the educated-youth policy, instructing farms to improve health 
care as quickly as possible, and to make overall plans for 
solving the existing problems in educated-youth lives. 
  The victory from this parading of a corpse sharply boosted 
the morale of educated youth to demonstrate against tyranny, 
paving the way for victory in the two subsequent strikes and 
demonstrations that called on the CPC to abolish its reactionary 
policy of sending educated urban youth to work in the 
countryside and mountain areas. The courage (a hundred laying 
down on the train tracks and a thousand going on a hunger 
strike) and tactics (absolutely peaceful and rational, to 
provide the authorities with no handles) displayed by the 
educated youth in these two magnificent actions, showed through 
and through the extent to which these young people had matured 
by steeling themselves to their miserable lives. 
<H5>  Firm Memories of the Ultra-Left Disaster </H5>
  On his Spring 1992 southern tour, Deng Xiaoping set forth 
the 
key issue as guarding against the left. Dreams of Educated 
Youth was written in the midst of this anti-left tide, 
being in the same category as works such as Anti-Left 
Memorandum and China's "Left" Disaster. 
  Mao Zedong's policy of sending educated urban youth to work 
in the countryside and mountain areas has been negated by Deng 
Xiaoping. Deng's remarks on this policy were: "We spent 30 
billion yuan to buy three discontents -- educated youth, 
parents, and peasants." Still, the CPC has ultra-leftists who 
just cannot give up on this policy that has wasted our national 
wealth, ruined a whole generation of youths, and was such a 
disaster; they are still trying by all means to beautify it. 
  In 1990, Beijing held the "Spirits Tied to the Black 
Earth--A 
Retrospective on Wild Beijing University Youth," at which time 
ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN BAO also said that the policy of sending 
educated urban youth to work in the countryside and mountain 
areas had "radiated a spirit of development and excellence." In 
the early spring of 1991, to commemorate the 20th anniversary of 
going to Yunnan in support of the border area, Chengdu held a 
large retrospective exhibition, with the general title "Youth 
Has No Regrets." Beneath this general title was an explanatory 
note borrowed from Selected Poems by Pushkin: "A 
Russian once said that all suffering will pass, and what is past 
will turn into a happy memory." 
  However, the author of Dreams of Educated Youth 
questions this view. He says in the "Introduction" that: "I 
cannot help but have certain instinctual doubts about the words 
of this Russian poet: If all past suffering does not turn into 
bitterness, then can the attitude of the Jews toward World War 
II, the Chinese toward the Nanjing Massacre, and the Japanese 
toward the atom bomb be one of turning those nightmares into 
happy memories?" He holds that as history is an organic unity, 
"While we may forget honors, money, and the many shining laurels 
that may someday adorn our heads, we have no rationale for 
forgetting suffering, or its indelible historical brand that was 
forcibly stamped on us as individuals and as a whole." He asks: 
"If those 10 young girls who have already been forgotten and are 
forever sleeping in darkness (referring to the 10 educated young 
girls from Chengdu averaging only 17 and one-half years of age 
who died in a fire in Yunnan in 1971 while there in support of 
the border area) could speak out from the grave, what would they 
say? If they had the right to choose their lives again, would 
they opt to be educated youths? Would they have no regrets?" 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59352 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar005___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  19 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Journal Views Taiwan F-5 Fighter Upgrade </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0101A Beijing JIANCHUAN ZHISHI [NAVAL AND MERCHANT 
SHIPS] in Chinese No 10, 8 Oct 93 pp 11-12 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0101A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIANCHUAN ZHISHI [NAVAL AND MERCHANT 
SHIPS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jiang Yan (6199 6056): "Taiwan's New Modified </F>
Fighter, the F-5E SX"] 
  [Excerpts] Early in 1993, the Taiwan media reported that 
the military was preparing to modify its antiquated F-5E 
fighters. After modification, 90 of these F-5E SX fighters would 
join the new fighter aircraft line-up made up of F-16s, Mirage 
2000's, and the IDF. Coming as it did in the wake of Taiwan's 
having signed an agreement with the United States and France to 
import fighter aircraft, Taiwan's continued use of these 
fighters, which it had originally planned to replace, cannot 
help but arouse some interest about the newly modified F-5E SXs. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Possible Combat Tactics </H5>
  The F-16s and Mirage 200-5s in Taiwan's new fighter aircraft 
lineup are superior quality aircraft, while the IDF and the F-5E 
SXs are relatively lower quality aircraft. When used to attack 
surface targets (including on water), generally speaking, the 
attacking force capabilities (bomb load and attack accuracy), as 
well as the penetration capabilities of superior quality 
aircraft are somewhat greater than for lower quality aircraft; 
however, if low performance aircraft have accurately guided 
weapons, they also can complete their mission fairly well. When 
they run into the opponent's air defenses, the survivability of 
high-priced, superior quality aircraft is not all that much 
better than for lower quality aircraft. This point was made 
extremely clearl during the Gulf War. However, in aerial 
warfare, the performance of superior quality aircraft is 
markedly higher than that of low performance aircraft. This 
demonstrates that when combat using both superior quality and 
lower quality aircraft is waged, the basic method should be as 
follows: Use of the superior quality aircraft primarily for 
aerial warfare, and the lower performance aircraft mostly for 
ground combat. When needed, the two kinds of aircraft may be 
changed around. This means that as a lower quality aircraft, the 
F-5E SX would be used mostly in attacks on the ground (or 
water), but when a large scale enemy aerial attack is 
encountered, if there are not enough superior quality aircraft 
to put up a fight, the F-5E SX would also join the aerial war. 
  Taiwan is surrounded by the sea. The nearest threat to its 
land area, one might say, comes from the opponent's surface 
vessel units. According to the laws of combat, the objective to 
be attacked first is naturally the one that is nearest and that 
poses the greatest threat. This means that Taiwan will send out 
fighters to assault the opponent's nearest surface vessel 
forces. If the enemy has fighter planes up to protect its vessel 
formations, the two sides will engage in aerial warfare. The 
F-5E SX's could carry out attacks against the opponent's 
vessels, but they could not easily protect themselves. 
  Data show that the F-5E SXs do not carry air-to-ship 
missiles; thus, they do not have a distant warfare capability 
against ships. However, Taiwan does have 60 Mirage 2000-5s that 
carry Exocet air-to-ship missiles. During wartime, the 
air-to-ship missiles could be used first in attacks against the 
opponent's ship formations, followed by the F-5E SXs' dropping 
bombs to exploit the results. In addition, Taiwan has nearly 40 
S-2 anti-submarine patrol aircraft, and it has ordered four E-2 
early warning plans from the United States. When an armed attack 
occurs, it can use the S-2s for continuous patrolling of key 
ocean areas, and during major combat activity, it can use the 
E-2s for command and control, thereby greatly improving combat 
performance. 
  Given the F-5E SXs' performance, the main tactics that might 
be employed in order to evade the opponents' aircraft, missiles, 
and anti-aircraft fire while attacking surface vessels might 
very well be low altitude attacks using small forces in multiple 
sorties from many directions, while frequently changing speed, 
altitude, and direction on the flight path. After coming within 
striking distance of the opponent's ships, the planes could 
deliver a diving attack and then break off rapidly. At night, 
they could switch from a visual attack to a radar-guided attack 
to carry out more horizontal bombing runs. When the aircraft's 
radar is jammed, they could use an "illuminated attack," meaning 
having a single plane fly rapidly over the opponent's vessels 
and drop flares. The other aircraft would then use the light of 
the flares to conduct visually aimed attacks. With the flares at 
an altitude of between 1,000 and 2,000 meters, they could drop 
two to four bombs on each run, and make several runs. 
  Faced with a serious aerial attack threat, when superior 
quality aircraft are insufficient to complete an attack mission, 
the F-5E SXs would be used in aerial combat. Because of the 
fairly small number of them, and their relatively low 
technological level and combat capability, their aerial combat 
role would be to intensify and augment that of the superior 
quality aircraft. In wartime, the F-5E SX's would be under the 
command and control of the E-2 early warning aircraft. They 
would use Sky Sword II air-to-air missiles in combat at long 
range avoiding close-in combat insofar as possible. When 
unavoidable, after firing their Sky Sword II air-to-air 
missiles, they would continue to press the enemy and engage in 
combat at close quarters. To increase their combat 
effectiveness, the F-5E SX's would concentrate their strength to 
attain partial superiority in numbers in the aerial combat zone. 
At the same time, the F-5E SX's could work together with the 
superior quality aircraft in the electronic jamming of the 
opponents aircraft, and send some aircraft in strikes against 
the opponent's important land targets (sea and air bases). 
  One final point worth mentioning is that many countries and 
territories of the world (including many countries of Southeast 
Asia) are still using F-5 fighter planes today, the number of 
planes totaling more than 1,000. If Taiwan is successful in 
modifying the F-5E SX, the countries and regions that have F-5's 
will certainly be very interested. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59353 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liu Binyan Views Mao as `Cruel, Hypocritical' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0104A Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
10, 18 Oct 93 pp 42-45 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0104A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Binyan (0491 6333 7159): "Mao Zedong in Our </F>
Hearts"--First paragraph is editor's note] 
  [Text] In this article, renowned writer Liu Binyan 
probes specifically how Mao Zedong carried out mental 
enslavement of the Chinese people and trampled human instinct 
and personal dignity, resulting in the rampancy of evil and 
corrupt activity around the country today. The article is a 
rare, valuable work. 
  It is said that the corpse in the Mao Zedong Memorial Hall 
has begun to rot. Which one is it, the real or the fake? In 
those days, an exact dummy of the corpse was made to meet the 
needs of "war preparation." The corpse on display may be the 
dummy. As artificial materials may be confused with a real human 
corpse, it is hard to tell which Mao Zedong it is. This is 
somewhat ironic because throughout his lifetime Mao Zedong was 
at home in playing tricks of real and fake. His tricks were so 
clever that every Chinese was infatuated. At that time, despite 
their suffering from starvation and the withering of their will 
under mental oppression, the people around the country believed 
that they were creating a new beautiful world! 
  Some 20 years ago, those who ate human flesh in Guangxi must 
have had the belief that what they were doing was a 
revolutionary act. Apart from the utilitarian reason that eating 
human livers gives one a healthy liver and eating human hearts 
makes one intelligent, the valiant and proud "sentiments and 
aspirations" generated from the above belief must have played a 
role when they were trying to overcome the psychological 
obstacle that human nature posed against their cannibalist act. 
  Among Mao Zedong's many "magnificent contributions and great 
deeds," a significant one was that he succeeded in 
mentally enslaving the Chinese people and pushing them a big 
step ahead toward the goal of eliminating human nature.. 
  I once used three words in describing the acts of the 
Chinese Communist Party (here I mean the entity of that party 
rather than the overwhelming majority of its members) or, more 
precisely, the characteristics of its behavior in terms of 
morality: cruel, hypocritical, and despicable. These 
characteristics were also possessed by Mao Zedong. He 
successfully transformed the Chinese Communist Party "according 
to his own image" and remolded the Chinese people's souls after 
the party's model. All this was done in the guise of morality. 
  Why were the Chinese people so obedient to Mao Zedong that 
no 
rebellion occurred even when the unprecedented famine he created 
had taken away the lives of more than 40 million people? It 
would be oversimplified if we use "violence" and "deception" to 
explain this. When the People's Liberation Army [PLA] marched 
into Beijing, the first thing it did was to close all brothels. 
This move alone conquered the people's minds from the standpoint 
of morality. There were many other reasons: The strict 
discipline of the army, the plain lifestyle of cadres who worked 
even without salary, and the measures taken to stabilize 
commodity prices, eliminate robbers and bandits, crack down on 
local tyrants, and enable everyone to earn a living. All these 
satisfied the Chinese people's moral requirement for "equality." 
All these were not only "correct," but were "great." Mao 
Zedong's "morality incarnate" image established by himself in 
the early 1950's lasted until the early 1970's, when Lin Biao's 
coup failed (and when many of the party's scandals were exposed 
through the Cultural Revolution and through the events fomented 
in the early stage of the Cultural Revolution). But his status 
as a symbol of morality has not completely faded out even today. 
  During the period 1958-62, the destructive "Great Leap 
Forward" and the "People's Communes" movements brought about a 
catastrophic famine. Mao Zedong once again took advantage of the 
Chinese people's moral sense. This way he not only reestablished 
his prestige, but made hundreds of millions of people climax 
their blind faith in him. The publicity given to Lei 
Feng and many other PLA heroes, the accompanying nationwide 
emulation campaigns, and the propaganda on cadre Jiao 
Yulu all successfully drew the people's attention to the 
need for self-purification. They no longer bothered to observe 
and think what was going on in China's society and what faults 
Mao Zedong had committed. 
  The main theme of the report on Jiao Yulu was quite clear: 
Two factors accounted for Lankao County's dire poverty -- 
inclement natural conditions and lack of hard-struggling spirit 
on the part of cadres and masses. It was impossible that Jiao 
Yulu did not think over the numerous mistakes committed by Mao 
Zedong after the Agrarian Reform and the grave consequences of 
those mistakes. But the report -- which was not so moving -- 
said nothing about this at all. As a matter of fact, after 
comparing himself or herself with Lei Feng, everyone felt 
morally guilty and deemed it imperative to devote 
hard efforts to self-cultivation and self-improvement. Now, with 
Jiao Yulu as a mirror, they were all the more imbued with a 
sense of inferiority, feeling that they must be remolded. Both 
"models" told them that they must follow Mao Zedong closely 
without the slightest vacillation. 
<H3>  Successfully Made Hundreds of Millions of People Abandon 
Their Own "Selves" </H3>
  Neither the Soviet Union nor any East European country could 
match China in holding frequent political campaigns. In China, 
every year saw some political campaigns. On some occasions, 
several campaigns were held at the same time. 
  Let us say that China's political campaigns began with the 
Agrarian Reform. Mao Zedong was opposed to a "Peaceful Agrarian 
Reform" and the "idea of bestowing land as a favor." He insisted 
that the peasants should do this with political consciousness 
and on their own initiative. This required a lot of efforts. 
Work teams must "visit the poor and inquire about their 
sufferings." They must "take root in the countryside, keep in 
contact with the peasants" and "mobilize" every household and 
individual. Where there was no suffering, the work team must dig 
out something as "suffering." Where there was no "hatred," the 
work team had to do something to foster it. The widespread 
campaign of physical torment imposed on landlords and rich 
peasants, the drive to sweep them out of the doors, and even the 
destruction of their lives were mostly the results of the 
stratagems applied by the work teams. 
  Mao Zedong was a successful psychologist without learning. 
Suppose, on a certain occasion, you mounted the stage to accuse 
a landlord of oppressing you and beat him up. Once you had such 
a "practice," even though you had done this not of your own 
accord or only half-heartedly or pretentiously, and even though 
you had not experienced the retaliation by the "home-going" 
legion, you would naturally stand on Mao Zedong's side. In a 
campaign, suppose you were egged on or forced to do something by 
the "party leadership." After you had done it over and over 
again, you would unwittingly become the protagonist. So it would 
appear as if the campaign had been really initiated by the 
masses themselves. 
  In urban areas, there was even better soil for sham things 
to grow into real ones. After underground party organizations 
and the army entered cities, they absorbed many young 
intellectuals, most with sincerity to devote themselves to the 
revolution. Newly liberated areas needed large numbers of cadres 
to replace the Kuomintang government functionaries, giving young 
intellectuals many opportunities both to "devote themselves to 
the revolution" and to "become officials and overlords." Whether 
their goal was to grasp the opportunity to better serve the 
people or to obtain official positions, they had to perform 
well--they must obey the party's instructions and actively 
plunge into various campaigns so as to become party members as 
early as possible. If they discovered that they were unwilling 
to do something--even if their unwillingness was a slight 
hesitation--honest and thoughtful people would blame themselves 
for entertaining an "individualist idea." They would quickly 
examine themselves so as to avoid being criticized. 
  Mao Zedong never advocated that a man should reflect on 
his mistakes in private. Ideological remolding was always a 
process by which the majority forced the minority to give 
in. Though this process, which transformed others as well 
as oneself, was "entirely arranged by the party," it made people 
feel that "I am doing this conscientiously and willingly" and, 
therefore, think that they were the initiators of the process. 
In each campaign, they had to unjustly attack a number of 
people, do something against their will, and say something 
against their conscience. Sometimes, they could not avoid acting 
immorally or unlawfully, such as conducting secret 
investigations, informing against someone, and making false 
testimonies. All these, they thought, were "demanded by the 
party" and "needed by the revolution," or the "common things" 
they had to do in order to protect themselves. With this 
thinking and seeing that everyone was doing the same, they could 
be relieved of guilty conscience. 
  In each campaign, the victims were invariably the "small 
handful." More than 1 million people were accused as rightists, 
but compared with the nation's total population or the total 
number of personnel of a work unit, those accused were still a 
"small handful." This made people feel relieved--even though the 
accused were wronged, there was no need to rehabilitate them. In 
fact, the "small handful" could serve a big purpose. Mao Zedong 
was more clever than Stalin. Why was it necessary to kill so 
many people? Mao Zedong did not want to frighten people with 
slaughter. He wanted people to fear that "they might make 
mistakes, and if they did make mistakes, they would not only 
ruin themselves but bring a disaster to their families." 
Therefore, some of the more than 1 million rightists were not 
arrested, and only very few were killed. Most of them were still 
alive and were allowed to show up everyday. Seeing them, people 
could not help but constantly alert themselves. At the same 
time, they felt happy that they themselves had not been accused. 
What a clever scheme this was! 
  One of Mao Zedong's inventions was the "label." Among the 
"rightists," "bad elements," and "historical 
counterrevolutionaries," who would not like to have their labels 
removed as early as possible? The "rightists" were further 
divided into six categories. The "ultra-rightists" were deprived 
of everything but their lives. Those belonging to the sixth 
category were only deprived of political rights--even their 
wages were not affected. This saved the party a lot of trouble 
because the rightists could check and criticize each other and 
vie to show loyalty to the party so as to cast off their labels 
at an early date. What was wonderful was that these people did 
not even know the deceptive or unjust nature of so-called 
self-transformation. More often than not, they conducted 
self-transformation out of their faith in the revolution. 
  There was no distinction between right and wrong, 
truth and falsehood. When this situation lasted for several 
decades, people's instinct, righteousness, and personal dignity 
were practically nonexistent. 
  Mao Zedong succeeded in making hundreds of millions of 
people abandon their own "selves." All personal desires, 
benefits, and interest not contradictory but even conducive to 
the development of the whole nation were attacked and 
suppressed. An individual's concern, thinking, and demand for 
participation in social transformation were either manipulated 
by the leader or the party or viewed as dangerous and hostile, 
and therefore strangled. There was one thing that no ruling 
party or political leader in the world dare to do but Mao Zedong 
and the Chinese Communist Party did successfully, and that was 
to openly ask the people to serve as "tools" of Mao and 
society--and the "tools" were "docile tools." Unconditional 
negation of individuality became the basic norm for ideology, 
systems, and policies and was accepted widely as a general 
practice. On the other hand, people had no right to withdraw 
from society or become inactive members of society. They must 
constantly dedicate themselves to society in line with the 
party's will. Only in this way could they be really "docile." 
<H5>  Making the People as Poor as Animals Is Kind of Knife </H5>
  "Poverty stifles ambition." Desire for survival outweighs 
everything else. At that time, people were satisfied as long as 
they remained alive. They were in a state of lasting 
hopelessness, and no one could change their fate. Diligence and 
initiative were of no use at all. When you had to beg the party 
branch secretary every year for "relief grain" or "resold 
grain," or when you had to present your wife or daughter to him 
in exchange for his favor, could you still have personal 
dignity? At that time, of course, the people would most easily 
accept the despotic rule. In 1956, Mao Zedong hastily put into 
force the agricultural collectivization policy. The reason was 
no other than that he feared that once the peasants became 
well-to-do, they would not obey his instructions. 
  The long period of poverty in China since the late 1950's 
was 
a result of cruel oppression and enslavement of the Chinese 
people by Mao Zedong's personal ambition and his anti-humanist 
ideology. Poverty, political deprivation, and mental 
enslavement were three leading reasons for the unprecedented 
destruction of the Chinese humanist spirit and morality. 
  Mao Zedong praised "poverty and blankness" because only on a 
blank China could he "draw the most beautiful picture" according 
to his own will. He held that poverty could make people's hearts 
purer. In fact, it made the people more like animals, and it 
forced them to suffer much more than real animals. 
  Despite their year-round toiling, the people could hardly 
eke out a living and even had to incur heavy debts. Through 
years, such a life benumbed the people's normal feeling and even 
caused them to give themselves up as hopeless. After all, 
however, human beings were human beings. In society, poverty 
always existed along with unfairness, oppression, and bullying. 
The Chinese people had neither property nor power, and were 
unable to change their predicament. They felt hopeless about 
their future and were ignorant of the world (and even of China's 
real situation over the past four decades). Because of these 
problems, in 1976 when Mao Zedong died, the Chinese people's 
minds were by no means a blank. Still less were they in a state 
of lovely purity. 
  By that time, the peasants' go-slow movement which began in 
1958 nationwide had lasted for nearly 20 years. Theft of public 
property by the masses, which started at the same time, was a 
form of the peasants' retaliation against exploitation and 
oppression. Slow work and privately seizing public property were 
quite common in state-owned enterprises. When these activities 
appeared over and over again, the people's hatred for the ruling 
political power became increasingly intensive, and their hearts 
drifted farther and farther from society. In the early 1970's, 
peasants along railways and highways began to seize state 
materials being transported. Shortly afterward, an appalling 
incident occurred in Shanghai where several hooligans took turn 
to rape a young woman in a downtown area. There were lots and 
lots of onlookers, but no one bothered to stop the scene. 
  In 1971, the Lin Biao incident broke out. The second 
economic 
crisis and the nationwide political persecution caused by the 
Cultural Revolution finally collapsed Mao Zedong's authority and 
his ideological system. China was in a state of great 
disillusionment. The clock began to run back and the ideological 
pendulum in China's society began to swing toward the side 
opposite to the one advocated by Mao Zedong and hotly pursued by 
the Chinese people in previous years. 
<H3>  Though the Clock Has Run Back, the People Are Still Going 
Toward Inhumanity </H3>
  It was a quiet collapse triggered by a soundless explosion. 
On their own initiative and without mutual consultation, people 
quietly discarded their blind faith in Mao Zedong and moved to 
the opposite. What Mao Zedong described as correct now became 
erroneous. And what was bad according to his teaching was now 
considered to be good. 
  In a certain sense, there was no doubt an ideological 
emancipation movement. People began to be freed from the cage 
built by themselves and the shackles they forged for their own 
bondage. Nonetheless, the emancipation was tragic in nature and 
destructive in terms of its ethical consequence. There was an 
instance which might be exceptional but was indeed 
representative. Some educated youths who had plunged into the 
Great Cultural Revolution and later gone to work in the 
countryside and mountain areas in response to the great leader's 
call suddenly felt hopeless and dispirited after a long period 
of ascetic life where the revolution outweighed everything. In 
some villages, young men and women cohabitated as a way of 
pleasure-seeking. 
  When Mao Zedong was building the revolutionary edifice and 
using his illusive goal and humanism to unify the people, he 
broke down individual entities, eliminated freedom, and 
exercised physical and mental enslavement, pushing the Chinese 
people toward inhumanity. Now, the collapse of Mao Zedong's 
edifice is just a reversed process: Awakened individuals 
have divorced themselves from the whole. In doing so, they have 
discarded the sham part of Maoism (revolution and morality) 
while still holding on to its true essence (cruelty, hypocrisy, 
and despicableness). This process, too, is leading to 
inhumanity. 
  This was not a sudden explosion. The dark side of the party 
and related historical facts were first exposed during the 
Cultural Revolution to meet the needs of struggle. Then, Mao 
Zedong put at the highest place the fallacies he had designed 
since the 1950's and dealt blows at hundreds of millions of 
people. All these have gradually awakened the people. Finally, 
the self-awareness of the Chinese people has been aroused to an 
extent unprecedented in the past several thousand years. With 
such awakening and emancipation, they have naturally taken the 
renouncement of Maoism as their glorious goal. On the other 
hand, those who can speak the people's sufferings, as a matter 
of course, have come up to fill the void in the people's hearts. 
  Now, the people have begun to regain their own "selves." But 
you will find one thing: After trampling human nature underfoot 
for decades, what a fertile field Mao Zedong has prepared for 
the growth of the vicious part of human nature. 
<H5>  The Legacy of Spiritual Ruin Is Evil Running Wild </H5>
  Out of revenge for nearly three decades' exploitation and 
oppression, everyone now feels that he or she has a right to ask 
anything from society. All of a sudden, the self, which has long 
been belittled, can go its own way as magnificently and freely 
as a heavenly steed soaring across the skies. Unfortunately, 
however, the freedom obtained in the Deng Xiaoping era is 
neither used for creation and discovery nor for participation in 
social transformation (in 1978-80 even an ordinary worker in 
China longed for an opportunity to do so). That road is 
overgrown with brambles and full of potential dangers. In 
contrast, the road to satisfying selfish desire is unimpeded. 
  Mao Zedong used "socialism" to do away with China's 
traditional society and put the party and the political power in 
a position to face every Chinese directly. The party's feeler 
went deep into every aspect of the people's life. Everyone's 
subsistence, honor and disgrace, and ups and downs were dictated 
by the will of the party (from the great leader to the village 
party branch secretary), and every good deed appearing on the 
9.6 million square kilometer land was credited to the party's 
leadership. The only conclusion that can be drawn from this is: 
The Chinese can be irresponsible for their nation, society, and 
even themselves. If all achievements are creditable to the 
party, then any malpractice should be attributed to the party as 
well. So, in the course of time, a peculiar consciousness 
or subconsciousness has come into being: Damn! This country 
belongs to the Communist Party. It has nothing to do with 
me. 
  The old moral code is practically nonexistent, while new 
morality is ridiculed. Education is renounced by society. Law 
has little or no binding effect. Religion is considered unlawful 
or only semi-lawful unless it voluntarily serves as a tool of 
the party. Thus, there is virtually no force that can restrain 
people from within and without. This has been the case since the 
"virtue" concept was eliminated by man-made class struggle, and 
evil activities "for the sake of revolution" were held in 
esteem. Now, Deng Xiaoping's time has begun, and a new problem 
has arisen: The party's corruption is spurring the decay of the 
entire society. 
  The spiritual ruin created by Mao Zedong has become an ideal 
venue for evils to run amok. 
  This article is not intended to make a comprehensive 
evaluation and analysis of the reality in present-day China. The 
economic boom resulting from the people's might unleashed by the 
economic reform and the greater freedom enjoyed by the Chinese 
today are undeniable facts. But didn't we pay too high a price 
for these? It is not necessary to turn the obedient people into 
an "unbridled people" or "violent people." China need not 
repeat the course of Europe in the initial period of capitalism 
when darkness and crimes prevailed. And the creative force of 
the revived people should not necessarily be translated into a 
destructive force. The only question is whether the Deng 
Xiaoping clique is willing to carry China's de-Maoization drive 
through to the end. 
  Recently, when the news came that China failed in its bid 
for 
hosting the 2000 Olympic Games, a female Chinese reporter said 
indignantly before the public: "If this had been known 
earlier, Wei Jingshen would not have had to be freed from 
jail!" Was this a comeback of the departed spirit of Mao 
Zedong? 
  On the day when I learned that Wei Jingshen was released 
from jail, I thought of a question: In the face of Wei Jingshen, 
has any Chinese intellectual asked his or her own conscience: 
During Wei Jingshen's 14 hard years behind bars, what was I 
doing for the Chinese people? 
  I believe there are such people, but perhaps they are not 
many. Everyone can find some reason to have a clear conscience. 
Mao Zedong has taught many people how to ease their conscience. 
No doubt, this will be conducive to their longevity. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59354 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Urges Strengthening Macroregulation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1601013394 Beijing JINGJI GUANLI in Chinese No 12, 5 Dec 
93 pp 14-16 </F>

<F P=103> HK1601013394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI GUANLI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Jinqi (3769 6855 1477) and Cheng Baohua </F>
(4453 1405 5478): "Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Should 
Be Strengthened When Developing the Market Economy" -- edited by 
Lin Daojun (2651 6670 0689)] 
  [Text] The target model established by the 14th CPC 
Congress for building the system of the socialist market economy 
has ushered in a period of rapid development in China's 
socialist market economy. How to ensure the healthy development 
of the socialist market economy and promote a sustained, stable, 
and speedy development of the socialist economic construction 
are important problems confronting us. 
  Modern economic theories believe: To ensure normal operation 
of the market economy, it is necessary to carry out 
macroeconomic regulation and control over the market. By 
macroeconomic regulation and control, it refers to regulation 
and control by the government over market operations, and is 
intervention by the government in the course of operations of 
the economy as a whole. For economic operations to reach a 
scheduled state, it is the conduct of carrying out regulation 
and control over national or social economic activities by 
comprehensive use of various means of regulation proceeding from 
the overall situation of the national economy. In his work 
"General Study of Employment, Interest, and Money" published in 
1930, the well-known British economist John M. Keynes, in light 
of the failure of market economic setups that purely relied on 
the laissez-faire market regulation of economic operations, put 
forward the theory of expanding government functions of 
intervention in economic affairs and standardizing them. If we 
make a comprehensive survey of the history of development of the 
market economy and the practices of China's economic 
development, the socialist market economy likewise should not 
deviate from government macroeconomic regulation and control. 
<H3>  I. The Building and Development of the Market Economy Should 
Not Deviate From Government Macroeconomic Regulation and Control </H3>
  The market economy emerged and developed in the capitalist 
society, and promoted a major development of capitalism, but the 
intrinsic contradictions of the capitalist society also became 
acute. By the early 19th century, periodic economic crises 
began to appear as one of the basic contradictions of the 
capitalist society. It later became increasingly acute, 
resulting in the closing down of factories. In 1929-1930, major 
crisis broke out in the Western world, the Great Depression led 
to an unprecedented social disaster of capitalism during 
peacetime, and various contradictions of capitalist society were 
thoroughly exposed. U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt put 
into practice the New Deal, and the administration intervened in 
the market economy, thus resulting in a turn for the better in 
the U.S. economy. The macroeconomic management theory 
represented by Keynes's "General Survey" was also gradually 
accepted by Western countries, and various governments carried 
out macroeconomic regulation and control over their economies by 
fiscal and monetary policies, and other means. These measures 
could not eliminate the basic contradictions of capitalist 
society, but greatly relaxed its periodic economic crises and 
social and class contradictions. Furthermore, powerful postwar 
tides of scientific and technological revolution not only made 
capitalism survive, but still have considerable vitality. 
  Now the market economies of Western countries are fairly 
developed, but government macroeconomic regulation and control 
have never stopped. These countries intervene in economic 
operations by constantly making use of interest rates, tax 
policy, and other economic means, and provide a certain 
guarantee for the development of the national economy. This 
indicates that whether in an initial or highly developed stage, 
the market economy should not deviate from macroeconomic 
regulation and control. 
  The socialist market economy which China is speedily 
cultivating and developing is different from the capitalist 
market economy, but the former too has general character with 
the latter. In November, 1979 when he met with (Gypney), deputy 
chief editor of the Encyclopedia Britannica, Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping pointed out: "It is definitely incorrect to say 
that the market economy is limited only to the capitalist 
society, thus the capitalist market economy. Why cannot 
socialism go in for the market economy? The market economy had 
rudiments during the period of the feudal society; socialism can 
also go in for the market economy." The socialist market 
economy, he believed, is basically similar to the capitalist 
market economy in method, but it is also different in the 
relation between ownership by the whole people, relations 
between collective ownership, and relations with foreign 
capitalist countries. But in the final analysis, it is 
socialist, the market economy of a socialist country. In his 
talks during his inspection tour of southern China, Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping clearly put forward that both planning and market were 
economic means. In terms of operational mechanism, there is no 
difference in the market economy under the two kinds of social 
system. If there should be any difference, it is not a matter 
of the market economy itself, but is brought by the basic 
feature of two kinds of social system. 
  China is a developing socialist country, with relatively 
backward productive forces and unbalanced economic development. 
China's national conditions and its present stage of economic 
development require that China should all the more attach 
importance to strengthening and improving macroeconomic 
regulation and control. 
  At present, China's socialist market economy is in its 
initial stage of development, its economic structure has not 
been rationalized, and new contradictions and problems have 
appeared in the course of economic development. Therefore, in 
developing the market economy, China must strengthen and improve 
macroeconomic regulation and control, should draw on the useful 
practices of capitalist countries in market control and their 
successful experiences in market regulation, and carry out 
effective macroeconomic regulation and control over the market 
economy. 
<H3>  II. To Carry Out Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Is the 
Intrinsic Requirement for the Operational Mechanism of the 
Market Economy </H3>
  The market allocation of resources is generally achieved by 
bringing into play the functions of the competitive mechanism 
and the changes in the supply and demand relations according to 
the requirement of the law of value. By sensitive price signals 
and constant competitive pressure, it can promote the superior 
ones and the inferior ones will be eliminated, coordinate supply 
and demand relations, and effectively allocate resources. 
However, there are also unavoidable defects in market 
allocation, which itself has weak points and negative factors. 
For ensuring the equilibrium of the total economy, preventing 
drastic economic functions, rationally restructuring the 
economy, carrying out fair competition, preventing a wide gap 
between the rich and the poor, for ecological balance and 
environmental protection, and the relations between fairness and 
efficiency, it either does a poor job or is incapable of action. 
Market regulation has a certain blindness, and will easily give 
rise to economic fluctuation. Market regulation is a kind of 
local regulation, and it is impossible for it to achieve a 
comprehensive balance of the macroeconomics. Market regulation 
is a regulation of actual resources, and cannot bring into play 
the potential superiority of resources. It is a regulation of 
productive activities and cannot automatically regulate the 
social target of fair income distribution. 
  Market regulation can only regulate the allocation of 
economic resources, and some nonproductive departments cannot 
carry out market regulation. It is impossible for market 
regulation to affect nonmarket behavior and it cannot safeguard 
fair market competition. Therefore, market regulation requires 
intervention by the state and the government, and requires 
constant macroeconomic regulation and control. Market without 
planning is incompatible with the increasingly socialized 
commodity economy. In building the system of the socialist 
market economy, we should better integrate planning as the means 
of regulation with the market. In the course of allocating 
resources, whatever problems can be solved by the market will be 
solved by the market; whatever cannot be managed or managed well 
by the market will be managed by the government through policies 
and planning. The modern market economy not only does not 
exclude government intervention and planning guidance, but also 
remedies the defects of the market by drawing support from and 
relying on them. This is what we should never forget even for a 
moment in shifting from the planned economy to the market 
economy, far less should we completely abandon planning as the 
means of macroeconomic regulation and control whenever we talk 
about the market economy. It seems once we talk about planning 
we are "taking the old road." When we say we should strengthen 
macroeconomic regulation and control, it absolutely does not 
mean to return to the old mandatory methods commonly used in the 
past under the unitary planned economy system, but to regulate 
the supply and demand equilibrium, the direction of funds 
investments, social distribution, and regional differences by 
interest rate, tax rate, exchange rate, prices, and industrial 
policies by using primarily economic means, legal means, and 
necessary administrative means that conform with the economic 
law of the market economy, and to standardize and constrain the 
behavior of the economic subject and the order of market 
activities by speeding up the legalization of economic work. We 
should take necessary administrative means to solve those 
problems of confused economic orders caused mainly by 
administrative behavior. Of course, this is not to replace 
economic means, but to ensure the implementation of economic 
means by administrative means. 
<H3>  III. To Proceed From China's Practical Situation and 
Seriously Strengthen Macroeconomic Regulation and Control </H3>
  The development of China's market economy is different from 
that of the market economy in capitalist countries. They take 
different roads and have their own characteristics in 
macroeconomic regulation and control. 
  The market economies of Western countries have experienced 
the process from laissez-faire development to constant 
government intervention. China's market economy has experienced 
a rather complicated historical process and has gone through an 
ever-intensifying process of gradual advance from taking on all 
economic affairs by the state and carrying out the management 
system of highly centralized planned economy to reform and 
opening-up and gradual establishment of the system of the 
socialist market economy. The planned economy management system 
China carried out during the early period after the founding of 
New China played a gigantic role in the rapid recovery of the 
national economy. However, with social and economic 
development, the drawbacks of the planned economy system also 
became increasingly apparent and seriously obstructed the 
development of social productive forces. Since the Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th Congress, the CPC put forward the 
theory of planned commodity economy, carried out the policy of 
reform and opening-up, vigorously developed the socialist 
commodity economy, and gradually reduced the state plans, 
especially mandatory plans. Based on the development of the 
commodity economy, the CPC then proceeded to put forward in time 
the theory of building the system of the socialist market 
economy, and cultivated and developed with great efforts the 
socialist market economy, thereby energetically promoting the 
development of the productive forces. This is a road entirely 
different from the building and development of the market 
economy in Western countries. Therefore, we must carry out 
effective regulation and control by combining with China's 
practical situation in the light of the characteristics of the 
socialist market economy. China accumulated rich experiences in 
macroeconomic management over decades of economic work in the 
past, which makes it possible for China not only to carry out 
macroeconomic regulation and control over the socialist market 
economy, but also to yield more fruitful results than the 
measures for macroeconomic regulation and control introduced in 
the Western countries. 
  At present, China's socialist market economy is still in its 
initial stage of development, there is a process of transforming 
from the old to the new system, various kinds of relations still 
require further straightening out, and it is inevitable that 
drawbacks and problems will appear in economic development. But 
these are contradictions and problems in the course of 
development; they can only be overcome and solved by further 
in-depth reform and seriously strengthening macroeconomic 
regulation and control. It also determines that we must now 
still use necessary administrative means to guide the market 
when strengthening macroeconomic regulation and control, and 
escort economic development. We must further strengthen the 
building of the legal system, build up and improve as soon as 
possible the legal system of the socialist market economy, and 
try our best to rely on and use economic and legal means to 
regulate and control regular economic operations, thus creating 
a set of theories and methods for macroeconomic regulation and 
control over the market economy with Chinese characteristics, 
and ensuring that the socialist market economy will forge ahead 
along a healthy course. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59355 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic Reform To Be Accelerated in 1994 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0231B Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 30 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0231B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Jishen (2799 4949 4939): "Next Year's </F>
Reform Will Bring Overall Impetus and Key Breakthroughs"] 
  [Text] A relevant department informed reporters a few days 
ago that, in the 1994 implementation of the "Decisions" taken at 
the 3d Plenum of the 14th Party Central Committee, reform will 
bring with it overall impetus and key breakthroughs. 
Authorities are optimistic that next year will see an 
acceleration of reform and progress. 
  In 1994, the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy 
will select 100 medium-sized and large state-owned enterprises 
as experimental sites for conducting a modern enterprise system 
in the corporation form. For state-owned small enterprises, the 
chief measures taken will be combination leases, auction or 
sale, lease prior to sale, while some enterprises can also 
remold themselves according to the joint stock system. At 
present, for a great many of enterprises which lack the 
prerequisites for remolding into corporations, the key is to 
implement the "Enterprise Law," "Rules for Transforming the 
Operational Mechanism," and the "Rules for Supervising 
State-Owned Assets," linking enterprises' rights of 
self-operation with the system of property rights supervision, 
to give positive impetus to property rights system reform. The 
impetus for pricing reform will continue in the next year, with 
cancellation at the earliest possible date of the dual-track 
pricing system for means of production, acceleration of the 
process of marketization of key production element pricing, 
positive reform of the current commodity circulation system, and 
strengthening and development of a commodity market network. 
This is an important program of reform. The key points in 
cultivating a market system are the financial market, the labor 
force market, the real estate market, the technology market, and 
the information market. 
  The key points in reform of the revenue system are changing 
the current local revenue contract system into a tax division 
system on the grounds of reasonably dividing the rights of the 
central government and local revenues, setting up systems for 
central revenue and local revenue, and, meanwhile, implementing 
a system for refunding and transferring payments to localities 
from central government revenues to regulate the distribution 
structure and regional structure. The key points in financial 
system reform are strengthening the role of the central bank, 
setting up the central banking system as soon as possible to 
implement currency policy independently under the leadership of 
the State Council, regulating and controlling the currency 
supply to keep currency value stable, separating policy type 
business and commercial type business in the banking system, 
organizing and building a policy type bank, changing specialized 
banks into commercial banks, allowing them to become enterprise 
type financial organs. The key points in investment system 
reform will be dividing investment main entities and scope of 
responsibility along the lines of investment areas, 
progressively establish risk responsibility for legal person 
investment and bank credit, confirming the investment scope for 
government and enterprises, replacing the administrative 
examination and approval system currently in operation with 
project registration and maintenance of a file system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59356 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inflation: Analysis, Forecast </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0222A Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] in Chinese No 10, 11 Oct 93 pp 19-22, 7 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0222A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Qiusheng (0491 4428 3932), affiliated with </F>
the State Statistical Bureau's General Office; edited by Xie Wei 
(6200 5898): "An Assessment of China's Inflation Problem"] 
  [Text] In a country with a market economy (including a 
planned economy in which market factors have reached a certain 
proportion), price changes are a comprehensive indicator 
reflecting the state of the country's economic operations, as 
well as a key macroeconomic regulation and control target. Too 
high inflation has a destructive impact on the normal growth of 
a national economy. While the formative mechanisms in China's 
inflation of recent years are complex, an analysis of their 
mutual impact constitutes the basic analytical framework for and 
policy thinking on inflation. Since the beginning of 1993, 
sustained strong demand has pulled and supported hyper economic 
expansion, gradually becoming a key factor in the new round of 
runaway inflation. This should arouse our full attention. 
<H3>  I. The Basic Current State of Market Prices: Moderate 
Inflation </H3>
  Since the beginning of 1993, as our national economy has 
continued to grow at a high rate, while our pace of conversion 
of price formation mechanisms has accelerated, potential 
inflationary pressures have been released faster, with market 
prices showing a strong upward momemtum. Having topped 10 
percent for the first half, our inflation rate for 1993 will 
undoubtedly reach double digits at that rate, with it already 
being a foregone conclusion that it will exceed the planned 
controlled-price index of 6 percent, to make 1993 our inflation 
peak since 1988. Our key current inflation features are: 
  1. Inflationary energies are being released faster, with all 
categories of prices on a clear upward trend. Under the dual 
impact of price-reform policy results and rapid growth in public 
demand, our market prices in 1993 are in a state of all-out 
rapid increase, with particularly sharp rises in the prices of 
capital goods and labor. For the first five months, purchase 
prices were up 31 percent from the same period in 1992 for 
energy and raw materials, 11.2 percent for agricultural capital 
goods, 27.2 percent for service projects, and sharply also for 
capital and foreign exchange. From an urban and rural 
perspective, while urban prices sustained high increases, rural 
prices were also in a clearly rising state. For the first five 
months, our national cost-of-living price was up 12 percent from 
the same period in 1992, including rises of 12.8 percent for 
cities and towns (16.7 percent for the 35 large- and 
medium-sized cities), 11.3 percent for rural areas (with rural 
wholesale and cost-of-living prices both higher that those for 
cities in May), and 10.2 percent for national retail prices. 
  2. Retail prices, on the heels of their higher base for the 
fourth quarter of 1992, have shown a monthly upward momentum. In 
comparison to the same months in 1992, they were up 8.4 percent 
for January, 8.7 percent for February, 10.2 percent for March, 
10.9 percent for April, and 12.5 percent for May, with retail 
price rises averaging 10.2 percent for the first five months, 
and estimated to have risen 10.5 percent for the first half, for 
an increase close to or exceeding that for the first half of 
1988, showing the beginnings of a new price-rise peak period. In 
1993 in particular, cost-of-living prices in our 35 large- and 
medium-sized cities have grown monthly in comparison to the same 
months in 1992, being up 14.7 percent for January, 15.3 percent 
for February, 17 percent for both March and April, 19.5 percent 
for May, and 21.6 percent for June, for an average of 17.4 
percent for the first half (including 14.7 percent for consumer 
goods and 38.9 percent for service projects), with the 
first-half rise being higher than the 14.5 percent for the same 
period in 1988, to make 1993 our highest price-rise peak since 
1990. 
  3. As to our price-change structure, the lagging impact of 
1992 price rises made up about one-third. In 1992, the state and 
localities speeded up their pace of reform, raising grain buying 
and selling prices, adjusting prices of capital goods, such as 
railway freight, coal, and natural gas, and devolving pricing 
jurisdiction or deregulating prices on a large scale, which 
further expanded the market price-regulation percentage. It is 
estimated that 3.3 points of the market retail price rise for 
the first five months of 1993 were due to the lagging impact of 
1992 prices, which impact was nearly one-third, while new 
price-rise factors in 1993 (including spontaneous rises and 
structural adjustments) made up the other two-thirds. 
  As to our price-change regional structure, rural retail 
price 
rises were close to those for cities and towns, with 
particularly high price increases in our 35 large- and 
medium-sized cities. Comparing the first five months of 1993 to 
the same period in 1992, rural retail prices were up 9.9 
percent, only 0.6 points lower than the urban retail price rise 
(10.5 percent), including April and May when retail prices rose 
even more in the rural areas than in the cities. This was due 
mainly to the lagging impact of the successive upward 
adjustments in recent years by the state of energy, fuel, and 
oils and foodstuffs prices showing up gradually on rural 
markets. It is predicted that for 1993, retail price rises may 
be higher in the rural areas than in cities and towns. 
  4. As to the commodities driving price change, price changes 
were larger mainly for ones, such as grain, building materials, 
fuels, agricultural capital goods, and service projects. 
  A) The deregulation of grain prices, pushing up food prices, 
has also become a key factor in the high retail-price rises. 
Comparing the first five months of 1993 to the same period in 
1992, retail food prices were up 10.4 percent, including a 
retail price rise of 27.9 percent for grain, which one item 
alone caused 1.9 points of the retail price rise, meaning that 
about 20 percent of the impact came from the grain price-rise 
factor, and a retail price rise of 8.7 percent for nonstaple 
foods (including 1.6 percent for fresh vegetables, 10 percent 
for meat, poultry, and eggs, and 13 percent for aquatic 
products). 
  As to manufactured consumer goods, a comparison of the first 
five months of 1993 to the same period in 1992 shows retail 
prices up 39.7 percent for fuels and 25.9 percent for 
construction and decoration materials, with these two items 
having a joint impact on retail price rises of 2.9 points, or as 
much as one-fourth. Various other commodity retail prices were 
respectively up 4.3 percent for clothing, 3.7 percent for 
everyday commodities, 5.4 percent for books, newspapers, and 
magazines, and 9.7 percent for drugs and medical articles, but 
down 1.1 percent for cultural and recreational articles. 
  B) Agricultural capital goods prices are up sharply. 
Comparing the first five months of 1993 to the same period in 
1992, agricultural capital goods retail prices were up 11.2 
percent, causing 1.3 points of the retail price rise. This 
includes prices up from the same period in 1992 by 8.8 percent 
for chemical fertilizer, 46.7 percent for farm-machinery 
gasoline, and 2.6 percent for agricultural plastic film, but 
down 2.3 percent for pesticides. This was due mainly to the 
greater impact of new price-rise factors in 1993. The monthly 
comparative indexes for the first five months were respectively 
102.5, 103.3, 104.3, 102.5, and 101.6. An analysis of the year's 
trends shows agricultural capital goods prices were impacted by 
higher costs and expenses in the production and marketing links, 
with the rises likely to grow still further. 
  C) Service price rises are growing steadily. Service price 
rises have been in double digits ever since August 1992, with a 
comparison of the first five months of 1993 to the same period 
in 1992 showing service prices up 27.2 percent (for January 
through May respectively 22.9 percent, 25.9 percent, 28 percent, 
29.3 percent, and 29.9 percent), exceeding 1988's 16.2 percent 
and 1989's 23.9 percent, and causing 3.1 points of the 
cost-of-living price rise. This was due mainly to all areas 
generally raising train and long-distance-bus ticket prices, as 
well as deregulating or adjusting prices for items, such as 
telegrams, tuition and miscellaneous expenses, child-care 
charges, bathhouse, rest home, and park admission tickets, and 
movie tickets. 
<H3>  II. The Immediate Impact of Inflationary Pressures on the 
Economy: A Further Analysis and Forecast </H3>
  While China's economy has maintained a high growth rate 
since 
the beginning of the 1980s, with our GDP growing at an average 
rate of 8.9 percent a year, including a high of 11.5 percent 
from 1984 to 1988, our rapid economic growth has been 
accompanied by progressive price rises, with the high inflation 
accompanying the rapid economic growth in 1988 in particular 
being a direct factor that forced the improvement and 
rectification campaign. As higher economic growth rates 
usually are accompanied by higher inflation, with the two 
showing a feature of changing in the same direction, which has 
been proved in both domestic and overseas economic practice, the 
period of high growth that our economy entered in 1992 due to 
rapid investment growth has steadily raised the attention of 
those in all walks of life toward the inflation problem, with 
some in both theoretical circles and actual working departments 
continuously calling for vigilance against an inflationary 
rebound, and anti-inflation also remaining a key item in 
macroeconomic monitoring and government macroeconomic regulation 
and control. 
  We hold that there now exist both factors that are 
sharpening 
inflationary pressures, as well as ones that are curbing and 
easing inflation. At present, the latter factors are weakening 
in impact, while the former ones are growing. In light of the 
market price-rise features and factors manifested in the first 
half, which are similar to those in 1988, we predict that it 
will be hard to curb the price rise momentum in the second half, 
for which our key grounds are: 
  1. Increasing public demand will strengthen the [upward] 
pull 
on market prices. As demand-driven inflation has a lag period, 
such inflation shows up first in higher capital goods prices. 
As to our current capital goods price changes, the upward 
momentum still shows no clear signs of containment. This means 
that for enterprises with currently weak consumption capability, 
higher basic product prices will eventually result in retail 
market prices rising correspondingly. And investment, after a 
certain lag period, will generally be 40-percent converted to 
consumption funds. While such conversion is certainly not 
evident in today's market, it will be reflected somewhat on 
markets as time passes. Then it will spur consumer demand to 
faster growth, increasing market demand pressure, to turn the 
upward pull on market prices from a possibility into a reality. 
On the other hand, our money supply is now obviously growing 
faster than our economy. Due to the changes in our overall 
assets-liability items in particular, there is still great 
pressure to put money into circulation. While our GDP grew 13.9 
percent in the last half, our current M&lt;inf&gt; 0&lt;/inf&gt;  is growing 
at a high rate of more than 50 percent, with our M&lt;inf&gt; 0&lt;/inf&gt; 
demand elasticity nearing 4 (and our M&lt;inf&gt; 1&lt;/inf&gt;  and 
M&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  demand elasticity coefficients also similar), 
much higher than the normal value of 1.5-2, and higher even than 
1992's 3. 
  2. The gradual conversion to market-oriented price-formation 
mechanisms will further strengthen spontaneous price-rise 
factors. China is now in a stage of conversion to markets, 
requiring rationalization of longstanding too- low basic product 
prices, which is inevitably accompanied by a high price-rise 
period. In particular, as tertiary industries further expand, 
the trend of higher labor prices will grow more evident. And in 
the current state of our still imperfect market system and 
relatively weak price-control oversight, spontaneous commodity 
price rises will be unavoidable. The last few months of market 
price changes show that spontaneous price-rise factors are 
growing steadily. On the other hand, cost-driven pressures are 
continuing to grow. As intermediate investment product demand 
is up, in addition to the larger change in capital goods prices, 
prices are clearly rising. In the first quarter, our national 
manufactured goods factory-price index rose about 18 percent, 
while the comparable product costs of budgeted state-owned 
industrial enterprises rose 11.1 percent. Based on monitoring 
by our commodity sector, our key commodity market prices are now 
all in a general upswing, with some commodity prices rising 
sharply, to exceed international market prices. In the first 
quarter of 1993, our commodity system's capital goods prices, on 
the heels of 1992's higher price base, continued to rise 38.2 
percent. Meanwhile, the price rises are still continuing to grow 
in scope, with the larger increases being mainly for items, such 
as rolled steel, lumber, cement, machinery and electronic 
products, and motor vehicles, which merits attention. 
  3. The follow-up impact of higher business taxes will 
gradually show up. In May, the state raised the commodity 
retail business-tax rate from 3 percent to 5 percent. The 
projection is that if the retail sector (business) incorporates 
all of the higher business tax into sale commodity prices, this 
will push 1993's retail commodity prices up about 1.3 points. 
All areas report that the increase in the business tax has 
pushed market prices up 3-5 percent, or more than the 
business-tax increase itself. In addition, some regions have 
delayed putting the new business tax into effect, which will be 
bound to increase the retail market price rise for the last half. 
  4. GATT membership will impact China's market prices. Once 
we rejoin the GATT, China's prices will get on track with those 
on international markets, which will inevitably tend to raise 
our price levels. On the other hand, along with 
foreign-exchange system-reform, the force of lower exchange 
rates to encourage exports and curb imports will strengthen, 
with higher purchase prices for export commodities pulling up 
similar domestic commodity prices to a certain extent. In 
particular, since the last half of 1992, our market 
foreign-exchange conversion price has seen a sharp increase. 
Our foreign-exchange quota conversion price per U.S. dollar was 
0.45 yuan at the beginning of 1992, up to 1.74 yuan by the end 
of 1992, over the 2-yuan mark for the first quarter of 1993, up 
to 5 yuan by the second quarter, and above 10 yuan by the end of 
June, even higher than 11 yuan on some black markets. While the 
effects of our macroeconomic regulation and control policy have 
brought certain new changes since July, there is still quite a 
large gap between this [market]-conversion price and our 
official exchange rate. 
  An analysis of the historical data and China's current 
sustainability in all areas shows that in China, price rises 
constitute low inflation at 4-8 percent, moderate inflation at 
9-14 percent, severe inflation at 15-18 percent, and runaway 
inflation when over 18 percent, meaning that 1993 will be a year 
of moderate inflation. But as our current material base and 
public psychological and economic sustainability are much 
stronger than in 1988, short of an abrupt change, we will not 
see the sharp panic-buying and social unrest of 1988, for which 
our grounds are: 
  1. From the perspective of the economic growth in all 
countries throughout the world, price rises due to inadequate 
infrastructures and raw material shortages are a normal 
market-economy phenomenon, as well as the price that China must 
pay for reform and getting onto track with international prices. 
China's current order of too low basic product prices with 
higher manufactured goods prices has not yet been basically 
reversed. As we make the conversion from a planned to a market 
economy, the products formerly regulated and controlled by the 
state will enter markets, bringing quite glaring conflicts 
between supply and demand. When our old administrative 
regulation and control means have lost effectiveness, while the 
new market restraint forces have not yet been genuinely 
established, the market-driven operations will inevitably touch 
off price rises. On the other hand, China's GATT membership 
will also require us to speed up our pace of price-mechanism 
conversion, spurring China's pricing system to shift to an 
international orientation. This will require us to sharply 
raise our basic product prices to keep them from flowing on a 
large scale to overseas markets, which would exacerbate our 
supply shortage of domestic market-resource products. 
  2. From the angle of China's economic-system reform 
experience, during periods of high economic growth, price 
structural adjustment is bound to cause price rises. In 
China's current economic system, high economic growth relies 
mainly on the drive of high investment and industrial production 
growth. Generally speaking, a high-growth economy cannot be 
founded on the basis of price stability, but rather needs prices 
to be adjusted and stimulated through constant change. Or it 
could be said that a certain amount of inflation is a 
hard-to-avoid price for economic growth. 
  3. As to overall supply and demand balance, our supply and 
demand differential for the first half of 1993 was only 6.1 
percent, lower than the normal level of 10 percent. But this 
demand exceeding supply was seen mainly in staple capital goods, 
while the opposite order of supply exceeding demand on consumer 
goods markets had not yet changed. As to the supply and demand 
order of over 700 staple manufactured consumer goods for the 
first half of 1993, commodities for which supply exceeded demand 
or where supply and demand were in balance made up 90 percent. 
In addition, our improved agricultural situation in 1993 gives 
our market a solid foundation. But in 1988, supply and demand 
were severely out of balance, with demand 7.7 percent higher 
than supply, far exceeding the normal 5 percent, and the gap of 
demand exceeding supply being larger mainly for consumer goods. 
  4. As individual income is growing more than prices are 
rising, economic sustainability is up. Comparing the first half 
of 1993 to the same period in 1992, urban residents' monthly 
income for living costs was estimated to be 186 yuan, up 27.9 
percent from the same period in 1992 and, corrected for 
inflation, up a real 13.8 percent (which figure was up only 2 
percent for the first half of 1988, and down 3 percent for the 
first half of 1989). 
  5. Political and social stability are maturing the consumer 
mindset. As consumer demand is now diversified, with no new 
consumer fever yet formed, and consumer mindset matured, 
unchecked competitive consumption out of line with incomes is 
now extremely rare. Urban and rural savings deposits, under 
sharp attack by a great wave of all types of bonds, stocks, and 
public fundraising, still showed a balance of 1.2789 trillion 
yuan by the end of June, up 124.3 billion yuan from the 
beginning of the year. While panic buying was experienced by 
some some areas in 1993, it was focused mainly on items, such as 
gold jewelry, foreign currencies, and imported and domestic 
brand-name household electronics and expensive wool textiles, 
lasting for a shorter time. But the panic buying in 1988 was on 
a large national scale, involving commodities all the way from 
refrigerators and color TVs to needles and thread, as well as 
lasting considerably longer. 
  In addition, through 14 years of market-oriented reform, 
China's economic climate and growth mechanisms have undergone 
great changes, so that our inflation-formation mechanisms and 
manifestations are correspondingly somewhat different than in 
the past, which point also needs attention when we analyze 
current price conditions and future trends. We hold that there 
now exist both factors that would set off inflation, such as 
rapid economic growth, sharply higher fixed assets investment, 
new loans and currency put into circulation far exceeding our 
economic growth rate, and rising product costs, as well as ones 
that would curb too fast price rises. So our real price changes 
are the result of the contest between these two factors, with 
the ones that would touch off rapid price rises now temporarily 
having the upper hand. 
  So as to our current price rises, we should neither be 
panic-stricken or lower our guard, but rather should tighten our 
macroeconomic regulation and control, by taking the right steps 
to keep price rises from exceeding the warning line. As to our 
economic operating trends for the last half, the choice of 
regulation and control targets gives us two possibilities: 1) 
We could take forceful regulation and control steps for an 
overall retrenchment, to provide an overlapping of policy 
effects and economic cyclical impact, which might quickly bring 
our economy from the "red-light zone" into a sharp decline, for 
a great fluctuation; 2) or we could apply moderate fine-tuning 
to sharply strengthen our structural adjustment, in which case 
our economy might make a soft landing from the "red-light zone" 
onto a basically normal operating field (the "yellow-light 
zone"). Our analytical projection is based on the second 
possibility. 
  As to the various factors impacting our second-half economic 
growth, the favorable aspects are: 1) the second-half is driven 
by a high-speed economic growth momentum; 2) the 
market-regulation impact is stronger; 3) comsumer goods market 
sources are abundant, with supply greater than demand as before, 
and public purchasing mindset basically stable; 4) incomes are 
growing more than prices are rising, bringing somewhat greater 
reform sustainability; 5) while our economic operations are 
subject to many problems meriting attention, they are generally 
still within the limits of possible macroeconomic regulation and 
control, with previous adjustment experience and lessons that 
can be drawn on. The unfavorable aspects are mainly that our 
current management system has too many links to be efficient, 
and that all macroeconomic fine-tuning steps are subject to too 
long of a time-lag, which might further exacerbate the various 
currently existing conflicts and problems. In addition, our 
regional and industrial growth is uneven, with all interested 
parties not having a consistent understanding of conditions, 
adding to macroeconomic regulation and control difficulties. 
Based on an overall analysis of the abovementioned conditions, 
premised on taking fine-tuning steps, and short of the 
unexpected, our key 1993 economic growth indexes will end up in 
the following manner: 
  -- Our economy will maintain its high growth. Our 1993 GDP 
is predicted to reach about 3 trillion yuan, up around 12 
percent from 1992. 
  -- Our industrial growth priorities will be heavy, coastal, 
and nonstate industries. Affected by "bottleneck" restraints 
and 1992's large bases, our second-half industrial production 
rate will recede somewhat. Our 1993 GVIO is predicted to top 4 
trillion yuan, up about 22 percent, including heavy industry up 
approximately 23 percent, and light industry up around 21 
percent. 
  -- Our agriculture will expand steadily. While our 1993 GVAO 
is predicted to grow about 4 percent, our grain, cotton, 
oilseed, and sugar output will be down to varying degrees, with 
our livestock and aquatic breeding industries continuing to 
maintain their growth momentum. 
  -- Our investment will grow rapidly. Fund shortages in the 
last half may make the growth decline. Our 1993 overall fixed 
assets investment is predicted to reach nearly 1 trillion yuan, 
up about 40 percent from 1992 and, corrected for inflation, for 
real working growth of around 20 percent. 
  -- Our domestic market sales order will be rapid growth of 
investment products and acclerated growth of consumer goods. 
Our 1993 retail commodity sales turnover is predicted to reach 
about 1.35 trillion yuan, up around 21 percent, with our capital 
goods sales turnover growing more than 40 percent. 
  -- It will remain hard to change our foreign trade order of 
high import growth and low export growth. Our 1993 exports are 
predicted to amount to $92 billion, up about 8 percent, while 
our imports will top $100 billion, for growth of approximately 
25 percent. Our national cash reserves will be below the $20 
billion mark. 
  -- While our national credit scope is expected to be 
basically controlled, a lot of currency will be put into 
circulation. It is predicted that while our 1993 new bank loans 
will amount to approximately 410 billion yuan, our currency 
issue is likely to reach nearly 165 billion yuan. 
  -- Our urban and rural individual income growth will be in a 
state of "one fast, one slow." It is predicted that our 1993 
urban resident cost-of-living income will average 2,300 yuan, 
for real growth of about 11 percent corrected for inflation, 
while our rural individual net income will average around 870 
yuan, for growth of approximately 3 percent corrected for 
inflation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59357 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economists Discuss Enterprise Funds Shortage </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0196B Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 2 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0196B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Yu Huiyin (7411 6450 7299): "How To </F>
Alleviate Enterprise Funds Shortage--Figures in Capital's 
Economic Circles Explore Countermeasures"] 
  [Text] Marked success has been obtained in strengthening 
regulation and control, but the contradiction of a funds 
shortage in state-owned large and medium-sized enterprises has 
also appeared. How is this contradiction to be alleviated? The 
Enterprise Management Institute of the Capital Research and 
Development Corporation, the Members' Work Department of the 
China Enterprise Management Association, and the Capital 
Entrepreneurs' Club on the day before yesterday jointly held a 
symposium at which this "hot point" issue was explored. 
  Figures from economic circles attending the symposium said 
that the current widespread shortage of funds in state-owned 
large and medium-sized enterprises had caused a reappearance of 
triangular debts exceeding the scale and rate of those in 1989, 
and that the amount of bank savings by enterprises had fallen; 
it is now difficult for the enterprises to maintain normal 
production and operation. The production and earnings of some 
state-owned large and medium-sized enterprises that, in the 
first half of the year, had been at a moderate rate and had had 
fairly good gains, had rapidly fallen back. For example, in the 
especially large enterprise Capital Iron and Steel Complex, 
which has abundant strength, the corporate debt funds are more 
than double what they were in the peak period of 1989. Since the 
beginning of this year, banks have given Capital Iron and Steel 
Complex 10 million yuan in working capital loans and at the same 
time have taken away 77 million yuan; in addition, the market 
changes make it impossible to obtain loans paid in advance, and 
a serious funds shortage has appeared. 
  It was widely held by those at the symposium that, from an 
analysis of the macroeconomic economy, the fundamental reason 
for the current funds shortage was that investment in fixed 
assets has increased too sharply and has taken up too many 
funds. Last year and this year work was completed on more than 
100 billion yuan worth of fixed assets investment projects, and 
they required the disposition of auxiliary working capital in a 
1:03 ratio, which squeezed the the enterprises' existing working 
capital. In addition, the rising prices of the means of 
production and raw materials has added to the demand for 
enterprise working capital; in the first nine months of this 
year, the amount of increase in loans for enterprise working 
capital was reduced compared with that in the same period of 
last year, and in the August the amount was reduced 10.39 
million yuan. The enterprises' nonstandard channels for raising 
funds have also been reduced. 
  Some of those attending the symposium pointed out that the 
finance and land management sectors have been overwhelmed by the 
"land craze" and the "exploitation craze." This has become a 
direct motive force for encouraging an over-rapid momentum for 
the increase of investment. For many projects the share system 
has been adopted, and the funds paid into them are not taken 
back. With these funds not being taken back, the funds that are 
taken back are funds that should not be taken out. Thus, in the 
state's reorganization of the money market, to a certain extent 
contradictions have been shifted to the production domain and 
the enterprises. 
  Speaking of state-owned large- and medium-sized enterprises 
themselves, everybody held that a crucial problem is that 
mechanisms to replenish these enterprises' working capital have 
not yet been formed. The low rate of growth and the too-heavy 
tax burden in several years in succession have caused, on 
average, the profits retained by the people in enterprises to be 
less than half those retained in 1988, and the capability to 
replenish working capital from retained profits to become weaker 
and weaker. In line with the stipulation that 1 percent of the 
sales income be used to replenish the working capital, the "two 
sides" in finance -- pursuing and liquidating -- will deepen the 
enterprises' dependence on banks. 
  With regard to the question of how to alleviate the funds 
shortage, the people attending the symposium unanimously 
maintained that the fundamental way to do this lies in deepening 
reform so as to enhance the vitality of state-owned large- and 
medium-sized enterprises and, at the same time, strengthen the 
comprehensiveness of the five major reforms and improve the 
enterprises' external environment. Yang Peixin [2799 1014 2450], 
a researcher at the Development Research Center of the State 
Council, said that, to practically handle the invigoration of 
state-owned large and medium-sized enterprises as a central link 
in the reform of the entire economic system, the tug-of-war 
struggle -- releasing rights-receiving rights-releasing rights 
-- is to be avoided. At present there are many ways, with regard 
to the funds problem, to handle the release of rights in a 
better way, invigorate the enterprises, and cause the 
enterprises to reap good returns. Zhu Renxue [2612 0088 1331], 
vice chairman of the China Enterprise Management Association, 
after giving a briefing on what he saw and heard during an 
investigation and study of enterprises over the recent several 
months, said that, in strengthening macroeconomic regulation and 
control, there remain 20-30 percent of the state-owned large- 
and medium-sized enterprises that are maintaining a growth in 
production and returns and that they do not feel that their 
funds are in very short supply. The operating mechanisms and 
management mechanisms of these enterprises are worthy of close 
attention and study. 
  Guo Zhishan [6753 1807 1472], deputy director of the 
Enterprise Department in the All-China Federation of Industry 
and Commerce, proposed four countermeasures to alleviate the 
funds shortage: 1) Concentrate the necessary working capital so 
that at any time the difficulties of state-owned large- and 
medium-sized enterprises are resolved. Checking the growth of 
triangular debts must be made an important objective of macro 
regulation and control. 2) Enterprises that have a debt larger 
than the average debt of enterprises as a whole must be closed 
down, i.e., their production stopped, they are merged, they are 
transferred, or they are declared bankrupt. Lawless elements 
who, in the name of triangular debts, intentionally erode the 
property of state-owned enterprises must be punished. 3) Regular 
channels that replenish the enterprises' working capital must be 
formed. 4) The growth of investment in fixed assets must be 
better controlled, emphasizing that investment in fixed assets 
and working capital must form a complete set. 
  Yang Kaisheng [2799 0418 3932], deputy director of the 
Planning Information Department in the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China, said that, as of the end of September, working 
capital loans had increased 63.3 billion yuan compared to their 
amount at the beginning of the year, an increase of 4 billion 
yuan compared to that of the same period last year. That the 
enterprises are not affected by this is mainly because of the 
time difference: in July and August bank funds were 
comparatively tight, in September the situation changed, and in 
September and October there was a fairly big increase in working 
capital loans; before long the enterprises will feel the effect 
of this. He maintained that not to depend on deepening reform 
and adjusting the structure to change the situation in which 
enterprise get low returns, and to only increase loans, would be 
like "digging up earth to fill a well." Currently the 
production and marketing rate is falling, and some of the newly 
added working capital loans have become "overstocked goods," 
which shows that we must get a tight grip on the industrial 
structure and the product mix. He advocated that short-term 
objectives and long-term plans for reform be formulated. Under 
the circumstances in which the financial supervision and control 
system is not sufficiently perfected, the legal system is not 
sound enough, and people do not have a strong enough 
understanding of financial risk, in comprehensively blending 
funds, direct finance capital should be made primary, but, 
speaking of adapting to the market economy's long-term 
objectives, we should create conditions for gradually opening up 
indirect finance capital. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59358 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> NATIONAL AFFAIRS, POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Symposiums Discuss Ownership Reform </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0196A Beijing JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 2 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0196A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Gao Lu (7559 6424): "Call for </F>
Reform of Ownership, Property Rights -- Brief Account of 
Seventh, Eighth Symposiums at `Forum on China's Market Economy'"] 
  [Text] Following China's deepening involvement in the 
reform of its economic system, especially since its decision to 
put into practice the socialist market economy, the question of 
property rights has gradually become a hot topic for theoretical 
circles to explore. On 24 September and 13 October the seventh 
and eighth symposiums of the "Forum on China's Market Economy" 
were respectively held. The subject discussed was the question 
of ownership and property rights in a market economy. The 
specialists and scholars at the symposiums gave their views and 
put forth many noteworthy viewpoints. 
  1. The Question of Ownership Should Become the Focal Point 
of 
Study and Reform 
  The subject discussed at the seventh symposium was the 
question of ownership in a market economy. It was unanimously 
held at the symposium tht, after it was decided that China would 
put into practice the socialist market economy, the study of the 
question of ownership should become the focal point of study in 
the circle of economists; ownership reform could have to go 
through a very long and difficult process, but the pace of 
reform must be accelerated. Centering on the question of 
ownership, the specialists and scholars in their discussions put 
forward the following viewpoints: 
  A) The "social ownership" advocated by Marx is directly 
integrated in individual ownership. The state ownership now 
existing on the national territory of China is not the social 
ownership talked about by Marx. State ownership is only a form 
of public ownership, and is also a fairly primitive form, not 
like the high-level form it was thought to be by people in the 
past. Some scholars believed that various forms of the worker 
individual ownership system should be made the basic form of the 
socialist ownership system. 
  B) Only by setting up a rational ownership structure can we, 
within the scope of society, fully integrate the worker and the 
means of production and create a more practical productive 
force. Therefore, the existing irrational ownership structure, 
which does not suit the market economy, needs to be reformed. 
  C) In the current reform in state-owned enterprises of 
separating government and enterprise, noteworthy phenomena have 
appeared. The first phenomenon is the "reversed signboard 
company," i.e., the original administrative and management 
organization changes its sign and becomes a group company. This 
is a case of going backward in the name of reform. The second 
phenomenon is "shotgun marriages" in which some small- and 
medium-sized enterprises are pinched together, causing them to 
lose their proper right to act on their own initiative. The 
third phenomenon is, on the pretext of effecting macroeconomic 
regulation and control, the methods of the command economy 
system have restrengthened administrative control. The 
appearance of these phenomena and trends show that the form of 
ownership currently in practice in the state-owned enterprises 
also must be reformed. 
  2. Thoughts on Ownership Reform 
  A) Some scholars said that, in the reform of state 
ownership, 
not only must the government and the enterprise be separated, 
but also the government and capital must be separated, changing 
sector management to trade association management. The 
government has begun to conduct experiments in this aspect at 
selected points, i.e., respectively changing the Ministry of 
Light Industry and the Ministry of Textile Industry to the China 
Light Industry Association and the China Textiles Association. 
These experimental points, which show the direction to go, 
should be popularized. 
  B) Encourage mutual competition between various kinds of 
ownership,and promote the development of various kinds of 
economic reforms and management forms. The new forms of 
ownerhsip proposed by those at the symposium were "state-owned, 
people-managed," "publicly owned, privately managed," "mixed 
economy," "share system," "share cooperative system," "social 
ownership," and "people-managed economy." Of these forms the one 
everybody was most interested and the one that was fairly fully 
analyzed was the "share cooperative system." 
  C) The share cooperative system should be developed 
vigorously. At the ownership level it is a mixed ownership 
system that makes use of both the cooperative system and the 
share system. It has components of the collective ownership 
system and cannot be equated to the private ownership system. 
Also, it need not be artificially pushed higher on the question 
of ownership; the key is to look at whether it promotes the 
development of productive forces. The share cooperative system 
is an integration of both capital (funds) and labor, and it is 
suited to complex, changeable productive forces. 
  3. Defining Property Rights Is the Foundation and Premise 
for 
Managing the Market Economy 
  The subject of the eighth symposium was the question of 
property rights. The majority of scholars at the symposium 
pointed out that, in state ownership under the original planned 
system, both profits and losses were actually borne by the 
state. This kind of property rights cannot suit the market 
economy mechanisms. Changing the contract system and management 
mechanisms cannot solve the problem of invigorating state-owned 
enterprises, and basically cannot solve the problem of property 
rights. If property rights are not clear, there will not be a 
property rights system that suits the market economy. Therefore, 
we must transform and take seriously the current property 
relationships of state-owned enterprises. 
  Some scholars pointed out that to deepen the reform of 
state-owned enterprises we must proceed from defining property 
rights so that they are made clear, and must transform the 
original property relationships; promote the separation of the 
kinds of rights, then further separate the ownership rights 
under the premise of maintaining the state's right of final 
ownership of state-owned property, and let the enterprise obtain 
the right of corporate ownership. Only in this way can 
state-owned enterprises be truly invigorated. 
  The definition of property rights, some specialists pointed 
out, makes clear the use rights, earnings rights, and 
possession-transfer rights for natural resources. At present, in 
the experimental-point enterprises for reforming the share 
system of state-owned enterprises, there still exists a problem, 
i.e., state-owned shares cannot circulate. Since state-owned 
shares do not circulate, the problem of effecting an optimum 
disposition of the property held by the state cannot be solved. 
Therefore, we must set up a new kind of property rights system 
for state-owned property in order to create conditions for 
state-owned enterprises to get on the track of the market 
economy. 
  4. The Share System Is the Best Form for Smoothing Out 
Enterprise Property Rights Relationships 
  In their discussions many scholars held that the modern 
share 
system was the great beginning of a commodity economy. It has 
many advantages, the most prominent of which is that property 
rights relationships are extremely clear. Therefore, putting the 
share system into practice is a fairly good choice for deepening 
enterprise reform and making clear entrprise property rights. 
Now many of the share systems being tried out have fallen into 
error. This is mainly manifested in "old wine in new bottles" -- 
the same old stuff with a new label--and is in reality a case of 
changing the appearance of the old system. For example: chairmen 
of the board are selected by the government departments in 
charge, and the sole purpose of some of them is to raise money. 
The transformation of the share system of state-owned 
enterprises must be done strictly in accordance with a 
standardized share system. 
  In the final analysis, the property rights problem is a 
problem of the relationships of interests. The share system, 
with regard to the property relationships and the enterprise 
system, strengthens the owner's restraints on the manager, so 
that the value of state-owned property is guaranteed to maintain 
or increase its value. 
  5. Establish the Idea That "Property Rights Are Sacred and 
Inviolable" 
  Some scholars at the symposium pointed out that the 
constitution stipulates that public ownership is to be 
maintained as the main part, existing side by side with various 
forms of ownerhip. Under any ownership system, property should 
be sacred and inviolable. Both public property and private 
property should be sacred and inviolable; if they are not, the 
constitution becomes a mere scrap of paper, personal safety 
cannot be ensured, the economy cannot develop normally, and the 
state will lose prestige in the eyes of the people. 
  The specialists and scholars from economic theoretical 
circles attending the two symposiums included: Yu Guangyuan 
[0060 0342 6678], Gong Yuzhi [7895 5148], Zhu Houze [4281 0624 
3419], Dong Fureng [5516 6534 4356], Lin Zili [2651 1311 0500], 
Wang Jue [3769 3778], Yang Qixian [2799 0796 0341], Feng Lanrui 
[7458 5695 3843], He Wei [0149 0251], Song Yangyan [1345 7402 
8827], Wan Dianwu [5502 0368 2976], Fang Sheng [2455 3932], Tang 
Zongkun [0781 1350 3824], Xiao Liang [2556 0081], Dong Guoying 
[5516 0948 2819], Fang Gongwen [2455 1872 3306], Liu Wei [0491 
0251], Wei Jie [7614 2638], and He Yang [6320 7122]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59359 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Establishes 10 Work Tasks for 1994 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  SK1001235494 Changchun Jilin People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 9 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK1001235494 </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun Jilin People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The province will shoulder many economic 
restructuring tasks in 1994. The provincial party committee and 
the provincial government put forward 10 tasks for making key 
breakthroughs. 
  The first reform task is to positively explore effective 
ways 
for setting up a modern enterprise system. The second task is 
to comprehensively sell and transfer the property rights of 
small-sized state-owned industrial and commercial enterprises. 
The third task is to positively develop state-owned and 
civilian-run enterprises. The fourth task is to further develop 
enterprise associations. The fifth task is to speed up the 
reform of the state-owned property management system. The sixth 
task is to vigorously promote the establishment of the system 
governing markets with the focus on the markets for production 
factors. The seventh task is to firmly grasp the organization 
and establishment of local cooperative banks and to standardize 
the development of the financial organizations other than banks. 
The eighth task is to strengthen the extent of reforming the 
social guaranteeing system. The ninth task is to exert efforts 
to experiment with the reform of [words indistinct]. The tenth 
task is to speed up the system reform of development zones and 
open zones. 
  To realize these 10 tasks in the new situation with new 
special features of reform, the provincial party committee and 
the provincial government urged that we should conscientiously 
study and comprehensively understand the guidelines of the 
decision and work out feasible reform programs according to the 
arrangements of the state and the province and in line with the 
local actual conditions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59360 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial Urges Improvement of Banks' Reputation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0235B Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO in Chinese 13 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0235B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Further Establish Banks' Good Image"] </F>
  [Text] Comrade Jiang Zemin emphasized in his report to the 
14th CPC Congress: "All sectors and businesses should emphasize 
the construction of professional ethics, gradually formulate 
norms of professional ethics which are appropriate in view of 
their own characteristics, and resolutely rectify the erroneous 
tendency in various sectors and businesses toward seeking 
personal gain through using one's position." In the critical 
period of efforts to accelerate the reform of the financial 
system so as to meet the demands of the construction of a system 
of socialist market economy, the vigorous promoting of the 
construction of socialist spiritual civilization in the 
financial sector, especially the enhancement of the construction 
of banks' professional ethics, the strengthening of the 
cohesiveness of the ranks of financial workers, the 
encouragement of the valuable spirit of hard pioneering work, 
selfless sacrifice, and honesty and self-discipline, and further 
establishing banks' good image, is of great significance for 
accomplishing the difficult but glorious task given by the state 
to the financial sector. 
  The CPC Central Committee and the State Council have 
repeatedly emphasized that in the course of reform and opening 
up, it is absolutely necessary to persist in fighting corruption 
for a long time. Banks are special enterprises which engage in 
the business of money, and the main channels through which 
enterprises get funds. Under the current situation where legal 
supervision and internal constraining mechanisms are not fully 
developed, corruption is also prone to happen and spread in the 
financial sector. The big and major embezzlement and 
bribe-taking cases revealed recently by the news media have 
sounded the alarm for the people: Fighting corruption and 
promoting honesty in the financial sector are a difficult and 
long-term task in the course of reform and opening up. 
  As Comrade Deng Xiaoping has pointed out, clean government 
construction depends first on education and second, on the legal 
system. Focusing on prevention through doing a good job of 
carrying out education on banks' professional ethics in an 
expeditious manner so as to improve the overall quality of 
financial personnel is of especially critical importance. The 
existence of a good habit of observing professional ethics and a 
strong sense of professional ethics not only affects a person's 
code of conduct, but is also the precondition for establishing 
banks' good image and improving their reputation. 
  Currently we must carry out further efforts to establish 
banks' good image in society and improve banks' reputation. 
Banks' reputation is the basis for banks' survival, and the most 
important way to improve banks' reputation is to enhance banks' 
self-construction so as to win the trust of enterprises at large 
and the social public. We must proceed with the enhancement of 
the construction of banks' professional ethics by doing three 
things: First, advocate devotion to one's duties, 
trustworthiness, self-discipline and self-respect, diligence, 
and being responsible; establish the idea of collectivism; 
heighten the sense of responsibility and sense of mission on the 
part of cadres and workers; and overcome the tendency to be 
passive. Second, advocate doing hard and pioneering work, acting 
in accordance with the public interest and being honest, 
refraining from the pursuit of personal interests, and making 
selfless sacrifices; establish the idea of serving the people 
whole-heartedly; raise cadres' and workers' conscientiousness in 
being honest and exercising self-discipline; restore banks' 
"three iron things" (iron funds, iron accounts, and an iron 
abacus) reputation; and resist the corruptive and corrosive 
effects of money worship, hedonism, and ultraselfishness; and 
third, promote the sense of competition and sense of efficiency 
entailing an eagerness to carry out reform, explorations, and 
creative work; and raise cadres' and workers' enthusiasm for 
financial reform. 
  As should be pointed out, in the course of reform and 
opening 
up in the past 15 years, most financial institutions have 
adhered to the policy of "doing two jobs" and "being tough on 
two fronts," and given emphasis to enhancing the work of 
educating employees on ideological and political matters and on 
professional ethics. Most financial workers are honest, have 
self-discipline, are devoted to their duties, work hard, and 
provide friendly service, thereby making contributions to the 
efforts to manage well the financial work, to promote the 
construction of socialist spiritual civilization, and to reform 
the financial system. In February this year, three grass-roots 
financial units and one employee were gloriously named learning 
from Lei Feng advanced groups and one individual, by four 
organizations including the CPC Central Propaganda Department 
and the Central Committee of the Communist Youth League; in 
March 33 units and 39 comrades of the financial system were 
gloriously named "advanced groups in activities of learning from 
Lei Feng" and "advanced individuals in activities of learning 
from Lei Feng" respectively by the People's Bank of China and 
the Chinese Union of Financial Workers; of the 119 "advanced 
individuals of the nation who have acted bravely for a just 
cause" commended jointly by the CPC Central Propaganda 
Department and the Ministry of Public Security in August, 13 
were workers on the financial front; eight comrades of the 
financial system were gloriously named "March Eighth red flag 
holders of the nation" by the All-China Women's Federation... 
These advanced groups and individuals who have been commended 
only constitute a small proportion of the advanced models in the 
financial system. Over the several years, in addition to 
"financial guards" of the "Er Lan type" who fought bad elements 
bravely in order to protect the state's and people's property 
from being lost when bad elements were robbing banks, the 
financial sector has also seen many comrades who, working in the 
front line of financial work, are silently making selfless 
sacrifices; models of resisting corruption, remaining always 
uncorrupted, and honesty and self-discipline; and advanced 
groups and individuals who are engaged in hard pioneering work, 
who make vigorous efforts to produce improvements, who are eager 
to carry out reform, and who conduct bold explorations. Even 
amidst the disorder regarding financial discipline in the 
previous period, there also emerged a large number of advanced 
models who remained sober-minded, who refused to engage in 
inter-bank lending in violation of regulations, who did not use 
credit funds for trading in real estate and stocks, and who did 
a good job of managing well funds, the employees, and 
themselves. They are models for us in the financial system and 
the elite elements of our financial system. 
  The current task facing us with regard to financial work is 
very difficult and heavy. The Decision of the CPC Central 
Committee on Several Issues Relating to the Establishment of a 
System of Socialist Market Economy points out that large steps 
will be taken to reform the fiscal and taxation, financial, 
investment, and planning systems in a coordinated manner. Doing 
a good job of carrying out the reform of the financial system 
requires a united and stable team of financial cadres and 
employees who have a high fighting spirit and high morale, and 
calls for the creation of an atmosphere conducive to vigorous 
efforts to make improvements, to energetic efforts to pursue 
lofty goals, and to bold explorations. Therefore, in conjunction 
with implementing the spirit of the Third Plenum of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee and the National Economic Work Conference, 
with studying the third volume of Deng Xiaoping Wenxuan 
(Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping) and the work of fighting 
corruption and promoting clean government, with enhancing 
ideological and political work and professional ethics 
education, and with implementing the spirit of the recently held 
conference of presidents of branches of the People's Bank 
nationwide and based on consideration of the actual situation of 
financial work, the financial system should publicize the 
national advanced models in a big way, so that everyone has 
examples to emulate and target entities to catch up with. 
Through utilizing the power of examples, promote the activities 
of learning from the advanced and of competing in making 
contributions in the entire system, so as to stimulate the 
fighting spirit, inspire people, heighten morale, enhance the 
cohesiveness and centripetal tendency of the financial system as 
a whole, and promote further establishing banks' good image, 
thereby making the construction of socialist spiritual 
civilization in the financial system reach a new level. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59361 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Five Types of IOU's Disturb Finance Sector </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 10, 18 Oct 
93 pp 55-56 </F>

<F P=103> Hong </F>
<F P=104>  Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Manke: "Five Types of IOU Slips </F>
of Different Colors Disturb Financial Sector -- Peculiar Sign of 
`All Five Sons Passing Civil Examination With Flying Colors'"] 
  [Text] The financial sector in China is quite abnormal 
recently. There emerges a strange phenomenon of IOU slips of 
five different colors prevailing in the realm of circulation. 
These slips have become the lubricants in China's financial 
sector just next to the renminbi as a secondary instrument of 
payment. 
  As an economic center and hub, China's financial sector was 
quite abnormal this summer. There was a shortage of cash and 
funds. There emerged a phenomenon of so-called, "All five sons 
passing civil examination with flying colors" -- namely, white 
IOU slips, red IOU slips, green IOU clips, yellow IOU slips and 
black IOU slips. For a short period, these slips have become the 
lubricants in China's financial sector, next to the renminbi as 
a secondary instrument of payment. 
<H5>  White IOU Slips Owe Peasants Several Billion Yuan </H5>
  1. White IOU slips. These are IOU slips issued by the state 
in lieu of cash when it purchases farm and sideline products 
from peasants. In recent years, the purchasing departments in 
China's rural areas, particularly the grain and cotton producing 
districts in Central Plains, are short of funds. They have 
issued a large number of white IOU slips. When the purchasing of 
summer grain crops started in June this year, a large amount of 
funds earmarked for the purchasing of grain crops did not arrive 
on time. Misuse of state funds is everywhere. The 11 billion 
yuan earnest money needed for the purchasing of grain crops and 
cotton in the country fail to arrive on time. According to 
statistics compiled by the Bank of Agriculture in May, only six 
billion yuan in cash are available. 
  Since ancient times, the symptom of peasants selling grain 
to the state but failing to get paid has always indicated that 
troubled times are coming. News of small scale riots stirred up 
by peasants to buy chemical fertilizer in panic keeps pouring in 
from various localities. In this connection, the State Council 
held a special telephone meeting demanding that the local 
authorities ensure that funds for the purchasing grain and 
cotton arrive on time and that the phenomenon of issuing white 
IOU's must be eliminated. Liu Jiang, Minister of Agriculture, 
said that all the funds from the central authorities have 
already arrived. Wherever IOU slips appear, the responsible 
persons there will be severely punished, he added. 
<H5>  Green IOU's Owe Recipients of Postal Remittance Debts </H5>
  2. Green IOU's. These IOU's are issued by post offices to 
postal remittance recipients for the money they owe. Such green 
IOU slips began to appear in Central South, Southwest and North 
China at the beginning of 1993. They reached a peak during the 
Spring Festival. 
  For example, a large number of civilian workers from 
Sichuan, Guizhou, Hunan and other localities rushed to the 
coastal areas of Guangdong and Fujian to find jobs. When they 
earn money, they remit money back to their home towns. The 
amount of such remittances is on the increase every year. As a 
result, post offices at and below the county level are unable to 
pay cash to the recipients of such postal remittance because of 
shortage in funds. Whenever there is a trade fair, peasants 
often gather around the post office to withdraw money, but the 
post office is unable to pay in cash. Peasants in some 
localities are so angry that they break into post offices and 
beat up the postal clerks. 
  According to a CHINA DAILY report, the situation whereby 
peasants attack post offices prevails in 11 provinces. A survey 
shows that there are 200 million green IOU's in Hunan, 300 
million green IOU's in Sichuan Province, and each IOU owes 500 
renminbi in average. The main reason for this is attributed to 
the unreasonable form for settling accounts for postal 
remittance. Due to the fact that various departments fail to 
recognize the use of post offices as a main channel of fund 
circulation and that the banks cannot meet the demands of rural 
post offices in drawing money to pay for the post remittances, 
postal office have no other choice but issue more green IOU 
slips. 
<H5>  Red IOU's Owe Worker-Investors Debts </H5>
  3. Red IOU's. These are receipts with red stamps issued by 
the enterprises and institutions in various localities when they 
borrow money from their staff members and workers. This is a 
form of fund-raising from staff members and workers in one's own 
unit. 
  Officials point out that there are more and more red IOU 
slips in various localities throughout the country. No one can 
accurately compile statistics in this connection. In 1992 alone, 
the total amount of money raised in society reached more than 50 
billion yuan Renminbi. It was as high as 20 billion yuan during 
the first quarter of this year. 
  Due to the fact that red IOU slips constitute an internal 
fund-raising form in an enterprise or institution, the interest 
rate is usually higher than that paid by the bank for saving 
deposits or bond dividends by a large margin. Various units try 
their best to extend their tentacles to all sectors of the 
society. The most common form is to exploit peasants. For 
example, a factory in a certain city in Sichuan Province used 
the hiring of workers as a bait. As long as a peasant can pay 
5,000 yuan, he or she can work in the factory. As a result, it 
raised more than 300,000 yuan in a few days. This constitutes an 
irresistible temptation to peasants who are unable to work in 
the cities for generations. 
  The trend of internal money borrowing is like the Eight 
Immortals crossing the sea, each one showing his or her special 
prowess. Some enterprises issue bonds among the workers, while 
others ask workers to buy shares. Still others pay high 
interests to borrow money within one's own enterprise. An expert 
points out that red IOU slips are attractive, but they are 
extremely risky. Once the borrowers lost their investments, who 
is going to pay for these valueless IOU's ? 
  It is reported by newspapers that many people have suffered 
losses in investing their money in private fund-raising 
campaigns launched by various enterprises. The main reason is 
that the fund-raising companies make careless investments and 
fail to retrieve their capital, let alone make profits. There 
were scores of state organizations and journalist units raised 
funds within its own organization or unit to make investments in 
the so-called "Production Enterprises for New Products" and 
"Bases for Farm and Sideline Products." As a result, they failed 
to recover their capital. Many of them also used funds to 
illegally buy and sell foreign exchange, real estate and stocks 
and shares, and suffered losses. 
  China's largest financial fraud -- the "Great Wall" 
fund-raising case -- was exposed in July this year. It was a 
major case involving red IOU slips. More than 100,000 people 
were hoodwinked, and over one billion yuan renminbi were 
illegally seized and squandered. The kind of stupidity and 
frenzy driven by money shocked many people. It was rumored in 
Beijing that the "Great Wall" fraud was a major case involving 
high-ranking leaders of the central authorities including 
Premier Li Peng and his wife and some ministers. 
<H5>  Yellow IOU Slips Owe Bank Customers Debts </H5>
  4. Yellow IOU Slips. These are slips issued by the bank to 
its customers, when it fails to make payments at their request. 
Since the beginning of 1993, the amount of savings deposits in 
rural and urban areas in the country fluctuated enormously under 
the influence of the fund-raising campaigns, the flourishing 
stock market and the high inflation rate. A sign of negative 
growth which was rarely seen for many years has appeared, 
causing "extracorporeal circulation" of funds and a tight money 
situation. 
  As a result, it takes more than 20 days to normally transfer 
funds from one bank to another in the same city. Under the 
pressure of increasing demands for money and in order to 
alleviate the situation in fund shortage, the bank does not 
hesitate to sacrifice its own credit to procrastinate the check 
clearance procedure. Meanwhile, it issues yellow IOU slips to 
its customers who wish to draw money from the bank, trying to 
shift its own difficulties to other banks. As a result, it 
causes a chain reaction, forcing many banks to fail in meeting 
their payments. 
  Right now, a "debt chain" has been formed among the banks 
throughout the nation. Although banks use fines as a principal 
measure to strictly restrict the issuance of yellow IOU slips, 
some of the banks still cannot meet the payments, because they 
cannot receive money they expect to receive on time. Thus it is 
quite difficult to impose fines on banks under such 
circumstances. Due to the fact that the bank is unable to 
collect the large amount of money receivable, it has to extend 
the number of days needed to deposit the money into its 
customer's account. It has greatly lowered the rate of fund 
utilization and economic efficiency. As a result, the credit of 
the bank suffers a disastrous decline. 
  Thus, in order to ensure smooth production, some of the 
enterprises, on the one hand, keep a large amount of cash on 
hand for emergency use, while on the other hand, they try their 
best not to settle accounts through the banks. They often pay 
cash to do business among themselves, making the banks even more 
difficult to operate. 
<H5>  Black IOU Slips Owe Debtors of Underground Private Banks </H5>
  5. Black IOU Slips -- Right now, the industrial and 
commercial organizations, public security organs and banks have 
different views on whether or not pawnshops, private banks and 
private financing groups should be considered as members of the 
financial sector. As a result, these "financial institutions" 
have emerged with a legal status of people-to-people loaners. 
They have become a fashion for a time. People call the deposit 
slips of these highly risky and speculative "underground banks" 
as "black IOU slips." 
  Let us take Shanxi Province as an example, pawnshop business 
booms, and pawnshops mushroom in many counties and cities. 
According to a rough estimate, there are more than 20 large 
pawnshops in the province with their branches spreading over 70 
percent of the villages and counties in Southern Shanxi. 
Pawnshops not only attract a large of deposits by paying 
interests higher than the banks, but also extend loans in 
various forms. They directly collide with businesses of the 
local banks. In fact, they have created a situation of "private 
banks" monopolizing the financial sector. 
  For example, a private bank in Wafangdian, Liaoning 
Province, has attracted more than 100 million yuan deposits 
since 1991 in the legal form of people-to-people loans. "Bank 
Director" Chen Shulan's financial strengths and capabilities to 
make payments are far greater than the local banks. Even the 
local state Bank of Agriculture is affected by this private 
bank. Its customers withdraw as much as over 50 million yuan 
from the bank. Trying their best to lure deposits with high 
interests, this kind of private banks are becoming larger and 
large in scale. However, they often make unhealthy investments, 
and they have no regular income to pay the interests. Investors 
often find their deposits irretrievable, causing disputes and 
leading to murders. Tear down west wall to repair the east wall, 
they love to play money games of a vicious cycle. Once the 
dominoes fall, a large number of people with black IOU slips 
will lose everything they have. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59362 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Features of Personal Income Tax Amendment </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0209A Beijing ZHONGGUO SHUIWU BAO in Chinese 29 Nov 93 
pp 1, 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0209A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO SHUIWU BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Wenbin (0491 2429 1755): "A Crucial Step in </F>
the Perfection of China's Income Tax System"] 
  [Text] On 31 October 1993, the Fourth Session of the Eighth 
NPC Standing Committee approved the "Resolution on Amending the 
PRC Personal Income Tax Law," which amended personal income tax 
law will go into effect on 1 January 1994. The new personal 
income tax law will be very important in intensifying tax 
reform, streamlining our tax system, and making tax burdens 
fairer. 
  The amended personal income tax law preserves the continuity 
of the original policy, while making further additions and 
improvements aimed at changed circumstances, with the following 
distinct features: 
  It has a clear guiding ideology. The general 
guiding ideology of this amended personal income tax law is: To 
adapt to the needs of a socialist market economy by streamlining 
our tax system, making tax burdens fairer, strengthening the 
organization of revenues and the proper regulation of personal 
income, preserving national rights and interests, and enhancing 
public tax payment awareness to improve the personal income tax 
collection system. Based on this guiding ideology, the 
particular amendment principle, premised on preserving policy 
continuity, is to make appropriate adjustments: It retains as 
much as possible certain effective existing provisions that have 
been accepted by all, essentially maintaining the current tax 
policy, while suitably adjusting tax burdens and collection and 
exemption items; it adjusts high incomes to ease the conflict of 
the personal income gap by placing the taxation priority on 
those with high incomes, to reflect the policy of taxation based 
on income and fair tax burdens; it proceeds from China's 
realities while drawing on valuable overseas methods, being more 
suited in tax model and collection method to the tax payment 
awareness of Chinese citizens and the tax collection and 
management status quo, and operable in line with our realities, 
by making it easier for taxpayers to pay taxes according to the 
law, while contributing to the tax management of tax collection 
organs. 
  It streamlines our personal income tax laws. The 
amended personal income tax law is "a merger of three taxes." 
Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, the state had successively promulgated three personal 
income tax laws and regulations; that is, the "PRC Personal 
Income Tax Law" passed by the NPC in 1980, and the "PRC Interim 
Regulations on Urban and Rural Individual Industrial and 
Commercial Household Operation Income Taxes" and the "PRC 
Interim Regulations on Individual Income Adjustment Taxes" 
promulgated by the State Council in 1986. While the application 
of these three laws played a positive role in areas, such as 
increasing revenues, serving reform and opening, attracting 
overseas talent, easing social-distribution unfairness, and 
promoting public stability and unity, the intensification of 
reform and opening has gradually shown up conflicts unsuited to 
changing circumstances in these laws and regulations that were 
put into effect under particular historical conditions. Taking 
our personal income-tax law and the interim provisions on 
individual-income adjustment taxes for instance, the former law 
is applied to foreigners, while the latter regulations are in 
force for Chinese, which state of affairs is hard to interpret 
in both legislation and enforcement, as well as being out of 
line with normal international practice. Then as to our 
individual industrial and commercial household operations, their 
income is also essentially in the category of personal income, 
with many countries throughout the world now also including 
income from individual industrial and commercial household 
operations in personal income taxation. So the current 
amendment of these provisions is in line with international 
practice. 
  It stabilizes tax burdens, while giving consideration 
to state revenue. The amended personal income-tax law makes 
taxable income of monthly wage and salary income over 800 yuan 
or minus surcharges. This provision, in comparison to the 
current regulations, raises the tax collection starting point 
for domestic wage and salary income, which adjustment was made 
mainly in consideration of the increases in recent years in both 
the price and employee cost-of-living indexes that have raised 
cost-of-living expenditures. As this raises the tax base, it 
may correspondingly reduce tax revenues, but as collection and 
management work intensifies and employee income increases, more 
people will become taxpayers, so that revenues will increase 
somewhat instead. As to taxpayers who have no residence in China 
but earn wage or salary income in China, and those who live in 
China but earn wage or salary income outside of China, the 
exchange-rate adjustments of recent years mean that continuing 
to maintain the original deductions would obviously be unsuited 
to the changed circumstances. The amended items are more 
feasible, contributing to our opening up to the outside world, 
as well as to the introduction of talent from abroad. As to tax 
burdens, while they generally are essentially fair as before, 
the burden on high-income taxpayers is increased slightly, which 
is also in line with the principle of taxation based on income. 
  This personal income-tax law passed by the NPC Standing 
Committee, in comparison to the one promulgated in 1980, makes 
certain amendments in areas such as tax objects and limits, tax 
reductions and exemptions, payment terms, and collection 
management, mainly in the following points: 
  --It sharply adjusts the tax rate for individual industrial 
and commercial household operations. The "Interim Regulations on 
Urban and Rural Individual Industrial and Commercial Household 
Operation Income Taxes" issued by the State Council in January 
1986 provided that income taxes on individual industrial and 
commercial household operations would be collected according to 
a 10-grade progressive tax rate for excess income, with the 
lowest grade being annual income of 1,000-2,000 yuan with a tax 
rate of 7 percent, and the highest grade being annual income of 
over 30,000 yuan with a tax rate of 60 percent. They also 
provided that when annual taxable income exceeded 50,000 yuan, 
an additional 10-40 percent income-tax markup would be collected 
on the excess taxable income. But this amended personal 
income-tax law provides for a five-grade progressive tax rate on 
excess income for individual industrial and commercial 
household-operation production and business income, with the 
lowest grade being annual taxable income up to 5,000 yuan with a 
tax rate of 5 percent, and the highest grade being annual income 
over 50,000 yuan with a tax rate of 35 percent, as well as 
abolishing the markup taxation method. The amended terms show 
clearly that the tax burden on individual industrial and 
commercial household operations is sharply lower than before. 
This provision is a tangible expression of the state's policy of 
support for individual industrial and commercial household 
operations, in order to spur individual industrial and 
commercial household operations to sounder market economy growth. 
  -- It provides tax reductions on income from payments for 
articles or books written. In the personal income tax law 
promulgated in 1980, income from payments for articles or books 
written is included in remuneration for labor, with each earning 
of less than 4,000 yuan being provided an expense reduction of 
800 yuan, each one over 4,000 yuan granted one of 20 percent, 
and the balance being taxable. But this amended personal income 
tax law excludes income from payments for articles or books 
written from remuneration for labor, listing it as an 
independent tax item. While all matters, such as tax collection 
criteria, expense-reduction amount, and tax rates remain 
unchanged, a provision is added on a 30-percent reduction of 
taxable income. 
  -- It adds income from property transfers and chance to 
taxable items. As China's economic reform intensifies, with 
stock and real estate markets growing very rapidly, and 
transactions of all types of movable and real property, mainly 
stocks, bonds, and real estate, becoming increasingly brisk, 
some are earning increasing amounts of appreciation income. 
Meanwhile, all sorts of lottery-attached activities such as 
fundraising, savings, sales, and contests are increasing daily, 
with the chance income of lottery winners also growing steadily. 
In light of this, as the state should regulate through taxation 
this appreciation and chance income, the amended personal-income 
tax law lists these two incomes as taxable items. 
  -- It practices markup taxation on income from remuneration 
for labor where one-time earnings are abnormally high. In our 
current income from remuneration for labor, the income gap is 
very high. Similarly in labor remuneration, some have very high 
one-time earnings, as high as tens of thousands of yuan, which 
easily sharpens the conflict of distribution injustice. As 
taxation is a macroeconomic regulation and control tool that 
should play a proper role in this area, the amended personal 
income tax law clearly provides that "for income from labor 
remuneration where one time earnings are abnormally high, markup 
taxation can be applied." This undoubtedly is particularly 
correct as to implementing the principle of distribution 
according to work and alleviating social distribution injustice. 
  -- It clarifies the distinction between residents and 
nonresidents. According to international practice, taxpayers are 
distinguished as residents or nonresidents. Residents are liable 
for an unlimited tax payment committment. In other words, 
whether the income source is domestic or overseas, it is subject 
to tax payment in China. But nonresidents are liable for only a 
limited tax payment committment, or for paying taxes only on 
income earned in China. This amended personal income tax law 
uses the two criteria of whether or not there is a residence and 
length of residence to set the limits between residents and 
nonresidents, while the one promulgated in 1980 set only the one 
condition of whether or not there was a residence. According to 
the principles provided in general civil law rules, residents 
are Chinese citizens who live in China and have Chinese 
nationality or registered permanent residence, as well as 
foreigners who have lived a whole 365-day year in China and 
Chinese citizens without registered permanent residence. All who 
do not conform to these terms are nonresidents. According to the 
principle that residents are liable for an unlimited tax payment 
committment, residents should pay personal income taxes on all 
income earned both in or outside of China. This additional 
"residence" condition includes personnel who go abroad to work 
for public or other reasons as taxpayers, stopping up tax 
loopholes, as well as conforming to international practice. 
  As the amended personal income tax law is very broad in 
scope, strong in policy, and closely tied to vital public 
interests, it needs widespread publicity and education, to raise 
taxpayer legal awareness and enhance tax payment 
conscientiousness. Every taxpayer should act in line with tax 
law provisions, by strictly observing the law, and fulfilling 
their tax payment committment to the country with their own real 
actions. Tax departments must also intensify their enforcement 
oversight and inspection by acting in accordance with the law, 
and when discovering tax evasion or avoidance, dealing with it 
strictly according to tax law provisions, and investigating and 
affixing legal liability for serious cases. The implementation 
of the amended personal income tax law will also require the 
support and coordination of concerned departments, with close 
and strong cooperation. Units responsible for withholding 
particularly need to perform their tax withholding functions 
strictly according to the provisions of the tax law. Moreover, 
certain measures interrelated with the personal income tax law 
also need to be correspondingly drawn up, for a complete 
application. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59363 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tax Reform Under Market Economy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0193A Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] in Chinese No 10, 11 Oct 93 pp 43-46 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0193A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Guo Qingwang (6753 1987 2489), affiliated with </F>
the Taxation Department at Northeast Finance and Economics U; 
edited by Wang Lianjun (3769 1670 0689): "On Tax Reform Under 
Market Economy Conditions"] 
  [Text] In a decade-plus of economic reform, China has been 
through a transition from planned economy through planned 
commodity economy to socialist market economy. In the course 
of establishing and developing market economy operating forces, 
the tax system will need constant improvement, to turn it into 
a policy means for helping to bring the impact of market forces 
into full play, and to act with market forces in achieving the 
optimum disposition of resources. 
<H3>  I. The Principles for Improving Our Tax System Under a 
Socialist Market Economy </H3>
  1. The Revenue Principle 
  Organizing revenues is the basic function of taxation. 
Economic operations based on a market economy require 
taxation, premised on not obstructing economic operations in the 
private sector, to raise the maximum revenues, which is the 
financial guarantee for a socialist country to realize its 
social and economic functions. 
  But China's reality is that a decade-plus of economic reform 
has been accompanied by a similar period of fiscal deficits, 
which totalled 259.876 billion yuan for the 12 years from 1979 
through 1990, or 2.91 percent of national income for the period. 
Even excluding treasury bond income, the shortfall from revenues 
raised mainly through taxation was still about 88 billion yuan, 
to average 7.33 billion yuan a year. Such a severe revenue 
shortage had to be a key factor hampering economic reform. 
  2. The Fairness Principle 
  As to tax burdens, the fairness principle means that when 
taxpayer payment capability is the same, the same amount of 
taxes are collected; and when payment capability differs, taxes 
are collected based on taxpayer capability. Legally, the tax 
fairness principle means that tax collectors and taxpayers have 
an equal standing as to tax law, with various taxpayers also all 
being equal in the face of the tax laws. As to enterprise 
taxpayers, it is only when taxes are collected fairly that 
enterprises will have relatively rational tax burdens to allow 
for free competition; and as to individual taxpayers, collecting 
taxes based on payment capability helps to redistribute social 
wealth, shrink the polarization between the rich and poor, and 
create the greatest public welfare. 
  3. The Regulation Principle 
  As the government's means of economic regulation, taxation 
has both a microeconomic and a macroeconomic regulation 
function. In the process of distributing and redistributing 
national income, taxation employs steps such as collecting or 
not collecting taxes on certain economic activities, collecting 
more or less taxes, and limiting tax bonuses, to affect and 
regulate (balance) the supply and demand of certain products, to 
realize the optimum disposition of resources and industrial 
structure goals. While this is the microeconomic-regulation 
function of taxation, taxation is also a means of regulating 
macroeconomic operations. The basic state of China's current 
market economy is an out-of-equilibrium economy, the conspicuous 
manifestation of which is the imbalance between overall supply 
and demand. The government can raise or lower taxes to curb or 
increase overall demand, to bring it into line with overall 
supply. We can go on to say that the regulation principle means 
that taxation needs the function of promoting production 
operation efficiency in microeconomic activities, as well as 
that of stabilizing macroeconomic operations. 
<H5>  II. Tax-Reform Mistakes </H5>
  China's economic reforms have a gap in revenue-taxation 
reform. While a decade-plus of tax reform has added many tax 
categories, to improve our tax structure, the guiding ideology 
of "streamlining administration and devolving authority" and 
"tax reduction and profit concession" has led all along to the 
taking of various tax-reduction steps for the key tax-revenue 
source--enterprise income taxes, even to the point of "tax 
reduction" remaining the major tax-reform-offensive direction 
today when the new economic operating forces of a market economy 
are being established. Data show that from 1981 to 1990, state 
support for enterprises through the tax-reduction and 
profit-concession policy amounted to net financial resources 
worth 310 billion yuan, including 244.8 billion yuan during the 
Seventh Five-Year Plan, or 19.13 percent of revenues for the 
period. While the grounds for tax reduction are that it 
invigorates enterprises, I hold that under today's conditions, 
when our socialist market economy is just developing, and we 
have no sound economic and legal institutions suited to the 
operating laws of a market economy, continuing with the same old 
tax-reform guiding ideology of "tax reduction" would be bound to 
lead China's tax reform astray. Enterprises have not truely been 
invigorated because they are retaining more profits, while 
inadequate revenues leave the government powerless to control 
the overall economic situation. 
  First take a look from the enterprise perspective. 1) When 
market forces are not very strong and enterprise actions are 
irrational, tax reduction cannot genuinely help enterprises 
become more efficient through competition. As our socialist 
market economy is just taking off, with China's society and 
economy still lacking a complete and mutually-restraining market 
system, being particularly short of market forces centered on a 
rational pricing structure, enterprises are actually in an 
unfair market-opportunity state. In addition, enterprises have 
not yet completely established internal mechanisms for self 
restraint and self development, or been subjected to full 
competitive pressures. In this state, tax reduction to increase 
the real budgetable income of enterprises allows them to acquire 
more liberal external terms not through their own efforts. They 
need only to strive for advantageous policies (an example being 
1993's wave of phoney joint ventures) to achieve their own 
profit objectives, without having to spend more energy on 
raising efficiency. The pertinent data on the ratio of material 
consumption to gross output value in China's industrial sector 
show it to have been 68.1 percent in 1986, but up to 72.4 
percent by 1990. So the tax-reduction policy had to have been a 
contributing factor to enterprise inertia. 2) When the state 
economy's property rights have not been genuinely put in order, 
so that enterprises lack long-range investment motivation, tax 
reduction does not fully play the role of stimulating 
investment. In our decade-plus of economic reform, the state 
economy's property rights relations have remained unclear all 
along, keeping commodity-producer behavior out of line with 
market rules. Meanwhile, as enterprises have no inherent drive 
for long-range development plus steadily increasing budgetable 
income, their real assets have not clearly accumulated and 
grown, with income being slanted more toward consumption. The 
data for 1985 to 1990 show that China's GVIO grew at an average 
rate of 13.1 percent a year, while employee payrolls in the 
industrial sector rose an average of 17.8 percent a year. In 
this state of affairs, the income realized through tax reduction 
moved limited resources from the investment arena to the 
consumption stage, turning production capital into consumer 
funds, stimulating an excessive increase in public consumption 
funds, and sharpening the overall imbalance between supply and 
demand. 
  Then take a look from the government's side. 1) When the 
government's status and functions in economic activities have 
not yet been clearly delimited, and spending demand is rigid and 
strong, tax reduction can only add to the fiscal burden, by 
increasing fiscal deficits, and threatening the stable growth of 
the national economy. While the tax-reduction campaign in the 
U.S. in the 1980s had theoretical grounds, holding that the 
government must cut spending while reducing taxes, our reality 
is that our government's economic functions have certainly not 
been clearly cut back, with it still being responsible for 
priority-construction investment necessary to economic growth 
but long neglected, and no lightening of the fiscal-subsidy 
burden in sight. So increased government spending puts 
enormous pressure on revenue sources. When spending is 
increasing steadily and tax revenues are in a relative decline, 
funds to finance reform can come only through overdrawing, which 
then leaves the door open for inflation. 2) When economic 
growth and living standards are rising steadily, the demand for 
public facilities grows, meaning that the government has to come 
up with the funding for infrastructure improvements. And the 
tax-reduction reform thinking certainly ignores the revenue 
demand in this area. 3) A socialist market economy requires the 
free flow of production essentials, with the workforce-mobility 
essential in particular requiring the government to provide 
social guarantees in areas, such as unemployment and pensions, 
which is a new fund demand. 4) In our current government bond 
system, government bonds are unattractive financial assets, 
leaving the government with very limited revenues from the 
fundraising means of government bonds. Under such conditions, 
most government funds needed for either economic or social 
functions must be raised through taxes. 
  It is thus obvious that in the initial stage of the 
establishment of a socialist market economy, when many economic 
relations cannot be completely rationalized and market forces 
cannot be made sound all at once, lowering taxes cannot solve 
problems, such as the strong demands on government revenues and 
the irrationality of enterprise actions. So I hold that in 
coming tax reforms, we can no longer reform our tax system with 
the tax-reduction thinking, but that our tax reform should be 
based on stabilizing tax burdens and revenues, by improving our 
tax structure, to build a tax system that is fair and can 
provide ample revenues and regulate the economy. 
<H5>  III. Tax-Reform Ideas Under a Market-Economy System </H5>
  1. Enterprise Income-Tax Reform 
  In light of market-economy demands and in consideration of 
China's objective conditions for some time to come, I hold that 
accelerated enterprise income-tax reform should be our 
tax-reform priority for the next few years. 
<H5>  A. Enterprise Income-Tax Laws Need To Be Consolidated. </H5>
  In the interests of fair tax burdens, we first need to break 
up the income-tax system that is set up on the basis of economic 
nature, with all types of domestic-invested enterprises, such as 
state, collective, private, jointly operated, and shareholding 
enterprises, being made subject to a uniform enterprise 
income-tax law and, when the time is right, merging of the 
income tax laws for domestic- and foreign-invested enterprises, 
and implementation of a completely consolidated enterprise 
income-tax law for industrial and commercial enterprises. As 
this is a prerequisite for fair taxation, as well as the 
consensus at all levels throughout China, there is no need to go 
into unnecessary details. 
<H3>  B. Income Taxes Need To Be Different for Large and Small 
Enterprises. </H3>
  As our socialist market economy develops, the goal model for 
the conversion of enterprise operating forces is the 
shareholding system. Once we go to a full shareholding system, 
enterprise income taxes for small, midsize, and large 
enterprises will need somewhat varying tax treatment. From the 
experience of overseas practice, due to various reasons, such as 
1) small enterprises having little profitmaking capability and 
prestige that is not yet established or not high, 2) the 
shareholding system requiring large financing and transaction 
costs on primary and secondary markets, and 3) the shareholding 
system requiring high costs for enterprise-manager supervision 
and control and information linkup between managers and 
shareholders, only 2 percent of small enterprises with less than 
500 employees sell shares at the time of their initial financing 
decisions, with still less than 20 percent doing so by the time 
of their second financing decisions. In other words, about 90 
percent of small enterprises take loans from financial 
institutions as their primary financing policy. So in support 
of vital small-enterprise growth, we should adopt preferential 
tax policies for small enterprises, such as making the legal tax 
rate applicable to small enterprises lower than that for large- 
and medium-sized ones, and offering broader investment-tax 
preferences. 
<H5>  C. Interest Needs To Be Included in Tax Bases. </H5>
  Interest having long been tax free has created the bad 
phenomenon of the enterprise sector overrelying on bank loans 
for investment, while using most of its own funds for welfare 
facilities. If interest expenditures were included in tax 
bases, the enterprise income-tax system would actually be 
neutral toward all capital sources, while playing the following 
roles: 1) it would spur enterprises to raise the use efficiency 
of their borrowed capital; 2) on the capital demand side, it 
would help to control credit scope; 3) it would also have a 
certain restrictive impact on investment scale. 
<H5>  D. Tax Rates Need To Be Flexible. </H5>
  The current focus of discussion in enterprise income-tax 
reform is tax-rate design. Many favor a 33-percent single-ratio 
tax rate. I hold that such a tax rate is a particular reflection 
of the tax-reduction guiding ideology, being too low, adverse to 
the organization of revenues, and detrimental to government use 
of tax leverage to regulate national economic operations. I 
favor the enterprise income-tax collection method of first 
adopting the soft-degree progressive tax-rate system, and then 
making a transition to the proportional (flat) tax-rate system. 
As our market economy is just being established: 1) Government 
revenue demands are strong, while enterprise income taxes are 
the major source of revenue, so that employing the progressive 
tax rate system can bring rich revenue flexibility; 2) in 
contrast to the individual income tax, it is only the enterprise 
income tax that plays a key role in regulating macroeconomic 
operations. So as the revenues so raised make up a very large 
percentage of overall tax revenue, if we continued to use the 
progressive tax rate, making it flexible, its regulatory impact 
would grow; 3) using the progressive tax-rate system would not 
affect enterprise investment initiative. In the current state 
of bank credit-mechanism restraints being soft, enterprise 
property-rights limits being unclear, and enterprise actions 
being severely short term, even more enterprise retained profits 
would be hard to use for long-term investment, as was explained 
above. In light of these factors, we should set enterprise 
income taxes for the short-term at a three-level progressive tax 
rate for excess income of 35-40 percent. Then, based on China's 
market-economy development and progress in converting enterprise 
operating forces, enterprise income taxes could make a gradual 
transition to the flat tax-rate system. In fact, before the 
1980s, corporate income taxes in developed countries, such as 
the United States and Japan, all employed a three- to four-grade 
progressive tax-rate system for excess income. 
  In addition, enterprise income-tax flexibility should also 
be 
expressed in the following two areas: 1) In order to encourage 
competition and raise production efficiency, I recommend that 
once the enterprise profit rate passes 20 percent, each 
one-point rise should lower the tax rate 1 point. The profit 
rate is calculated as profits plus all loan interest excluding 
utilized gross capital (including all loans). My reason for 
delimiting the profit rate at 20 percent is that according to 
economic-theory assumptions, in order for each industry to keep 
its output at a growth rate of 8-10 percent, its profit rate 
must be above 20 percent. This step would be a great 
encouragement to enterprises with profit rates above 20 percent, 
as well as playing a promotional role for all enterprises in 
achieving this profit rate and improving their economic 
efficiency. 2. In order to stimulate exports and import 
substitutes, I recommend that each one-point rise in the 
enterprise net-export rate should lower the tax rate 1 point. 
The net-export rate is present export value minus the present 
value of raw material and parts imports excluding the present 
replacement value of imported machinery and equipment. This 
could stimulate the growth of import industries and 
export-subsitute industries, while raising the use efficiency of 
imported machinery and equipment. 
  2. Individual Income-Tax Reform 
  The individual income-tax system functions to bring fairness 
to individual income levels and regulate overall demand, being a 
key component part of a flexible tax system. Individual 
income-tax system-reform includes three parts: 1) The 
individual income-tax system needs consolidated. In other 
words, the current individual income tax, individual income 
adjustment tax, and individual industrial and commercial 
household operations income tax need to be merged into a 
consolidated individual income tax. Meanwhile, both Chinese and 
foreigners should be made subject to a uniform individual income 
tax law, with nonresident taxpayers being provided with certain 
special deductions to solve the problem of high tax burdens 
created by income differences. 2) We need to abolish our 
individual income adjustment tax's excess-multiple progressive 
tax-rate system, and replace it with the progressive tax-rate 
system for excess income, which would be in line with 
international practice, as well as increasing our taxation 
flexibility. 3) Individual business income should be made a 
part of the individual income-tax tax-base in order to prevent 
tax-revenue losses. 
  3. Flow-Tax System Reform 
  China's flow taxes have always used the tax-inclusive-price 
model, with tax rates designed on the principle of high taxes 
for high profits, and vice versa. It is obvious that under the 
planned pricing system, flow taxes regulated profits, not the 
consumption that they should have. But in market-economy 
conditions, market-formed prices dominate, so that tax rates 
should no longer be designed on a planned-pricing basis. In 
addition, as to tax categories, everything from production to 
circulation and wholesale to retail should be subject to the 
value-added tax, with product taxes collected on some products, 
for a two-tax overlap. That is, the neutral value-added tax 
would be used for general regulation, with product taxes for 
special regulation. 
  4. Expanded Tax-Base, Additional Tax Categories 
  In order to adapt to market-economy needs, China should as 
quickly as possible begin to collect social insurance, 
inheritance and gift, capital gains, and securities transaction 
taxes. 1) The collection of social insurance taxes will help to 
lighten enterprise burdens and promote rational labor mobility. 
The pertinent data show that in many of China's older 
enterprises, retirees and pensioners make up one-third of all 
employees, with this ratio even as high as 1:1 in a few 
enterprises. Paying wages to retired employees has always been 
a heavy burden on enterprises, as well as obstructing rational 
labor mobility. Collecting social insurance taxes will shift 
pension and unemployment insurance payments from enterprises to 
the government, to equalize the burdens of old and new 
enterprises, while opening the way for labor mobility. 2) 
Collecting inheritance and gift taxes will help to equalize 
public wealth and tax revenue. As China's living standards rise 
steadily, personal assets accumulate and grow constantly, and 
dealings with the outside world continue to expand, the transfer 
and inheritance of personal assets occurs often. According to 
international practice, China should also collect taxes on the 
inheritance or transfer of personal assets above a set amount. 
3) The collection of capital-gains taxes, for separate taxation 
of corporate enterprise capital gains and operating income, is 
aimed at practicing a light-tax policy for the sale of capital 
assets, to encourage capital flow, invigorate capital markets, 
and encourage venture investments. 
  5. Stronger Tax-Control Legislation 
  As a market economy is one that is ruled by laws, this means 
that tax-collection control must have tax laws as a yardstick. 
1) Tax laws need consolidated, taxing authority must be 
concentrated, and the legal liability for the illegal actions of 
deciding without authorization to impose taxes, stop 
collections, or make exemptions has to be investigated and 
affixed; 2) illegal actions, such as tax evasion or 
resistance, need to be cracked down on severely; 3) we need to 
strengthen our tax-collection oversight, by investigating and 
affixing the legal liability of tax collectors who abuse their 
authority for private purposes and are derelict in their duties; 
4) and we need to use all means to disseminate tax-law 
knowledge, by raising taxpayer awareness among all, in order to 
push legal tax-control to new heights. 
  6. A Tax-Separation System as Quickly as Possible 
  In our traditional tax-management system, the departmental 
selfishness and policy of "storing wealth among the people" of 
local governments brought a sharp erosion of central-government 
tax revenue. 1) China's Central Government controls very few 
tax categories, with most taxes being collected on 
local-government responsibility, which shifts much tax revenue 
to extrabudgetary control, making our tax system severely 
regressive. 2) While the authority to draw up tax laws and tax 
rates is nominally the center's, it is actually all under local 
control. As this gives local governments the opportunity to 
loudly exploit tax reductions and exemptions, our tax-reform 
remedy will be to thoroughly practice a tax-separation system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59364 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> SMALL-SCALE ENTERPRISES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liaoning Reports Progress in Township Enterprises </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  SK1001230294 Shenyang Liaoning People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1000 GMT 9 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK1001230294 </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang Liaoning People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Township and town enterprises in the province 
achieved rapid progress in developing the export-oriented 
economy last year. Last year, the value of export goods 
delivered by township and town enterprises totaled 6.9 billion 
yuan, an increase of 36 percent over that of the previous year, 
and the value of export goods delivered by such enterprises 
accounted for 28 percent of the province's total export value. 
  Last year, among the province's township and town 
enterprises, the development speed of foreign-invested 
enterprises of three types has been accelerated. A total of 654 
foreign-invested enterprises of three types were initiated 
across the province's townships and towns, and a total of $480 
million was utilized by such enterprises, an increase of 300 
percent over the previous year. Last year, 14 township and town 
enterprises in the province obtained the right to deal in 
exports, and more than 20 township and town enterprises went to 
places outside the territory to run plants and do business. At 
present, the products exported by the province's township and 
town enterprises have begun to change from raw and semi-finished 
materials to finished products, to change from roughly processed 
products to finely processed ones, and to change from 
low-quality ones to medium- and high-quality ones. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59365 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   China To Participate in Trade Information Network </TI></H3>
<H4>   MOFTEC Official on EDI </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0226A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 16 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0226A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by GUOJI SHANGBAO reporter Zhang Haiyang: "EDI Will </F>
Become New Turning Point for China's Development in Foreign 
Trade" -- Interview of Rong Xingquan, Director of Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations and Trade Computer Center and Head of 
Group for Implementing EDI Projects in China] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] How Can China 
Continuously Carry Forward the Use of EDI? 
  Director Rong Xingquan believes that first of all, it is 
necessary to simplify the business procedure, standardize the 
operation pattern and quicken the tempo in setting up standards. 
The simplest and most effective method is to adopt international 
standards; and energetically, steadily and reliably introduce 
and use well-developed foreign EDI techniques. Meanwhile, we 
must strengthen coordination among various related departments 
in the business chain, help them join their efforts in 
fulfilling the work of establishing relevant definitions, and 
ensure the accurate and smooth flow of information in the 
process of carrying out trading. 
  Next, it is necessary to rely on the assistance from the 
government. The relevant ministries and commissions under the 
State Council have joined their efforts in establishing the 
"Leading Group for Use of EDI." The State Planning Commission 
has also listed EDI as a state project in the Eighth Five-Year 
Plan. 
  In conclusion, Director Rong Xingquan said: "An reforming 
and 
opening China needs EDI. The application and popularization of 
the EDI will add new vitality to the development of China's 
economy." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59366 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   China To Participate in Trade Information Network </TI></H3>
<H4>   Customs Official on EDI </H4>
<F P=102> 94CE0226B Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 18 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0226B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by GUOJI SHANGBAO reporter Zhang Haiyang: "EDI </F>
Customs Clearance System Makes Paper-Free Trading Possible" -- 
Interview of Yang Guoxun, Director of General Administration of 
Customs Information Center] 
  [Text] Recently, our reporter called on Yang Guoxun, 
Director of Information Center of General Administration of 
Customs on the use of EDI in the customs system. 
<H3>  Necessity To Popularize Use of EDI Customs Clearance System 
in China </H3>
  Right now, China's practice in reforming its economic 
structure and gradually forming the pattern to open up to the 
world in all directions has doubled the amount of supervisory 
work of China's Customs. The increasing number of preferential 
policies for various regions and lines of business has made the 
work of the customs even more complicated and further delayed 
the procedure of customs clearance. According to statistics 
compiled, the total value of China's imports and exports 
increased by 398 percent; the total volume of imported and 
exported cargo rose by 281 percent; the amount of customs duties 
collected increased by 441 percent; the amount of tax collected 
or levied on behalf of other departments rose by 2,747 percent; 
and the number of applications to pass goods through the customs 
increased by 398 percent during the ten years between 1982 and 
1992. 
  In order to keep pace with these changes, we must make 
things easy for the exporters and importers to legally pass 
goods through the customs, while strengthening our control. This 
will not work by relying on the manpower alone. We must depend 
on other means of advanced science and technology to quicken the 
pace for customs clearance. The customs offices in various 
localities have adopted some measures such as the system of red 
and green passages for cargo clearance, the use of different 
measures for screening, checking and releasing goods for imports 
and exports under different conditions and the utilization of 
subsequent centralized customs declaration. The EDI customs 
clearance system is able to effectively provide the technical 
support in the implementation of these measures and make things 
convenient for the declarant. 
<H5>  Specific Contents of EDI Customs Clearance System </H5>
  China's EDI customs clearance system is aimed at utilizing 
EDI technology to automatically exchange and process forms and 
documents for customs clearance, and make full use of the 
customs computer system to timely and automatically complete the 
entire customs clearance procedure between the customs and the 
declarant. 
  According to Director Yang Guoxun, the establishment of this 
system involves the design of software for the EDI customs 
clearance procedure, the purchase and installation of mainframe 
computers and a network, the setup of the organization in charge 
of the EDI customs clearance system, the improvement of the EDI 
customs clearance system and its relevant rules and regulations 
and the standardization of relevant forms and documents. The EDI 
customs clearance system consists of clearance of goods, 
supervision and control, taxation and release of goods. With the 
customs as the center, this EDI customs clearance system deals 
with declarant, banks, warehouses and transportation units; and 
automatically processes and examines declaration forms, levies 
taxes and releases goods. 
  The development of the EDI customs clearance system is 
mainly aimed at achieving automation and standardization, and at 
completing the entire customs clearance procedure with speed and 
in strict accordance with regulations. In many cases, there is 
no need for the declarant to send people to the customs office 
to apply for customs clearance in person. The customs office 
only needs to stress the essential points in checking 
declaration forms, levying taxes and checking and releasing 
goods. It may further simplify the customs clearance procedure 
and let the EDI customs clearance system automatically handle 
the arduous administrative work. 
<H3>  Prospects and Plans for Development of EDI Customs Clearance 
System </H3>
  Since the 1980's, some developed Western nations have 
adopted the EDI form in doing trading. They have also adopted 
the EDI system in their customs offices. For example, the U.S. 
Customs adopted the EDI form for customs clearance in 1992. The 
British Customs has established a complete administrative 
information system. In 1992, 90 percent of the 13.5 million 
customs declaration forms in Britain were processed by the EDI 
system. At the end of 1992, 96 percent of the customs 
declaration forms in Australia were processed by the automatic 
customs clearance system, of which 90 percent of the forms were 
processed and goods released automatically by EDI technology. 
  The methods, measures and experiences of the customs offices 
of these countries have provided China's Customs with important 
data to develop its EDI customs clearance system. 
  In the development of the EDI customs clearance system, 
China's Customs has designated 1993-1994 as an experimental 
stage, during which the relevant customs clearance system will 
be mainly revised, the use of EDI in filing applications to pass 
goods through the customs be permitted and preparations for the 
establishment and improvement of this system be made. It has 
designated 1997-1998 as a stage of popularization, during which 
it will promote the use of the EDI system. 
  China's Customs will closely cooperate with all functional 
departments and help coordinate their actions to recommend the 
use of the EDI customs clearance system and let "paper-free 
trading" become a reality in our country. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59367 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Grain Prices Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0200A Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 11 Nov 93 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0200A </F>
<F P=104>  Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Weiqin (1728 4850 2953) and Jia Yuxian </F>
(6328 3768 6343): "Grain and Oil Market--Prices of New Grains 
Coming on the Market Slide, Winter and Spring Grains Will 
Inevitably Float Up"] 
  [Text] The situation in markets in localities throughout 
the nation indicates that new grains coming on the market have 
had a certain impact on the grain and oil market, causing the 
price of wheat to generally slide and other types of grains and 
oils to fluctuate and to become complicated and confused. 
  Authoritative analysts believe that this winter and next 
spring, grain and oil prices will tend to rise. 
  We can expect wheat prices to rebound. Presently wheat 
prices 
in localities throughout the nation are essentially in a slump. 
The price of some three white wheats on the Zhengzhou market is 
0.76 yuan per kilogram, 0.02 yuan lower than corn. The price of 
wheat on the Jinnan market is about 0.72 yuan, and adjusted 
sales are not smooth and the market is not active. Several other 
grain producing regions are wavering at only about 0.64 yuan. 
The wheat price situation of such areas as Hubei, Jiangsu, and 
Shanghai is a little better, floating around 0.80 yuan. The 
China Grain Trading Company forecasts that in the short-term 
wheat prices still could waver in a low valley, but by this 
winter or next spring or at a little later point, wheat prices 
could rebound to about 0.90 yuan. 
  Corn prices continue to rebound. The corn market has 
maintained a two year high temperature without retreating and 
has not suffered an impact from new corn. The price, after a 
slight decline, will continue to rebound. In some regions the 
price approaches or exceeds the price of wheat. In East China, 
Hubei and Hunan, South China, and the Central Plain, the price 
of corn has remained at about 0.80. In such places as Chongqing, 
Nanning, Chengdu, and Kunming in the southwest, it has broken 
the 1 yuan barrier, and the Kunming Market has reached as high 
as 1.17 yuan. There are three reasons that corn receipts are 
huge and quotations are not declining: The first is that corn is 
full of nutrients and resistant to disease. The second is that 
the scope of its use is widespread and its uses are constantly 
expanding. The third is that feed requirements are increasing 
and international quotations look good. 
  Sales of other grains are active and prices will remain high 
and stable. With increases in agricultural and agricultural 
byproduct purchasing prices, the sales prices of small grains on 
various markets will stabilize at a rather high level. Based on 
information from more than thirty markets, including Beijing, 
Tianjin, Shanghai, and Guangzhou, this July the price rise for 
red beans over the same period last year was the highest, 
reaching 225 percent, rising from 2.40 yuan to 7.80 yuan. The 
rise for mung beans also reached 122 percent, rising from 4.50 
yuan to 10.00 yuan. The small grain market continues to be 
active, and although new grain coming to the market will have an 
impact, the effect will not be great. The price of mung beans on 
the southern and western markets is still 4.00 yuan or more. The 
Shanghai market has reached as high as 4.60 yuan. In some 
regions of north China and the northwest, it remains at 3.20 
yuan and above. Because of the rapid development of the 
livestock and the feed industries and the soaring development of 
the vegetable oil processing industry, soybeans are always in 
very tight demand, and although prices float down, they still 
stay high and do not decline. This year the area in the country 
planted in soybeans was greatly increased. So, after the new 
grain comes on the market, the price could stabilize at a high 
level. 
  There is a ready market for oil products and price rises are 
obvious. Because the area planted in rape, peanuts, and cotton 
was greatly reduced, peanut oil reserves have declined 30 
percent to 40 percent from the same period last year. In 
addition, customers from various localities are pouring into 
Xinjiang and the price of productive land has reached about 4.50 
yuan, causing oil product markets throughout the nation 
beginning this year to constantly rise. Jinnan wei 
[5898] oil has now reached 5.50 yuan or more and in Hebei peanut 
oil has reached as high as 5.90 yuan and rapeseed oil, 
wei oil, and soybean oil have all broken the 5 yuan 
barrier. Henan's price for peanut oil within the province has 
reached 5.70 yuan and the price outside the province has reached 
as high as 6 yuan. And palm oil is 5.30 yuan or more. Rapeseed 
oil is 4.80 yuan or more in both Shanghai and Jiangsu. On 
Hebei's Laohekou Market, the prices of scarce rapeseed oil and 
soybean oil have risen to 5.40 yuan and 5.60 yuan, respectively. 
  On the basis of the current domestic grain and oil market 
situation, all business units should pay close attention to 
market information in formulating business tactics. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59368 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Changes in Industrial, Agricultural Price Differential </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0212A Beijing ZHONGGUO WUJIA [PRICES IN CHINA] in 
Chinese No 10, Oct 93 pp 20-21 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0212A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO WUJIA [PRICES IN CHINA] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ma Xiaoming and Zou Wenhui, affiliated with the </F>
general urban survey team of the State Statistical Bureau: 
"Changes in the Situation Regarding the Scissors Difference 
Between the Prices of Industrial and Agricultural Products in 
China"] 
  [Text] Compared with the period shortly after the founding 
of the state, the scissors difference between the prices of 
industrial and agricultural products in China has been greatly 
reduced in terms of the general trend; the 1992 situation 
represented a decrease of 66.5 percent over 1950. But, amid the 
declines, there have been great fluctuations and marked 
differences between different stages. In recent years there has 
occurred a tendency to grow again, and such a tendency should 
arouse sufficient attention. 
  There have been marked differences between different stages 
with regard to changes in the scissors difference between the 
prices of industrial and agricultural products: 
  The first stage: After the founding of the state, the party 
and government adopted the policies of stabilizing the rural 
retail prices for industrial products, gradually raising the 
procurement prices for agricultural and sideline products, and 
gradually reducing the exchange price ratio between industrial 
and agricultural products. In 1951-1979 the scissors difference 
between the prices of industrial and agricultural products was 
reduced by 49.6 percent on a cumulative basis, and the reduction 
in the scissors difference manifested itself in the form of 
"static reduction." 
  The second stage: After the Third Plenum of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee, our country began price reform. Price reform 
started with reforming prices for agricultural products, and the 
focus of price reform in 1979-1988 was the reforming of the 
system of prices for agricultural products and the system 
governing the management of those prices. The state 
substantially raised the procurement prices for 18 major 
agricultural and sideline products including grain, cotton, and 
oil crops; the average increase was 25.7 percent. The 
procurement prices for most agricultural products were 
decontrolled. Because of demand, the decontrolled prices for 
agricultural products rose rapidly, resulting in an increase in 
the general level of procurement prices for agricultural and 
sideline products. Consequently the scissors difference between 
the prices of industrial and agricultural products decreased 
substantially. The general level of procurement prices for 
agricultural and sideline products rose by 145 percent in 
1979-1988, but the rural retail prices for industrial products 
rose by only 38.9 percent in the same period. The scissors 
difference between the prices of industrial and agricultural 
products decreased markedly, falling by 43.3 percent from 1978 
on a cumulative basis. That is, the amount of industrial 
products that the peasants were able to exchange a definite 
amount of agricultural products for increased by 76 percent. The 
scissors difference between the prices of industrial and 
agricultural products decreased at an average annual rate of 4.6 
percent. Compared with the 28 years before the reform, the 
amount of reduction was much larger and the speed of reduction 
was much higher. All this gave the peasants a great deal of 
benefits, and promoted the development of agricultural 
production. 
  The third stage: In 1989-1991 the state cooled down the 
"overheated economy" in a comprehensive way; that is, that there 
was a period of improvement and rectification. During this 
period, the focus of price reform was shifted onto industry. The 
state adopted measures to alleviate the problems in the prices 
of industrial products and agricultural production materials 
which had been accumulated over a long time; especially, large 
steps were taken in the last two years of the Seventh Five-Year 
Plan period. At the same time, because the market for 
agricultural products was weak, because there were constraints 
on demand for agricultural products, and because the procurement 
prices for agricultural products were low, the rate of increase 
in the rural retail prices for industrial products (27.9 
percent) was much higher than the rate of increase in the 
procurement prices for agricultural and sideline products (9.8 
percent); as a result the scissors difference between the prices 
of industrial and agricultural products grew for three years in 
a row, leading to a cumulative growth of 16.5 percent; that is, 
that the amount of industrial products that a definite amount of 
agricultural products could be exchanged for decreased by 14.2 
percent from 1989. 
  The fourth stage: In 1992, after Comrade Deng Xiaoping made 
his southern inspection remarks, price reform was accelerated. 
The state substantially raised the forward procurement prices 
for grain, and many regions decontrolled the procurement and 
selling prices for grain. Procurement grain prices left the 
fluctuating situation that had existed over the previous two 
years, and got out of the trough; the procurement prices for 
agricultural products rose by 3.4 percent, while the rural 
prices for industrial products rose by only 3.1 percent. The 
scissors difference between the prices of industrial and 
agricultural products decreased, falling by 0.3 percent from the 
year before. This was the first time that the scissors 
difference between the prices of industrial and agricultural 
products had been reduced after three consecutive years' of 
growth in the scissors difference which had started in early 
1989. 
  The fifth stage: Since the middle of 1992, our national 
economy has entered the period of rapid growth, and our country 
has intensified price reform, focusing on transportation, 
energy, and basic raw and other materials. In the first quarter 
of 1993 the scissors difference between the prices of industrial 
and agricultural products began to grow again. In the first half 
of 1993 the scissors difference between the prices of industrial 
and agricultural products grew by 1.8 percent, and the rate of 
growth is likely to increase gradually. This will inevitably 
produce adverse impact on agricultural production, and thus 
should arouse attention. 
  The reasons for the continued growth in the scissors 
difference between the prices of industrial and agricultural 
products in the first half of 1993: 
  The first was that agriculture was a backward and risk-rife 
industry. Agricultural labor productivity grew slowly and 
agriculture's economic returns were not high, 
  The second was that as the state adopted measures to 
alleviate the remaining problems in the prices of industrial 
consumer goods and agricultural production materials, carrying 
out intensified reform operations, the rate of increase in the 
procurement prices for agricultural and sideline products (8.1 
percent) was lower than the rate of increase in the prices for 
industrial products (10 percent). The structural adjustment of 
prices for industrial products was substantial and extensive. 
Toward the end of 1992, because of the effects of the state's 
decontrolling the prices of over 500 industrial products, the 
state's policy-based price adjustments, and the expansion of 
investment and consumption demand, prices for industrial 
products rose rapidly, In the first half of the year the rural 
retail prices for industrial products rose by 10 percent. In 
this respect the rural prices for industrial consumer goods rose 
by 9.3 percent, and prices for agricultural production materials 
rose by 12.3 percent. 
  The rate of increase in the prices for agricultural products 
got ever higher on a quarterly basis. The first quarter saw an 
increase of 8.5 percent, while the second quarter saw a 
double-digit increase (15 percent). The reasons for the ever 
higher rate of increase in the prices for agricultural 
production materials: 1) Because of the propelling effects of 
the abovementioned reform measures, production costs rose, while 
prices continued to be high. 2) The industry producing 
agricultural production materials contracted and imports 
decreased; demand pushed the prices to rise. Compared with the 
same period last year, in the first half of the year the 
production of chemical fertilizer declined by 2.6 percent 
cumulatively, farm pesticide declined by 10.1 percent, farm-use 
films declined by 31.8 percent; and small tractors declined by 
42.1 percent. At the same time imports of chemical fertilizer 
fell, resulting in a cumulative January-May reduction of 42.3 
percent. 3) The state abolished monopoly trading in agricultural 
production materials; the operating mechanisms became flexible 
and the circulating channel was broadened. 
  The continued growth in the scissors difference between the 
prices of industrial and agricultural products has led to a 
decline in the comparative returns on agricultural products as 
well as an increase in the hidden burdens on the peasants. 
According to calculations, the 8.1 percent increase in the 
procurement prices for agricultural and sideline products in the 
first half of 1993 led to an increase of 6.86 billion yuan in 
the peasants' income. As there was an increase of 8.1 percent in 
prices on rural trading markets, the peasants' income from 
selling agricultural products to the nonagricultural population 
increased by 680 million yuan. The two things resulted in a 
combined increase of 7.54 billion yuan in the peasants' income. 
The 10 percent increase in the rural retail prices for 
industrial products led to an increase of 28.42 billion yuan in 
the peasants' expenditures (in this respect: the 9.3 percent 
increase in the rural prices for industrial consumer goods led 
to an increase of 21.67 billion yuan in the peasants' 
expenditures; the 12.3 percent increase in the retail prices for 
agricultural production materials led to an increase of 6.75 
billion yuan in the peasants' expenditures). Overall 
calculations of the above-listed factors, having incomes 
compared with expenditures, would show that the growth in the 
scissors difference between the prices of industrial and 
agricultural products in the first half of 1993 led to an 
increase of 20.88 billion yuan in the peasants' expenditures, 
that is, 26.1 yuan per person or 6.2 percent of the peasants' 
per capita cash income. 
  The continued growth in the prices of agricultural 
production 
materials and the resumed expansion of the scissors difference 
between the prices of industrial and agricultural products have 
led to a decline in peasants' investment in agricultural 
production. In terms of physical input, in the first half of 
1993, nationwide the total sales of agricultural production 
materials, if adjusted for inflation, decreased by around 10 
percent in real terms. The ever growing gap between the urban 
and rural areas has not only hampered the development of 
agricultural production, but also weakened the economically 
mutually complementary and mutually promoting relationships 
between the urban and rural areas that were established in the 
early years of economic reform. This situation is certain to 
adversely affect the long-term development of agricultural 
production and result in agricultural production being unable to 
develop in a sustained manner. 
  In order to reverse the trend toward resumed expansion of 
the 
scissors difference between the prices of industrial and 
agricultural products, it is necessary to adopt measures 
involving many spheres. Particularly important, it is necessary 
to vigorously develop high-yield, high-quality, and 
high-efficiency agriculture, carry out large-scale economic 
operations, and accelerate the improvement of agricultural labor 
productivity. Clear circulation channels and enhance the 
exchanging of materials between urban and rural areas, so as to 
facilitate the smooth circulation of goods. Continue to proceed 
with the reform of prices for agricultural products. At the same 
time it is necessary to enhance the regulation and supervision 
of prices for agricultural production materials, and gradually 
reduce the scissors difference between the prices of industrial 
and agricultural products, so as to enable the peasants to 
increase income through increasing output, thereby promoting the 
steady development of agricultural production. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59369 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Grain Storage </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0181Z Changchun JILIN RIBAO in Chinese 16 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0181Z </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun JILIN RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] As of 14 December, Jilin Province had put 5.8 
million tons of grain in storage, an increase of 1.3 million 
tons over the same period in 1992. Of this amount 3.6 million 
tons were contract orders, fulfilling 84.4 percent of the 
contract task. No IOUs were issued. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59370 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ways To Increase Ningxia Peasant Income Outlined </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0216A Yinchuan NINGXIA RIBAO in Chinese 19 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0216A </F>
<F P=104>  Yinchuan NINGXIA RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhou Shengxian (0719 3932 6343), Deputy </F>
Chairman, Ningxia Autonomous Region: "On Increasing Peasant 
Income"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] Since the Third Plenary 
Session of the 11th Party Central Committee, peasant income in 
the Ningxia Autonomous Region has gone through three stages. 
The period from 1978 to 1984 was one of high speed growth 
during which peasant net income increased from 115.9 yuan to 
298.71 yuan a year in a 157.7 percent increase, or 17.1 percent 
per year. The period from 1985 to 1988 was one of low speed 
growth in which peasant net income increased from 298.71 to 
480.22 yuan per year in a 60.8 percent increase, or 12.6 percent 
per year. The period from 1989 to 1992 was one of slow growth 
during which peasant net income increased from 480.22 yuan to 
618.72 yuan per year in a 28.8 percent, or 6.5 percent per year. 
  Despite the sustained increase in total peasant income 
during 
these three periods, the speed of income increase slowed 
markedly. This was particularly true for the period 1989 to 
1992 when, after deducting for price increases, real income fell 
2.9, 0.7, and 1.7 percent respectively. A series of bad effects 
chain reactions ensued, the first of which was a widening of the 
gap between peasant income elsewhere in the country. In 1980, 
the gap between peasant net income in Ningxia and peasant net 
income nationally was only 16.23 yuan. In 1990, it was 60 yuan; 
in 1991, it was 100.50 yuan; and in 1992, it widened to 165 
yuan, Ningxia's income ranking falling from eighteenth place in 
the country in 1990 to twenty-third place in 1992. The second 
effect was a widening the gap between city and countryside. In 
1978 the gap between the region's average per capita peasant net 
income and city and town residents' income spent on living 
expenses was 1 to 2.78. This narrowed to 1 to 2.04 in 1988, but 
widened to 1 to 2.5 in 1992. Third was an increase in the 
number of low income needy families. In 1992, 21 percent of 
rural households in the region had an income of less than 300 
yuan; and 9.4 percent had an income of less than 200 yuan. Of 
the households having an income of less than 300 yuan, 47 
percent were in mountain regions, and of the households having 
an income of less than 200 yuan, 22 percent were in mountain 
regions. This was a 9 and 6 percentage point increase over 1991. 
Fourth was a decline in income from production and sales. In 
1990, investment in fixed assets used for production declined 21 
percent, peasant per capita spending for the purchase of fixed 
assets used in production declining from 61.70 to 48.40 yuan. 
Fifth was slow increase in total rural commodity retail sales. 
Between 1990 and 1992, the annual increase in total rural 
commodity retail sales fell from 16.5 to 6 percent in a 10 
percentage point decline. Between 1989 and 1991, peasant real 
consumption fell about 50 yuan. 
  The deep-seated reasons for the decline in the speed of 
peasant income growth in the region since 1989 are primarily as 
follows: 
  1. Failure To Eliminate Longstanding Notions That 
Emphasize Grain Output Rather Than Cash Income. Frequently, 
rural areas are judged in terms of their grain production, and 
rural work is judged in terms of whether grain production has 
increased, so much so that slight fluctuations in grain 
production greatly intensify the chain reaction of fluctuations 
in peasant income. The guiding thought in rural work emphasizes 
increase in agricultural product output and supply to the 
neglect of increase in peasant income. Up until 1978, the 
demand for farm products greatly exceeded supply. Farm products 
were in short supply, so the development of production to 
increase supplies and fill the markets became the focus of rural 
work. Since 1988, farm product production and supply largely 
satisfy needs, but the guiding thought has not been promptly 
readjusted. As before, it departs from the goal of increase 
peasant income. This is a subjective reflection of the decline 
in the speed of increase in peasant income. 
  2. National Economic Development Policies Do Not Favor 
Agriculture Sufficiently. Investment in agriculture has 
declined, infrastructure has aged, and reproduction capacity has 
become weak. The distribution of social benefits favors 
industry and the cities, and sacrifices the interests of 
agriculture and the peasants. The long emphasis only on 
applying agricultural accumulations to the development of 
industry ignores the role of industry suckling agriculture in 
turn. Despite several readjusts of agricultural product prices, 
the price scissors between industrial and farm products tends to 
widen, the peasants suffering a serious loss of benefit. Up 
until 1988, agricultural and sideline product procurement prices 
rose faster than prices of the means of agricultural production, 
so the price scissors narrowed and peasants gained real benefit. 
In 1988, the overall agricultural and sideline product 
procurement price level rose 1.75 times over 1978 in an average 
annual 10.6 percent increase. Meanwhile, during the same period 
prices of the agricultural means of production rose 50.2 percent 
over 1978 in an average 4.2 percent annual rise, which was 6.4 
percentage points lower than the agricultural and sideline 
products procurement price. Peasants benefitted to the tune of 
150.70 yuan, which was 41.4 percent of the increase in net 
peasant income for the same period. Since 1989, the rise in 
prices of rural industrial goods has exceeded the rise in prices 
paid for the procurement of agricultural and sideline products. 
Between 1988 and 1991, the price scissors between industrial 
and agricultural goods widened 31.5 percent in an average annual 
7.9 percent increase, the peasant gaining little but losing 
much. Comparison of 1992 with 1988 shows a peasant per capita 
loss of 124.95 yuan as a result of the rise in prices of 
agricultural means of production. This is 90.2 percent of the 
138.50 yuan increase in peasant per capital net income for the 
same period. In addition, because of the restraints of the 
traditional planned economy, development of the rural economy 
did not follow the path of the market economy. It emphasized 
production and slighted commodity circulation. Markets did not 
develop in a sound manner, channels for the circulation of 
agricultural products did not work well, and difficulties buying 
alternated with difficulties selling, large quantities of 
agricultural products piling up in inventory, the increase in 
peasant income suffering as a result. 
  3. Irrational Rural Economic Structure. With the 
advent of rural reform, the structure of rural industry has 
gradually changed from the heavily weighted emphasis on primary 
industry, on farming within the primary industry, and on grain 
production in farming to the joint development of primary, 
secondary, and tertiary industries, farming, forestry, animal 
husbandry, sideline occupations, and the fishing industry. 
These changes in the rural industrial structure have changed 
the sources of peasant income, and increased peasant income. 
Peasant family net income from the primary industry declined 
from 83.2 percent in 1983 to 78.1 percent in 1988. The 
percentage derived from farming, the primary source of income 
within the primary industry, fell from 79.8 to 72.6, while 
peasant net income from forestry, animal husbandry, sideline 
occupations, and the fishing industry rose from 20.2 to 27.4 
percent. Peasant net income rose from 175.10 yuan in 1980 to 
480.22 yuan in 1988. This included 91.69 yuan more from 
secondary and tertiary industries, which was 30 percent of the 
total, and 53 yuan more from forestry, animal husbandry, 
sideline occupations, and the fishing industry, which was 25.7 
percent of the total. Since 1989, rural tertiary industries 
have had hard going. Rural industry restructuring languished. 
Between 1989 and 1992, output value of rural primary, 
secondary, and tertiary industries stood still at around 68, 22, 
and 10 percent respectively, and the output value of farming, 
forestry, and animal husbandry stood at 70, 5, and 22 percent 
respectively. Peasant family net income secondary and tertiary 
industries, and from forestry, animal husbandry, sideline 
occupations, and fishing declined. At the same time, growth of 
the primary industry and farming slowed markedly. Between 1989 
and 1992, net income from the primary industry and farming 
increased 2.3 and -2 percent, an increase far lower than the 
16.5 and 46.5 percent of the period 1985 to 1988. Since 
readjustment of the peasants' industrial structure was in limbo, 
problems in increasing peasant income became greater and greater 
causing a steady year-by-year decline in peasant income. 
  4. Irrational Peasant Employment Structure. Since 
the advent of rural reform, the development of rural 
non-agricultural industries has enabled a large amount of 
surplus rural manpower to move out of agriculture into 
non-agricultural pursuits. Consequently, the structure of rural 
employment has entered a new stage. Changes in the make-up of 
peasant employment have widened the sources of peasant income. 
The peasants have moved from dependence on the distribution of 
income from agriculture to dependence on distributions of income 
from both agricultural and non-agricultural pursuits, which has 
increased their income. Between 1978 and 1988, peasant income 
derived from non-agricultural production increased from 2.08 to 
95.69 yuan in a 45-fold increase. This was an average annual 
46.6 percent increase and accounted for 28.9 percent of the 
increase in peasant income from production. Thanks to the 
effects of state macroeconomic improvement of the economic 
environment and rectification of the economic order since 1989, 
large amounts of manpower have returned to farming. In 1990, 
manpower employed in non-agricultural pursuits fell five 
percentage points from the previous year. As a result of the 
return of manpower to agriculture, peasant income from 
production fell 4 and 7.2 percent respectively in 1989 and 1990 
in comparison with the previous years, and the increase in 
income from non-agricultural pursuits slowed appreciably. 
Between 1989 and 1992, net income from non-agricultural 
pursuits increased by an average 14.6 percent per year, 32 
percentage points lower than during the previous 10 years. 
Large amounts of manpower continue to linger in rural villages, 
restricting increase in peasant income. 
  5. Slow Development of Town and Town Enterprises. 
Since the beginning of rural reform, town and township 
enterprises have suddenly come to the fore to become a main 
integral part of the rural economy and the entire national 
economy as well. They have also become an important means for 
increasing peasant income. Peasant income obtained directly 
from town and township enterprises nationwide amounts to 193 
yuan per capita, or 24.6 percent of annual per capita income. 
In Ningxia, it is 116 yuan, or 18.85 percent of annual peasant 
net income, 77 yuan less than the national figure. 
  6. Peasant Burdens Heavy. First of all, 
agricultural production costs have increased. During 1991 and 
1992, 64 and 62 percent of the increase in peasant earnings in 
Ningxia was eaten up by increased costs. Second, taxes have 
increased. In 1992, peasant tax payments in Ningxia averaged 
9.80 yuan per capita, a 6.7 and 13 percent increase respectively 
over 1990 and 1991, and higher than the increase in peasant net 
income for the same period. Third is an increase in collective 
withholdings. In 1992, withholdings averaged 15 yuan per 
capita, up 36.2 and 35.4 percent over 1990 and 1991. Like 
taxes, withholdings increased faster than peasant net income. 
Fourth is other unjustifiable burdens, which add to peasant 
burdens, causing a severe loss of peasant income. 
  The whole point of rural reform and development during the 
1990's has been to increase peasant income and to bring rural 
villages up to a comfortably well-off standard of living. 
Peasant income is the main indicator of a comfortably well-off 
rueral standard of living, the speed of its increase having a 
direct bearing on rural progress in achieving a comfortably 
well-off standard of living. Therefore, the guiding thought and 
approach in our work must take the goal of a comfortable 
well-off standard of living as the be all of rural work. We 
must make peasant income increase the key element in development 
of agriculture and the rural economy, truly changing away from 
the former sole pursuit of output and output value in 
agriculture and the rural economy to the improvement of benefits 
across the board, and increasing peasant income. The main 
reasons for posing the issue in these terms are as follows: 
  First, increasing peasant income is essential to maintaining 
the unflagging interest of peasants in production. Following 
implementation of the family output related contract 
responsibility system in rural villages, both simple 
reproduction and the expansion of reproduction fell to peasant 
households. A substantial portion of peasant income for the 
previous year had to be applied to reproduction in the following 
year. If income does not increase or increased only slowly, the 
peasants' capacity for reproduction is bound to be weak. When 
agricultural inputs are inadequate, not only is current 
agricultural production impaired, but changes in agricultural 
production methods and progress in the modernization of 
agriculture will suffer too. If the peasants toil all year and 
the granaries are full but their pockets are empty, and there is 
no improvement in their clothing, food, and housing, maintenance 
of their interest in production will be difficult. Once 
agricultural production no longer enjoys the enthusiastic 
support of the peasants and begins to slide, the entire national 
economy loses its most fundamental sustenance. 
  Second, increase in the effective supply of agricultural 
products, including increase in the total amount, improvement in 
the selection offered, and raising quality is a basic goal in 
the development of agriculture. Furthermore, attainment of this 
goal depends on how well the peasants are or are not rewarded. 
Nowadays peasants decide what they will grow on the basis of 
their expectation of the income to be made. If we resurrect the 
old methods of jacking up targets and issuing compulsory orders, 
matters may turn out differently that we expect. Unless the 
situation of increasing output only to recieve no or little 
increase in income is changed, stable agriculture also becomes 
an empty phrase. 
  Third, the main mark of modern agriculture is improvement of 
the organic make-up and technical make-up of capital, reducing 
the amount of manpower and its contribution. This means that 
the peasants and the rural collective economy organization must 
possess substantial accumulated funds. 
  Fourth, past thinking about the development of agriculture 
emphasized the role of peasants as a source of products, but 
neglected their role as a market. This is one of the reasons 
that the national economy has found it difficult to shake off 
the market slump. Rural villages are a vast market, and 
peasants are the largest customers for industrial goods. 
Changes in rural purchasing power have a direct bearing on the 
prosperity of industrial markets, which affects, in turn, the 
economic returns of industrial enterprises. Facts show that the 
market capacity of the urban population is not enough to support 
the sustained rapid growth of industry, but development of the 
rural market depends on increasing peasant income. 
  Fifth, attainment of a comfortably well-off standard of 
living for the people of the whole country by the end of the 
present century is an important strategic goal in the 
development of China's economy. The key to realization of the 
comfortably well-off goal lies in rural villages, and the 
difficulty in attaining it also lies in the rural villages. 
Calculations show that peasant attainment of a comfortably 
well-off standard of living will require a per capita net income 
of 1,200 yuan (at constant 1990 prices). At this rate, per 
capita peasant net income in Ningxia will have to reach 1,000 
yuan by 2000, i.e., an annual 6 percent rate of increase. This 
includes a per capita annual income of 1,300 in river valley 
areas, or an annual 8 percent increase, and a per capita annual 
income of 650 yuan in mountain regions, or an annual more than 6 
percent increase. These are 1 percentage point higher than the 
speed of increase for the nation as a whole. Clearly, the use 
of every possible means to increase peasant income is an 
extremely daunting task that will brook no delay. Unless 
peasant net income in the Ningxia Autonomous Region can be 
increased substantially, the region will be unable to enter a 
comfortably well-off standard of living period along with the 
rest of the country. 
  Sixth, peasant income is not just an economic issue but a 
political issue as well. It affects not only the overall 
development of the national economy, but also affects relations 
between industry and agriculture, between city and countryside, 
and between the Party and the peasantry, as well as the 
stability of society and the consolidation of socialist 
political authority in rural villages. The Party's and the 
government's repeated emphasis on various vigorous measures to 
solve the peasants' burdens problem has as it goal increasing 
peasant income. 
  Agriculture is the region's greatest strength, and it is 
also 
the main source of peasant income. Talk about increasing 
peasant income other than through agriculture is unrealistic. 
Non-agricultural industries are also an effective way to 
increase peasant income, and talk about increasing peasant 
income without non-agricultural industries is likewise 
impossible. Although non-agricultural industries have developed 
slowly in Ningxia, they show tremendous development potential. 
Therefore, a policy of emphasis on both agriculture and 
non-agricultural industries must be part of the guiding thought 
for increasing peasant income. Agriculture cannot be emphasized 
at the expense of non-agricultural industries, nor can 
non-agricultural industries be emphasized at the expense of 
agriculture. Coordinated development of both agriculture and 
non-agricultural industries should form the foundation for 
steady increase in peasant income. 
  1. Close Attention to the Peasant Income Problem, 
Making Increase in Peasant Income a Long-term Strategic 
Task. Increasing peasant income is a concerted expression 
of the Party's wealthy people policy, and it is the urgent 
desire of the broad masses of peasants. Once the food and 
clothing problems of the broad masses of people are solved, the 
income problem becomes the problem that concerns them most. The 
key to doing something about this rural economic task of 
increasing peasant income lies in doing something about the main 
contradiction between rural reform and development. The 
peasants wholeheartedly support the Party and the state's policy 
of reform and opening to the outside world because these 
policies enable them to obtain very many tangible benefits. CPC 
committees and government at all levels should do all possible 
to increase the peasants' income, truly making it the basic 
point of departure and point of return in rural work, make in a 
key task in future rural work, and correctly handle the 
relationship between development of the economy and increasing 
peasant's income, and between the peasant's immediate attainment 
of wealth and long-term economic development. They must proceed 
from local realities to draw up realistic plans and genuine 
measures, and carry them out one by one. Cadres at all levels 
must further change their thinking, get away from erroneous 
conceptions, eradicate the tendency to think that rural work 
means working on agriculture, and that agriculture means grain. 
In evaluating a place's work from now on, more must be looked 
at than just how much grain is harvested or how much output 
value increases. More attention must be paid to how much peasant 
income increases. Those in charge must fulfill the functions of 
their office, and administration means staying the course. In 
appraising achievements in an official career, it is important 
to look at whether the person has genuinely and sincerely guided 
the peasants in developing the economy, in increasing their 
income, and in being highly effective so that the peasants can 
gain a genuine sense of the advantages of the Party's wealthy 
peasant policy through the work of cadres at all levels. Only 
when they have such a work objective and guiding thought can 
cadres at all levels more wholeheartedly guide the peasants in 
becoming wealthy, and find more ways to riches. 
  2. Intensify Rural Reform; Persist in Using Reform To 
Spur Development; and Use Development To Spur Increased 
Income. The goal of China's economic system reform is 
establishment of a socialist market economy system. This means 
enabling the market to play a basic role in the allocation of 
resources under state macroeconomic regulation and control, 
economic activity thereby abiding by the laws of value, and 
adjusting to changes in supply and demand, so that the 
allocation of resources produces greater benefits. The setting 
of this goal places new requirements on, and poses new tasks for 
rural reform. After rural villages instituted the family output 
related contact responsibility system, although the peasants had 
relatively independent decision making authority, under the 
planned economic system, agricultural production continued to 
follow the former leadership methods in which growing areas were 
rigidly assigned, and even production methods were stringently 
set. The peasants lacked true decision making authority, and 
the increase in peasant income was severely limited. With the 
development of a rural socialist market economy system, the 
production orientation will change, production being conduction 
according to market demand. Whatever the market needs will be 
produced, and whatever is profitable will be produced. 
Unprofitable crops will not be grown. The market supply and 
demand situation and price fluctuations will be a reflection of 
this demand. Development of production on the basis of the 
market orientation will mean that both government and the people 
must make some fundamental changes. Government has to change 
its functions and leadership methods, become aware of, study, a 
nd thoroughly understand market signals in a timely fashion, and 
pay attention to regulating the market well. Using this as the 
orientation for economic activities, government must produce 
companion policies, and organize the peasants to produce to meet 
market demand. The peasants must orient toward the market 
instead of toward the government, and change from reliance on 
the government to reliance on market demand in reaching their 
own decisions. In this way, the peasants can effectively 
increase their income according to the laws of market economy 
activity. In addition, a market economy is an economic form 
that encompasses both cities and the countryside, and the entire 
national economy. It cannot be built solely on the rural 
villages. It must knit together and dovetail every aspect of 
cities and the entire national economy. This means that the 
dual system of city and countryside separation must be 
demolished and barriers between cities and the countryside 
eliminated, the existing household registration control system 
that separates cities and the countryside reformed, the peasants 
encouraged to play a part in commodity circulation in the 
cities, and take part in the building of cities, thereby 
changing and building a new relationship between the cities and 
the countries. This will provide the peasants more space to 
exercise their talents and increase their income. It will 
actively guide a greater flow of the elements of production from 
cities to rural villages, thereby increasing rural vitality and 
strength for the development of productivity. The area thus 
affected is very broad. One important such area is the complete 
opening up of the urban labor market to allow surplus rural 
labor to flow into the industries and positions in cities that 
need manpower. At the same time, it will actively organize an 
exchange of manpower with economically developed areas, and 
gradually open up the international labor market. 
  3. Active Readjustment of the Make-up of Rural Industry 
To Develop High Yield, Premium Quality, High Returns 
Agriculture. As orientation toward the market increases, 
farm product prices are further decontrolled, and the clash 
between a steadily growing population and a gradually 
diminishing amount of cultivated land becomes worse and worse, 
accumulating the large amounts of money required for investment 
in agriculture by increasing income from limited cultivated land 
will be impossible. Prospects of increasing peasant income by 
increasing grain procurement are also becoming dimmer and 
dimmer. Likewise, controlling prices of the agricultural means 
of production cannot solve the problem fundamentally, and the 
national treasury will be unable to bar the burden of continued 
fiscal subsidies. Low return agriculture is already far from 
being able to meet peasant income growth needs. Therefore, no 
time should be lost in setting about the vigorous readjustment 
of the rural industrial structure. Development of high yield, 
premium quality, high return agriculture is bound to become the 
inevitable choice to improve overall returns from agriculture 
and increase peasant income. The development of high yield, 
premium quality, high returns agriculture is the basic future 
trend of development of China's agriculture, and it is also an 
important way for the peasants to become wealthy and begin a 
comfortably well-off standard of living during the 1990's. It 
marks the entry of China's agriculture into a new historical 
stage. This stage is characterized by, first, a change in 
China's agriculture from traditional agriculture to modern 
agriculture. Modern agriculture requires not only high yields, 
but premium quality and high returns as well. This is what 
distinguishes it fundamentally from traditional agriculture. 
Second is the transformation of China's rural economy from a 
semi-self sufficient to a commodity economy, and a commodity 
economy is market oriented. It takes not only quantity but 
quality to achieve dominance in markets. Only quality products 
can compete, gain a market share, and produce returns. Finally, 
the standard of living of China's people is changing from 
subsistence to comfortably well-off. One extremely important 
mark of this change from subsistence to comfortably well off is 
substantial improvement and rise in the people's food, clothing, 
housing, and travel. All these are related to agriculture; 
every one of them is related to the rise in the quality of 
agricultural products. These features of the era mean that high 
yield, premium quality, high return agriculture must abide by 
both natural laws and market laws. Advanced technology and 
scientific methods must be employed, labor-intensive and 
technology-intensive production are needed, and natural and 
social resources must be developed and used in multiple ways, 
all production elements combined in an optimum way to the 
maximum extent possible for greater per unit yields, premium 
product quality, and high overall returns that yield economic, 
social, and ecological benefits. Developing a high-yield, 
premium quality, and high benefit agriculture requires expansion 
of the growing area for cash crops, livestock feed crops, 
melons, fruits, and vegetables in the internal make-up of 
agriculture while ensuring steady increase in grain production 
at the same time. Development of forestry, animal husbandry, 
sideline products, fishing industry, and agricultural and 
sideline processing industries must be accelerated as part of 
the readjustment of the rural economic structure to lengthen the 
agricultural production chain and widen the agricultural 
production realm. Only a rational and effective restructuring 
can make the rural economy expand from the farming industry to 
processing industries, from the production realm into the 
commodity circulation realm, from undertakings that yield small 
returns to those that yield large returns, and from 
labor-intensive to technology-intensive industries, thereby 
gradually following a course of high yield, premium quality, and 
high return development. 
  4. All-out Development of Town and Township Enterprises 
To Open Many Avenues for Rural Employment. The trend of 
future rural economic development suggests a gradual decline in 
the primary industry portion of the rural industrial structure, 
and a gradual in the tertiary and secondary industries portion; 
a gradual decline in amount of manpower employed in agriculture, 
and a gradual rise in the amount of manpower employed in 
non-agricultural pursuits, particularly in town and township 
industries; and a gradual decline in the rate of increase in 
peasant income coming from agriculture, and a gradual rise in 
the rate of increase in peasant income coming from other than 
agriculture. As the most active growth point in rural economic 
development today, town and township enterprises have become a 
major source of peasant income. Over the long term, town and 
township enterprises offer potential for increasing peasant 
income in the Ningxia Autonomous Region, town and township 
enterprises also offer hope. Take a firm grip on the key that 
town and township enterprises are means having a firm grip on 
the key to increasing peasant income. The main difference 
between rural economic development in Ningxia and coastal area 
lies in the difference between town and township enterprises. 
The gap between peasant prosperity is manifested mostly in the 
level of development of town and township enterprises. 
Therefore, we must make all-out development of town and 
township enterprises a strategic emphasis for development of the 
rural economy and the entire national economy as well. We must 
regard it as the key to increasing peasant income. Adherence to 
a guiding policy of multiple wheel drives, multiple track 
operations, highlighting strengths, rational dispersal, 
step-by-step advance, and all-out development, no matter the 
form of ownership and no matter the form of operation, so long 
as it increases peasant income, and some long as it increases 
local economic strength, everything should be done to encourage 
development and to provide active support. Development of town 
and township enterprises requires suiting general methods to 
specific circumstances, and providing tailored guidance. In the 
relatively economically backward southern mountain region, a 
beginning should be made with the processing of agricultural and 
sideline products, and rational use of resources, needed support 
provided to quicken the pace of development in a planned way. 
In the irrigated areas in which water is diverted from the 
Huang He where economic conditions are relatively good, 
particularly in places where the town and township enterprise 
base is relatively good, the starting point should be somewhat 
high. Efforts should be made to bring about a gradual change 
from labor-intensive to capital-intensive and 
technology-intensive industries, steadily improving product 
quality and returns. Rural market towns and small cities are 
the main places from which agricultural, sideline, and local 
specialty products enter cities, and from which industrial wares 
enter the countryside. They support rural secondary and 
tertiary industries. We must hasten the building of rural 
market towns and small cities and towns, encourage the peasants 
to go into cities and towns to operate secondary and tertiary 
industries, and we must draw up corresponding favorable policies 
to increase the intensity of efforts in this regard. In this 
way, we can enable small cities and towns to play a turnkey role 
in the development of rural secondary and tertiary industries 
for the opening of peasant employment avenues that increase 
peasant income. In addition, we must channel surplus rural 
manpower to shift into cities and towns and to flow across 
jurisdictional lines. We must both encourage peasants to enter 
market towns and small cities, and also permit the peasants to 
enter large and medium-size cities under certain conditions so 
that they can engage in secondary and tertiary industries more 
securely, and have more secure employment channels. 
  5. Vigorous Fostering of Rural Markets To Guide the 
Smooth Entry of the Peasants Into the Commodity Circulation 
Realm. With the founding of the socialist market economy 
system, the extent of peasant reliance on markets is bound to 
become greater and greater, and peasants must enter the 
circulation realm if they are to increase their income. 
However, in Ningxia, the backwardness and incompleteness of 
rural markets is extremely glaring. A powerful integrated 
system for supplying the means of production and for promoting 
the sale of farm products is lacking, and financial, technology, 
labor, and information markets have yet to appear. This greatly 
limits increase in peasant income. Therefore, the fostering of 
rural markets has become an urgent need in development of the 
rural economy to increase the peasants' income. The fostering 
of rural markets must rely on the small cities and towns, the 
advantages they offer in terms of geography, communications, 
energy, technology, and location being used for further 
development of country fair markets and specialized markets 
centering around agricultural and sideline products. We must 
energetically develop all sorts of wholesale markets, and 
actively explore futures markets for the gradual formation of an 
agricultural products system in which country fair markets are 
the foundation, wholesale markets are the hub, and futures 
markets are the vanguard. In addition, we must actively foster 
and develop land, manpower, finance, technology, and information 
markets. Only when a fairly complete rural market system exists 
can the peasants be linked to the market economy and the 
peasants be guided toward a smooth entry into the commodity 
circulation realm, thereby being able to increase their income 
consistently. 
  6. Truly Reduce Peasant Burdens To Protect Peasant 
Interest in Production. Reducing the peasants' burdens is 
a major economic and political issue for protecting the 
peasants' interest in farming, safeguarding social order, 
consolidating rural socialist political authority, and cementing 
relations between the Party and the masses, and between the 
cadres and the masses. We must resolutely abide by the State 
Council's and our own regions applicable policy regulations for 
reducing the peasants burdens, strictly control township 
collection of fees and collective withholdings, not increase 
peasant assessments on any pretext, and do all possible to 
reduce peasant losses of benefits in every regard, making sure 
to return to the peasant the benefits that belong to them in the 
first place. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59371 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ECONOMIC </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Farm Procurement Problems </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0200B Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO in Chinese 25 Nov 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0200B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by State Statistical Bureau, Urban Survey General </F>
Team, Circulation Department's Wang Xiaohong (3769 2556 4767): 
"Agricultural Product Purchasing Problems Cannot Easily Be 
Overlooked; We Should Guarantee Funds, Improve Management, and 
Safeguard Farmer Enthusiasm"] 
  [Text] There are problems in current agricultural product 
purchases that should be a great cause of concern to leaders at 
every level. 
  Implementation of Agricultural Preferential Policies Is 
Not Very Ideal 
  To protect the interests of farmers and arouse their 
enthusiasm for production, the state has decided to improve 
management of agricultural material prices and set maximum 
prices for major products. But in several localities operations 
greatly exceeding authority and unauthorized operations have 
occurred. According to data supplied by the Hubei provincial 
supply and marketing association, in that province's Tianmen 
City there are 1,469 primary business units that are engaged in 
agricultural material business in violation of state 
regulations. Of those 1,043 are individuals and other fixed 
primary business units exceeding their operating authority reach 
42. The Ezhou City Huarong District Putuan Credit Union replaced 
loans with fertilizer for all of the entire township's 600,000 
yuan in loans this year. All of the farmers who wanted loans, 
whether to buy farm cattle or to buy farm implements, were given 
fertilizer in place of loans. The farmers poured out endless 
grievances. To support agricultural production and solve the 
farmers' shortage of funds, the state decided at the beginning 
of the year to provide advance purchase earnest money. But 
according to a Hunan provincial survey, most of the rural 
households did not receive the advance purchase earnest money at 
the beginning of the year. Of the 80 Linli County rural 
households that responded to the survey, approximately 60 
percent had not received the advance purchase earnest money, and 
the minority of the rural households that did get the earnest 
money did not get the full amount. After the March issuance of 
the urgent "Two Managements" notice regarding lightening 
farmers' burdens, governments and departments concerned at every 
level adopted a series of positive measures and in the first 
half of the year farmers' burdens were lightened somewhat. But 
some regions continued to increase them. For example, the per 
capita increase in Nei Mongol was 5.57 yuan, in Liaoning it was 
3.57 yuan, and in Fujian it was 2.68 yuan. 
  The Contradiction of Tight Funds Is Still 
Pronounced 
  Despite the fact that the central government has expended a 
great deal of effort to resolve the fund problem, this year 
agricultural product procurement funds still are tight. The 
third and fourth quarters are peak periods for purchase of 
agricultural products and the contradiction of tight purchasing 
funds is pronounced. For example, 1.33 billion yuan is required 
to purchase Jiangxi cotton and the deficiency reaches 910 
million yuan. Gansu's cotton purchasing fund deficiency reaches 
45 percent. Henan Province has indicated that since the 
beginning of August it has had extreme difficulty raising grain 
and oil purchasing funds. In seventeen localities and cities 
throughout the province, as of 20 September, the grain system 
had only completed 5.4 percent of its fund raising task and of 
the 2.4 billion kilogram wheat negotiated purchase task, only 
1.1 billion kilograms had been completed. This fall the 
province's planned purchase of grain, oil-bearing crops, cotton, 
hemp, and tobacco leaves requires 9.706 billion yuan. As of 20 
September, they had only raised 3.218 billion yuan. 
  Prices of Agricultural Means of Production Have Risen 
Abruptly, the Scissors of Industrial and Agricultural Product 
Prices Continues To Expand 
  Beginning this year, despite the fact that the state 
formulated a policy to limit agricultural material prices, in 
the first half of the year, they still increased by 12 percent 
over the same period last year, but in the same period, 
agricultural product purchasing prices rose 8.1 percent. 
Abruptly rising agricultural material prices on the one hand 
restrain farmers' investment in agricultural production, and on 
the other hand, they erode farmers' earnings, and farmers are 
caught in a vicious circle of "small income--small investment." 
  Grain Purchases Decrease, State Ability To Exert 
Macroeconomic Control on the Market Is Weakened 
  This year because purchasing funds were inadequate, after 
grain prices were freed up, with multichannel business 
competition, after the grain department had essentially 
completed its quota purchases, negotiated purchase progress was 
slow. As of the end of September, only 66 percent of the planned 
summer grain negotiated purchases had been completed. In 
previous years by the end of September, early rice purchases 
were completed. This year by 20 September, about 50 percent of 
the planned purchases were completed. 
  So, we must now further implement the central government's 
preferential policies regarding agriculture, realistically 
reduce farmers' burdens, guarantee funds for agricultural 
product purchases by every possible means, and adopt measures to 
improve management of rural market prices to safeguard the 
enthusiasm of farmers for production and ensure stable growth of 
agriculture. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59372 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> CENTRAL-SOUTH REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangzhou Says Per Capita GDP Exceeds 10,000 Yuan </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101133294 Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1000 GMT 4 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101133294 </F>
<F P=104>  Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Latest statistics released by the Guangzhou City 
Statistical Bureau show that in 1993 Guangzhou's per capita 
Gross Domestic Product exceeded 10,000 yuan for the first time 
in history, an increase of 323 percent over the year 1980 when 
the reform and opening-up process had just been initiated. Thus 
Guangzhou has now become one of the top three cities of China in 
terms of comprehensive economic strength, while topping other 
cities in terms of some other economic performance indexes. 
  Over the 13 years of reform and opening up, Guangzhou has 
always kept its economy growing at a two-digit annual growth 
rate. Guangzhou's GDP last year is expected to reach 68.2 
billion yuan, an increase of more than 21 percent over the 
previous year. The tertiary industry sector is expected to 
share nearly 50 percent of this GDP, thus ranking Guangzhou 
second among other cities in this sense. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59373 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> CENTRAL-SOUTH REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hainan Radio Reports Economic Achievements </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101103094 Haikou Hainan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 5 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101103094 </F>
<F P=104>  Haikou Hainan People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In 1993, Hainan reached encouraging achievements in 
reform, opening up, and economic construction. On the basis of 
the previous year's speedy development, the province's economy 
showed a fast and good development trend. According to the 
relevant statistics, comparatively good development was made in 
the province's production, circulation, finances, banking, 
foreign trade, and tourism. The main economic indices met the 
demands of the Eighth Five-Year Plan and were higher than the 
country's average and the province's average since the 
establishment of Hainan Province. 
  The gross domestic product was estimated at 19.17 billion 
yuan, an increase of 18.9 percent over the previous year as 
calculated according to comparable prices; the gross industrial 
output value was estimated at 9.3 billion yuan, an increase of 
28.9 percent over the previous year. Major industrial products 
increased by a wide margin. Economic results of industrial 
enterprises improved markedly. The gross agricultural output 
value amounted to [words indistinct] despite a decrease in grain 
production. In the course of adjusting the investment structure 
and strengthening macrocontrol and regulation, investment in 
fixed assets in the entire society amounted to 13.5 billion 
yuan, an increase of 55.1 percent, [words indistinct] being the 
best year since the founding of Hainan Province. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59374 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> SOUTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guizhou Meeting Reviews Economy for 1993 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101114994 Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 4 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101114994 </F>
<F P=104>  Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Yesterday's provincial economic work meeting 
arranged this year's economic work according to central 
requirements. Provincial party and government leaders including 
Liu Fangren [provincial party secretary] attended the meeting. 
Governor Chen Shineng delivered a report entitled "Seizing the 
Opportunity, Deepening Reform, Widening the Scope of Opening Up, 
and Bringing About the Sustained, Speedy, and Healthy 
Development of Guizhou's Economic Construction." 
  Chen Shineng stressed: [passage omitted] First, we must 
seize the opportunity to speed up our development and the 
establishment of the socialist market economic structure. We 
must exert ourselves and carry out our work creatively. Second, 
we must comprehensively and correctly understand the major 
reform measures proposed by the central authorities and 
comprehensively treat and analyze problems. On the one hand, we 
must take the overall situation into account, cultivate a 
long-term concept, correctly handle the relationships between 
immediate interests and long-term development, carry out good 
ideological work among the masses, and protect state interests. 
On the other hand, we must effectively adjust the industrial 
structure, concentrate our efforts on local economic 
development, and maintain a steady increase in local revenues. 
Third, we must profoundly study and understand the spirit of 
the 14th CPC National Congress, the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee, and the national economic work 
meeting. [passage omitted] 
  Governor Chen Shineng said: In 1993 local revenues amounted 
to 5.19 billion yuan, an increase of 18.75 over the previous 
year. In 1993 the province further implemented Deng Xiaoping's 
important speeches and the spirit of the 14th CPC National 
Congress, carried out the central authorities' macrocontrol and 
regulatory policies, concentrated efforts on resolving 
contradictions in economic life, and maintained a good economic 
development trend in the course of overcoming difficulties. 
According to an estimate, the annual GNP increased by 9 percent 
over the previous year; the gross industrial output value 
increased by 13 percent over the previous year; and the 
production and marketing rate was 94 percent. The gross 
agricultural output value increased by 4.1 percent. In 1993 the 
province comprehensively fulfilled the national economic plan, 
laying a foundation for this year's reform and development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59375 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> SOUTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guizhou Fulfills 1993 Revenue, Expenditure Targets </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1201113794 Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 7 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1201113794 </F>
<F P=104>  Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] It was learned from a provincial financial work 
meeting yesterday that due to the common efforts of the people 
and relevant departments throughout province, Guizhou fulfilled 
the 1993 revenue and expenditure plan in an all-round way. 
  According to statistics by the provincial financial 
department, Guizhou attained 5.55 billion yuan of revenue in the 
1993 fiscal year, surpassing the plan by 4.6 percent, an 
increase of 18.25 percent over the previous year. Tax 
collections amounted to more than 860 million yuan. The 
province's financial expenditure amounted to more than 6.69 
billion yuan, an increase of 10.35 percent over the previous 
year. Due to a large-scale decrease in bank deposits last year, 
province's revenue kept declining for more than eight months. 
In this situation, leaders of party committees and government 
at all levels throughout the province carefully discussed the 
financial and economic situation and helped enterprises overcome 
difficulties in production and tax payments. [passage omitted] 
  The provincial government also formed a leading group to 
strengthen financial and taxation work. As a result of common 
efforts in all circles, the province fulfilled the revenue and 
expenditure plan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59376 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> SOUTHWEST REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yunnan Economic Activity in 1993 Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101115594 Kunming Yunnan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1000 GMT 1 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101115594 </F>
<F P=104>  Kunming Yunnan People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] According to a YUNNAN RIBAO report, last year the 
national economy showed a good trend of steady growth on the 
basis fast development in the previous year. Initial statistics 
provided by the relevant department indicate that in 1993, the 
province's GNP will amount to 64.8 billion yuan, an increase of 
10 percent over the previous year; tertiary industries will 
increase by 15 percent, higher than primary and secondary 
industries. 
  The characteristics of last year's economic activity are as 
follows: 
  Agriculture saw a comparatively good harvest. Despite 
serious natural disasters including large areas of drought and 
flooding and bitter cold weather, agriculture still saw a 
comparatively good harvest due to the efforts of cadres and 
masses. Grain output for the whole of last year was estimated 
at 10.85 million metric tons, an increase of 1.4 percent over 
the previous year. Flue-cured tobacco, tea, silkworm 
mulberries, and other major industrial crops, as well as animal 
husbandry, continued to increase. 
  Township and town enterprises developed fast; their total 
earnings were estimated at more than 2 million yuan, an increase 
of 53.2 percent. Industrial production grew steadily. Despite 
electric power and fund shortages as well as price increases in 
raw materials, the gross industrial output value will amount to 
53 billion yuan, an increase of 14 percent. Market sales 
remained stable. Following the implementation of macrocontrol 
and regulatory policies, markets gradually became stable. From 
January to November, the retail sales volume of commodities in 
society amounted to 24.6 billion yuan, an increase of 23 percent 
over the same period of the previous year. The increase in 
institutional purchases was brought under control. The 
contradiction between supply and demand for major materials such 
as steel and cement was alleviated. The monetary situation was 
turning better. Through rectification and improvement, fund 
expenditures in violation of regulations were effectively 
controlled, as were willful fund raising activities. Civilian 
deposits increased, and banks' payment ability became stronger. 
Revenue and expenditure were comparatively balanced. Last 
year's local revenues were estimated at 14.5 billion yuan. 
Civilian income continued to increase. The income of the people 
in cities and towns for last year was estimated at 2,340 yuan; 
peasant per capita net income was 670 yuan, an increase 
respectively of 6 and 2 percent over the previous year, allowing 
for price rises. 
  Imports and exports continued to improve. Foreign trade and 
exports were estimated at $510 million last year, an increase of 
12 percent; imports were estimated at $230 million, an increase 
of 12.7 percent. Imports and exports through border trade were 
estimated at 2.8 billion yuan, an increase of 25 percent. 
Tourism kept growing. Tourists coming to Yunnan from outside 
the country were estimated at 376,000, an increase of 20 percent 
over the previous year. Foreign certificate income from tourism 
was 530 million yuan, an increase of 43 percent. 
  An objective analysis indicates that in the course of a 
steady economic growth, there are still contradictions and 
problems in Yunnan's economic life. These find expression in 
the emergence of new problems resulting from serious natural 
disasters in agriculture and price rises in production 
materials. The task still remains tough in controlling price 
hikes. Enterprises are incurring more losses and are behind in 
their tax payments. These problems should be resolved by 
deepening reform. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59377 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL </F>
<F P=101> NORTH REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Statistics on Shaanxi Foreign Trade, Joint Ventures </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101125894 Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
0010 GMT 1 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101125894 </F>
<F P=104>  Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In 1993 Shaanxi's foreign trade was active and made 
marked achievements in introducing foreign capital. From 
January to October, the province's imports and exports amounted 
to $1.13 billion, of which exports were $770 million, an 
increase of 24.3 percent over the previous year; imports were 
$360 million, an increase of [words indistinct]. In 1993 the 
province made a new step forward in opening up to the world. It 
sponsored commercial and trade talks in Hong Kong, Singapore, 
Xian, and Lanzhou, thus further blazing omnidirectional trails 
to the rest of country and the world. 
  By the end of October, there were 61 wholly-owned foreign 
enterprises, 139 joint-venture enterprises, and 72 cooperative 
enterprises, an increase of 1.4 times over the previous year in 
the total number. Foreign capital introduced amounted to $801 
million, an increase of 1.4 times over the previous year. Funds 
invested amounted to $153 million, an increase of 5.9 times over 
the previous year. So far 1,322 three-capital enterprises 
[wholly-owned, joint- venture, and cooperative enterprises] have 
been approved and more than 200 of them have started operation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59378 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic Report 28 October-26 November </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2611104593 </F>
<F P=103> HK2611104593 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following are summaries of media 
reports on economic developments in Hong Kong monitored by Hong 
Kong Bureau between 28 October and 26 November 1993. Source 
information is provided in parentheses at the end of each item 
or in the body of the item. 
<H5>  HONG KONG INVESTMENT IN PRC </H5>
<H3>  FEATURE: Hong Kong Firms Fund Mainland Infrastructure 
Projects </H3>
  Hong Kong companies are moving to satisfy China's acute 
requirement for improved transport infrastructure and increased 
energy capacity. Hopewell Holdings, China Light and Power, and 
the New World Group are some of the companies that have 
announced plans or are already involved in building the 
infrastructure China requires to sustain a high level of 
economic growth. 
  The English-Language daily THE STANDARD on 3 November 
reports 
on page 17 that China Light and Power, one of Hong Kong's two 
electricity supply companies, is to build a HK$3.12 billion 
power plant in Zhangpu, Fujian. According to a local official, 
the plant will have a total capacity of 1200 Megawatts on 
completion. The official said that China Light was "negotiating 
with Chinese partners regarding the equity breakdown of the 
joint venture." On 20 November, THE STANDARD reports on page 21 
that the Lippo Group, which is controlled by the Indonesian 
Riady family, had entered into an agreement with the Fujian 
provincial government to construct a 120-Megawatt coal-fired 
power plant. The first phase of construction includes port 
facilities with the capacity to accommodate bulk carriers of up 
to 50,000 tonnes. The plant is expected to become operational 
by 1997. 
  Beijing-based ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese at 1040 GMT on 
7 
November views Hopewell Holdings's activities in China's energy 
and infrastructure sector. The press agency states that 
Hopewell was the first overseas enterprise to invest in China's 
power sector and notes that the company has launched a 
succession of large-scale infrastructure construction projects 
in recent years. Hopewell's interests in China include the 
"Guangdong-Zhuhai Superhighway" and several power plants, and 
the company is thought to have invested around HK$3.4 billion in 
China. 
  In the shipping sector, the 23 November edition of the SOUTH 
CHINA MORNING POST reports on page one that Swire Pacific and 
Britain's Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P 
&amp; 
O) have each taken a 25-percent stake in a HK$615 million joint 
venture to operate a container terminal in Shekou, Guangdong. 
Swire Chairman Peter Sutch said the deal was a significant one 
for Swire as it marked the company's return to its traditional 
business, shipping, and place of business, China. The other 
joint venture partners are China Merchants (Holdings) and China 
Ocean Shipping Company, which own 32.5 percent and 17.5 percent 
respectively. The terminal will be managed by P &amp; O from 1 
January 1994. 
  Meanwhile, the 3 November issue of the PRC-affiliated daily 
TA KUNG PAO reports on page 3 that the Bank of China Group is 
continuing to finance mainland infrastructure projects in the 
energy, transport, telecommunications, and raw material sectors 
as "supply shortages" in these areas were slowing economic 
development. According to the group's general manager in Hong 
Kong, the Bank of China is now directly involved in over 2,500 
projects on the mainland and has advanced $7 billion in loans, 
39 percent of which are directed to energy projects such as the 
Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant. 
<H5>  China Property Offered for Sale in Hong Kong </H5>
  A large number of properties in China are being offered for 
sale in Hong Kong. According to statistics from an 
international property consultancy, in the last nine months, 
Shenzhen has offered commercial space with a total floor area of 
876,894 square feet and Guangzhou has offered 702,505 square 
feet. In comparison, Shanghai offered commercial premises 
totalling 181,934 square feet in July and September alone. As 
for office premises, during the same period, Guangzhou has 
marketed a total floor area of 1,413,620 square feet, while 
Shenzhen and Shanghai have marketed 419,362 square feet and 
438,726 square feet respectively. In the residential sector, 
Guangzhou has marketed a total floor area of 12,013,821 square 
feet, while Shanghai and Shenzhen have marketed 2,395,867 square 
feet and 2,043,697 square feet respectively. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO 
TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1217 GMT 18 Nov 93) 
<H5>  Swire Group Establishes Office in Shanghai </H5>
  The Swire Group has announced that its subsidiary, Swire 
(China) Ltd, has set up an office in Shanghai after an absence 
of 40 years. Since 1992, the Swire Group's shipping companies 
and trading companies have been doing business in Shanghai. 
They are developing shipping and container services and act as 
auto distributors in Shanghai and East China. 
  It has been reported that Swire Industries has expanded its 
production in China and plans to set up several beverage and 
paint plants in other regions. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in 
Chinese 0914 GMT 19 Nov 1993) 
<H5>  PRC INVESTMENT IN HONG KONG </H5>
<H3>  China Resources Begins Using New Container Terminal in 
Kowloon </H3>
  A new container terminal with an annual capacity of 1.2 
million tonnes has been completed in Cheung Sha Wan, Kowloon. 
It is China Resources' Ruifa Terminal, Hong Kong's largest 
multipurpose terminal. Wei Kuan, general manager of the Huaxia 
Enterprise Company Limited, said that China Resources had 
invested HK$180 million in building two 6,209-square-meter 
warehouses and a large container storage lot. The new terminal 
is equipped with a 480-meter berth which allows two 10,000-tonne 
freighters to dock simultaneously. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 
in Chinese 1314 GMT 19 Nov 93) 
<H5>  CITIC Pacific Takes Stake in Swire Pacific Subsidiary </H5>
  Swire Pacific has sold one-third of its subsidiary Swire 
Aviation Services to CITIC Pacific. As Swire Aviation's 
principal asset is a 30-percent holding in Hong Kong Air Cargo 
Terminals (HACTL), the HK$120 million deal gives the mainland 
investment vehicle exposure to the air cargo franchise at Kai 
Tak International Airport. Swire's finance director Peter 
Johansen said that it was "important to have another China 
shareholder involved at HACTL." 
  HACTL is a leading contender for the air cargo franchise at 
Hong Kong's new airport at Chek Lap Kok. (SOUTH CHINA MORNING 
POST in English (BUSINESS POST) 26 Nov 93 p 1) 
<H5>  OTHER ISSUES: </H5>
<H5>  Growing Trade, Investment Links With Japan </H5>
  Hong Kong and Japan have intensified their economic 
relations 
over the last decade. In 1992, Japan became Hong Kong's third 
biggest trading partner, and the volume of trade between the two 
places rose 29-fold, from $800 million in 1982 to $22.8 billion 
in 1992. Hong Kong has also become the second biggest 
investment destination in Asia for Japanese businessmen. In 
1992, cumulative Japanese investment in Hong Kong stood at $11.5 
billion, and Japanese investment, particularly in 
telecommunications and electronics industries, accounted for 30 
percent of total foreign investment in Hong Kong. In addition, 
Japanese tourists spent HK$1 billion in Hong Kong, the second 
biggest spenders after tourists from Taiwan. However, Hong 
Kong's trade deficit with Japan has also grown, and in 1992 the 
deficit reached HK$117.7 billion. In the first seven months of 
this year, the deficit was HK$76.79 billion. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO 
TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1017 GMT 7 Nov 93) 
<H5>  Transit Trade Registers 21 Percent Increase </H5>
  From January to September, Hong Kong's total transit trade 
volume was HK$600.393 billion, up 21 percent over the same 
period last year. The value of cargo transshipped to China 
increased by 35 percent, larger than the value of cargo 
transshipped to other countries. 
  The same period saw an increase in the value of cargo 
transshipped to Singapore, Germany, the United States, Britain, 
France, and Japan, but a decrease of 26 percent in the value of 
cargo shipped to Taiwan compared with the same period last year. 
  In the same period, Hong Kong's total import value was 
HK$790.55 billion, up 15 percent over the same period last year, 
while its exports stood at HK$163.635 billion, a fall of 3.9 
percent. (Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese 1401 GMT 
12 Nov 93) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59379 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar006___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  21 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic Report 27 November-22 December </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2212121293 </F>
<F P=103> HK2212121293 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following are summaries of media 
reports on economic developments in Hong Kong monitored by Hong 
Kong Bureau between 27 November and 22 December 1993. Source 
information is given in parentheses at the end of each item or 
is provided in the body of the item. 
<H3>  HONG KONG INVESTMENT IN THE PRC: 
Investment Flows to Guangdong Through Hong Kong </H3>
  A total of $5.8 billion in foreign capital has been invested 
in Guangdong so far this year, with 77 percent, $4.5 billion, 
provided by Hong Kong-based investors. Statistics show that 
Guangdong signed more than 14,000 contracts involving the use of 
foreign capital in the first three quarters of this year, a 
71-percent increase on last year. Officials said that some of 
the $4.5 billion investment from Hong Kong had been transferred 
by European, U.S., and Japanese companies through their Hong 
Kong-based subsidiaries. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 
1315 GMT 2 Dec 93) 
<H5>  New China Hong Kong Invests in Sichuan Communications </H5>
  Sichuan Shuhai Communications Investment Company Limited was 
recently set up in Chengdu with the approval of the Sichuan 
government. The company was set up by the Sichuan High-Grade 
Highway General Development Company, the Sichuan Credit, Trust, 
and Investment Company, and Hong Kong's New China Hong Kong 
Group Ltd. 
  The company is mainly engaged in the development, 
management, 
and operation of communications businesses throughout the 
province, obtaining and providing funds for communications and 
transportation facilities, equipment, and technical 
transformation projects, and the provision of consultancy 
services. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0832 GMT 9 
Dec 93) 
<H3>  Investors Target Real Estate Development Above Subway 
Stations </H3>
  The Guangzhou Underground Railroad Corporation has signed 
contracts with eight major Hong Kong companies on the 
development of real estate above Huangsha Station, which is on 
Route 1 of Guangzhou's subway. Among the Hong Kong participants 
groups are Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. and Lippo Group. 
  Huangsha Station will be located to the north bank of the 
Zhujiang Tunnel, and the development above the station will 
cover an area of 54,000 square meters, the largest of the 25 
plots available for real estate development along the route. 
Hong Kong companies plan to invest in excess of HK$1 billion 
(Hong Kong dollars) in this development, which will include 
residential units, offices, and shopping malls. (Hong Kong TA 
KUNG PAO in Chinese 8 Dec 93 p 8) 
<H5>  Hong Kong Group Invests in Hainan Quarry </H5>
  Haigang Quarry in Qiongshan County, Hainan's largest quarry, 
began production on 13 December 1993. With a daily output of 
1,500 cubic meters of crushed stone of various sizes, the quarry 
is wholly owned and managed by Hong Kong's Shun Cheung Group, 
which invested HK$30 million. The quarry uses modern equipment 
from Britain, France, and Japan, and the entire production 
process is computer controlled. Shun Cheung Group also plans to 
invest in quarries in Sanya City and the Yangpu Development 
Zone. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0813 GMT 14 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Hong Kong Investors Rank First in Shanghai </H5>
  Of Shanghai's 6,571 foreign-invested enterprises, nearly 
half 
have been invested in by Hong Kong businesses. By the end of 
November 1993, cumulative direct investment from Hong Kong had 
exceeded $6.7 billion in 3,209 projects. In the first eleven 
months of 1993, Hong Kong investors provided $4 billion in 1,551 
projects, ranking Hong Kong first in the ranks of foreign 
investors ahead of Taiwan and the United States. According to 
statistics, Shanghai Municipality approved 3,200 investment 
projects with contracted foreign funds of $6.647 billion between 
January and November 1993, a 29-percent rise over last year. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1358 GMT 14 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Sixth Mainland Company Lists in Hong Kong </H5>
  Kunming Machine Tool Co.'s offering of H-shares on the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong closed 628 times oversubscribed. Kunming 
is the sixth H-share listing in the territory by a mainland 
incorporated company following previously successful listings by 
Beiren Printing, Guangzhou Shipyard, Maanshan Iron and Steel, 
Tsingtao Brewery, and Shanghai Petrochemical. Kunming Machine's 
10 production plant's helped the company achieve a profit of 
16.4 million yuan (HK$22 million at official exchange rates) in 
1992 on a turnover of 93 million yuan. (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA 
MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) in English 1 Dec 93 p 1) 
<H5>  PRC INVESTMENT IN HONG KONG: </H5>
<H5>  Five Firms Account for 65 Percent of Investment </H5>
  Five Chinese conglomerates account for nearly two thirds of 
the estimated $20 billion of mainland investments in the 
territory, according to Anthony Russell, head of Hong Kong 
Bank's China Services department. Mr. Russell said that based 
on identifiable transactions, CITIC Pacific, China Resources 
Holdings, the Bank of China Group, China Travel Service (HK), 
and China Merchant Holdings accounted for 65 percent of PRC 
investments in Hong Kong. (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in 
English 29 Nov 93 p 1) 
<H5>  OTHER NEWS: </H5>
<H5>  China Overseas To Issue Convertible Bonds </H5>
  A wholly-owned subsidiary of China Overseas Development 
Limited has signed an agreement to issue $125 million of 
convertible bonds, which will be listed on the Hong Kong and 
Luxembourg stock exchanges and offered to investors in Europe 
and Asia. Nomura International (Hong Kong) Limited is 
sponsoring the issue. 
  Sun Wenjie, chairman of China Overseas Development Limited, 
told journalists that the issue had met an enthusiastic response 
from investors in the world's leading financial centers and that 
the $122 million raised by the issue would be used for real 
estate development and industrial investments in Hong Kong and 
mainland China. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1342 GMT 
1 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Debt Clearing Service To Operate in Jan 1994 </H5>
  Hong Kong's first clearing system for locally denominated 
debt is expected to begin operations 31 January 1994. Monetary 
Authority Chief Executive Joseph Yam said that the service would 
provide an "efficient and convenient" clearing system which 
would help reduce transaction costs and settlement risks. The 
Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) Service has commitments to join 
from 11 companies including Hong Kong Bank, Standard Chartered 
and the Bank of China. Financial Secretary Hamish McLeod said 
that the creation of CMU Service was part of the continuing 
effort to develop Hong Kong's debt market. (SOUTH CHINA MORNING 
POST (BUSINESS POST) English 7 Dec 93 p 1) 
<H5>  Entrepot Trade Registers Double-Digit Growth </H5>
  Although Hong Kong Government statistics show that Hong 
Kong's gross export volume in 1993 will decline by 5 percent on 
last year, its entrepot trade will register double-digit growth. 
As a result, exports will increase by 13 percent compared with 
last year, imports will rise by 13 percent, and this will 
contribute to growth in the maritime and air transport 
industries. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0913 GMT 
7 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Exports to Southeast Asia Show `Ideal Growth' </H5>
  Hong Kong experienced ideal growth in its trade with 
Southeast Asian since the beginning of this year. Hong Kong's 
export volume to five southeast Asian countries totaled HK$43.5 
billion in the first three quarters of this year, up 14 percent 
over the same period last year. During the first three 
quarters, the total volume of bilateral trade between Hong Kong 
and the five southeast Asian countries reached HK$107.6 billion. 
Singapore's trade volume with Hong Kong totalled HK$55.3 
billion, a 22-percent increase over the same period last year 
and 50 percent of the region's total trade with Hong Kong, and 
exports to the Philippines totaled HK$7.1 billion, 18 percent up 
on the same period last year. However, Hong Kong's exports to 
Thailand stood at HK$5.7 billion, down 4 percent over the same 
period last year. Meanwhile, Hong Kong saw a 9-percent increase 
in imports from Thailand during the first three quarters of this 
year, which totaled HK$9.7 billion. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 
in Chinese 0857 GMT 9 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Sino Land Buys Residential Site in Kowloon </H5>
  A consortium led by Sino Land paid HK$3.94 billion, HK$3940 
per square foot, for a residential site in central Kowloon at a 
government land auction. The market had expected a price in the 
range of HK$2.8 billion. Sino Land, which has a 50-percent 
stake in the project, is joined by Singapore's DBS Land with 20 
percent, and China Overseas Land and Investment, Nan Fung 
Development, and the Chinachem group, each with a 10-percent 
interest. Analysts believe that the record price paid for the 
site will contribute to further price rises in the residential 
property sector in 1994. (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST 
(BUSINESS POST) 16 Dec 93 p 1) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59380 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL </F>
<F P=101> UNITED STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Trade Policy Deemed `Not Protectionist' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0098A Beijing MEIGUO YANJIU [AMERICAN STUDIES] in 
Chinese No 3, 5 Sep 93 pp 32-52 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0098A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing MEIGUO YANJIU [AMERICAN STUDIES] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Jian: "Trend of U.S. Trade Policy in the </F>
1990s"] 
  [Excerpts] I believe that the major trend of the 
trade policy of the Clinton administration is not protectionist, 
although it has a strong protectionist flavor and some 
protectionist ingredients in many areas. It should be realized 
that there is a difference in principle between the "fair trade" 
promoted by the Clinton administration and trade protectionism. 
They are absolutely not the same. "Trade protectionism" is to 
erect tariff or nontariff barriers on the U.S. market to prevent 
foreign goods from entering the market to achieve the goal of 
protecting the American domestic market. To promote "fair trade" 
is to ask U.S. trade partners to open up their markets to U.S. 
goods and provide U.S. goods with an equal opportunity to enter 
foreign markets while keeping the U.S. market open for 
merchandise from other countries. It seeks to open up the closed 
markets of other countries and expand the scope of free trade 
instead of sealing up the U.S. market. Therefore, "fair trade," 
the purpose of the trade policy of the Clinton administration, 
is definitely not a facade of trade protectionism just like what 
some people believe. In essence, it is even closer to the 
principle of free trade instead of the principle of trade 
protectionism. 
  When we talk about "fair trade," one of the questions that 
we have to answer is: Does the principle of reciprocity 
demanded by those who promote "fair trade" run counter to the 
basic principle of free trade? Another question is: Since the 
United States promotes free trade, should it still follow the 
principle of reciprocity? Many theoreticians believe that the 
principle of reciprocity is incompatible with the principle of 
free trade. Since the Clinton administration emphasizes the 
principle of reciprocity (I open up my market to you, you should 
also open up your market to me), it has given up the principle 
of free trade. I think that this kind of inference is 
over-simplified. In general, the principle of reciprocity 
emphasized by the Clinton administration in its "fair trade" 
policy has not violated the basic principle of free trade. It is 
perhaps better to say that this is precisely what free trade is 
about. In essence, the principle of reciprocity is the principle 
of equality and mutual benefits. It demands that trade partners 
on both sides enjoy equal status and equal rights in their trade 
activities, and that both sides reap benefits. This is precisely 
what free trade demands and stands for. Trade activities cannot 
last very long, if they are not built on the basis of equality 
and mutual benefits. It is reasonable for a sovereign state such 
as the United States to demand that trade partners should share 
equal benefits and obligations in doing international trading. 
This is not an excessive demand. As far as the contents of its 
demands are concerned, they are also not something of a 
protectionist nature. Naturally, they also differ from the 
completely unconditional free trade policy which the United 
States had promoted for a considerably long period after the 
War. Relying on its absolutely predominant economic position in 
the world between the end of the War and the 1970s, the United 
States had implemented an unconditional policy for free trade, 
and set the example for other nations in taking the road of free 
trade. During this period, the speed and extent of the U.S. open 
market had greatly exceeded other nations. The United States had 
not strongly demanded that other nations open their markets the 
way the United States did, because its products which were 
extremely competitive could easily enter and seize the markets 
of other nations. What the United States promoted during that 
period was a one-way unconditional free trade policy. It is 
somewhat of a "preferential" nature. To a considerably great 
extent, the United States "tolerated" the unfair trade which 
foreign nations imposed on the United States. After the 1970s, 
Europe and Japan have rapidly caught up. The U.S. absolute 
predominance no longer exists. The United States has lost its 
position of strength in carrying out one-way unconditional free 
trade policy. Therefore, beginning from the 1980s, it has called 
for "free and fair trade," keeping the U.S. market open, while 
asking other nations to open up their markets in the same way. 
In despite of the fact that the proposal of "fair trade" 
signifies the relatively weak U.S. economic position in the 
world, it has not weakened to the extent of erecting a trade 
barrier and practicing protectionism in an overall manner. The 
United States still has the strength to uphold free and open 
trade policy. The principle of "reciprocity" stressed by the 
Clinton administration means to eliminate, not erect trade 
barriers. It is aimed at mutually opening, not closing markets 
to each other. What the Clinton administration demands does not 
run counter to the principle of free trade. It is a two-way, 
conditional free trade policy. In despite of the fact that it is 
no longer a totally unconditional free trade policy, it still 
falls within the major scope of doing free trade. We should not 
brand such policy as protectionist. 
  The major trend of the trade policy of the Clinton 
administration is free trade, not protectionism. Nevertheless, 
it is not because Clinton favors free trade, while detesting 
protectionism. The objective situation has made him do so. The 
objective conditions at home and abroad which have made the 
Clinton administration oppose trade protectionism and uphold 
free trade are as follows: 
<H5>  I. Demand for Global Economic Integration </H5>
  Right now, global economic integration has reached a high 
degree. The world economy has become an entity of interrelation, 
interaction and mutual reliance. A single country cannot 
possibly separate itself from the world economy and operate on 
its own. A free, open international trading system is an 
indispensable condition for the smooth economic operation of the 
United States. This is precisely why the United States must 
implement a free, open trade policy. The Clinton administration 
also clearly understands that trade protectionism is a 
double-edged sword, which may harm its trade partners and 
finally hurt itself. Protectionism will only escalate the trade 
war. As the largest trading nation, the United States will bear 
the brunt and suffer the greatest damage when a global trade war 
breaks out. 
<H3>  II. United States Still Has Economic Strength in Carrying 
Out Open Trade Policy </H3>
  Under the new world economic situation, the United States 
still has the economic strength needed to implement an open 
trade policy, despite the rise of Japan and Germany, which has 
weakened the U.S. economic position in the world. The U.S. 
leading role in world economy and its potential to maintain this 
leading role in the foreseeable future constitute the foundation 
of the Clinton administration in upholding free trade policy. In 
particular, we must point out that the United States possesses 
the greatest ability in carrying out scientific research, 
developing technology, and blazing new trails in the field of 
economy. This is of great significance in an era in which 
science and technology constitute the primary productive force. 
It is the basic advantage of U.S. economy. It is closely related 
with the unique U.S. social and historic conditions (social 
diversity, compatibility, openness and mobility). No other 
nation has this kind advantage. Right now, the United States is 
way ahead of other nations in the world in terms of labor 
productivity, which plays an important role in becoming 
competitive in world economy. In the global competition for high 
technology which affects the future of the world economy, the 
United States is also predominant. We should also realize that 
the advent of the information society and the post industrial 
era has further strengthened, not weakened, the dominant 
position of the United States. It has provided the United States 
with even more favorable conditions than other nations, because 
the present economic competition in the world is one of science 
and technology, one of blazing new trails, one of intellectual 
resources and qualified and trained personnel. The United States 
is strong in all these realms. 
  From the development of an international trade point of 
view, the share of the trade of products (visible trade) drops, 
while the trade of services (invisible trade) is rapidly rising. 
This situation is compatible with the development of the 
information society. The dominant position of the United States 
in international competition is more distinct in those fields 
which are closely connected with the new technological 
revolution, such as the realms of intellectual property rights, 
service trades, technical transfer and international 
investments. This predominance has demonstrated tremendous 
potentials in the 1990s when the era of information society and 
soft economy is rapidly approaching. This is precisely what the 
Clinton administration keeps in mind and expects in upholding 
its free trade policy. 
<H3>  III. The United States Has Improved Its Situation in Foreign 
Trade; It Is Not Weak or Uncompetitive. </H3>

---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|U.S. Foreign Trade Situation in Past Decade                               | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Items         |Total Volume  |Total Volume  |Deficit in Fo-|Share Deficit | 
|              |of Imports    |of Exports    |reign Trade   |in GDP        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1983          |2017          |2689          |671           |1.9 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1984          |2199          |3324          |1142          |3 percent     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1985          |2159          |3380          |1221          |3 percent     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1986          |2233          |3684          |1450          |3.4 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1987          |2502          |4097          |1596          |3.5 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1988          |3202          |4471          |1270          |2.6 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1989          |3617          |4774          |1157          |2.2 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1990          |3887          |4976          |1089          |2 percent     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1991          |4160          |4897          |734           |1.3 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1992          |5325          |4482          |843           |1.3 percent   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Source of reference: Economic Indicators January 1993                     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Many theoreticians regard the tremendous amount of trade 
deficit that the United States had since the 1980s as important 
evidence for the inevitable protectionist trend in formulating 
its foreign trade policy. Their deduction is that the tremendous 
amount of trade deficit totaling tens or hundreds of billion 
U.S. dollars shows the increasingly deteriorating U.S. situation 
in foreign trade and its weakness in meeting world competition 
and that only by relying on this "straw" of protectionism, will 
it be possible to reverse this trend. Is this deduction correct? 
It will be very clear if we earnestly and realistically analyze 
the actual situation in U.S. foreign trade during the past 
decade. 
  From the aforementioned reference material, we realize that 
in the mid-1980's the U.S. foreign trade situation had seriously 
deteriorated with the trade deficit rapidly increasing. The 
trade deficit reached a peak of $159.6 billion in 1987. The U.S. 
foreign trade situation has improved since 1988 with its rate of 
growth in exports increasing, the rate of growth in imports 
decreasing, and its trade deficit continuously dropping with the 
exception of one single year. (The trade deficit in 1992 was 
greater than that in 1991, mainly because the economic 
depression in Japan and Germany had affected U.S. exports.) The 
share of its trade deficit in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
decreased every year. The actual situation indicates that the 
U.S. foreign trade situation has improved, not deteriorated, 
since the late 1980s. Despite the fact that its trade deficit 
still amounts to tens of billions of U.S. dollars in recent 
years, it only accounts for 1.3 percent of its GDP. With its 
huge GDP which exceeds $6,000 billion, the United States is 
still able to withstand such a trade deficit. From this, we can 
see the kind of arguments saying that the situation in U.S. 
trade is deteriorating in each passing day, that the United 
States is too weak in foreign trade to meet world competition 
and that only by relying on protectionism can it manage to 
support itself, are unrealistic. In fact, the U.S. situation in 
foreign trade confronting the Clinton administration is less 
grim than that during the days of the Reagan and Bush 
administrations. Therefore, there is no need to risk everything 
and implement the extreme policy of trade protectionism which 
may play the role of a double-edged sword. 
  It is precisely this kind of objective economic situation 
that decides the orientation of the foreign trade policy of the 
Clinton administration, makes the administration follow general 
trends of free trade, and prevents it from taking the wrong road 
of trade protectionism in despite of the fact that the Clinton 
administration exhibits a more distinctive protectionist color 
than the Bush administration. 
  By analyzing all aspects in breadth and depth, we have 
studied the nature and the basic trend of the trade policy of 
the Clinton administration. Our conclusion is that instead of 
being protectionist, the trade policy of the Clinton 
administration closely follows the basic principle of free 
trade. There is a difference in principle between protectionism 
and the "fair trade" which is the purpose of the trade policy of 
the Clinton administration. The trade policy of the Clinton 
administration is closer to the principle of free trade than 
that of protectionism. We like to point out that we are only 
talking about the basic nature and the major trend of the trade 
policy of the Clinton administration. We do not want to deny the 
fact that such trade policy is imbued with protectionist 
ingredients. In fact, the trade policy of the Clinton 
administration is tainted with a deep protectionist color and 
composed of many protectionist components. These protectionist 
components are mainly manifested as follows: 
  The Clinton administration seems to make more direct 
protectionist means to deal with the "unfair trade actions" of 
its trade partners. For example, its "war of steel" with Japan 
and the European Community was an action it took to greatly 
increase its import duties to sanction their dumping activities. 
It also tried to increase its government subsidy to wage an 
"aircraft war" with the European Economic Community. 
Particularly it had time and again talked about its intention to 
even more strictly implement its "quota system for imports," 
asked its trade partners to exercise "self-restraint" and 
imposed excessively high sanitary and environmental standards on 
them. All these are typical trade protectionist measures, 
because all of them are used to prevent and restrict foreign 
goods from entering the U.S. market. 
  Therefore, when we say that the major trend of Clinton's 
trade policy upholds free trade, we absolutely do not imply that 
it has no protectionist ingredients at all. To deny or cover up 
this "negative" aspect of the trade policy of the Clinton 
administration is an equally unrealistic analysis. In short, we 
must, on the one hand, understand that the basic nature and 
major trend of the trade policy of the Clinton administration 
follows the principle of free trade, while on the other hand we 
must also realize that such policy of the Clinton administration 
is tainted with more protectionist color and composed of more 
protectionist ingredients, and that it adopts an even more 
uncompromising stand in foreign trade. From an overall point of 
view, the Clinton administration may uphold the free trade 
policy under general conditions. In certain realms (such as 
automobile, textile and steel industries) and under certain 
conditions (especially conditions which will deeply affect labor 
employment), it may also adopt some protectionist measures. Only 
by seeing these two aspects of the trade policy of the Clinton 
administration and realizing that such policy has dual 
characteristics (naturally one is primary, while the other 
secondary), will it be possible for us to completely and 
accurately understand the trend of U.S. trade policy in the 
1990s. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59381 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tang Emperor Metaphor for Deng Xiaoping </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0075A Hong Kong CHENG MING [CONTENDING] in Chinese No 
193, 1 Nov 93 pp 46-47 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0075A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHENG MING [CONTENDING] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ho Chia (6320 0163): "Historical Metaphor of the </F>
TV Play `The Tang Ming Emperor'"--first paragraph is 
introduction] 
  [Text] Although Tang Xuanzhong, the "general designer 
of opening up and reform" in the Tang Dynasty, created what 
history calls an "unprecedented era of prosperity," his absolute 
power ultimately led to the absolute corruption of society and 
of the autocrat himself. Regardless of how prosperous the 
times, they can change to troubled times because of absolute 
corruption, which produces what Du Fu's historical pen described 
as the tragedy of the nation breaking up, and the people's being 
subjugated. 
  After more than 14 years in prison, Wei Jingsheng [7614 0079 
3932] has just been released on parole. The reason for his 
sentence was that he raised a self-evident truth: An autocracy 
can only hatch a new autocrat under the autocracy, just as an 
egg can only hatch chickens; if China does not realize the fifth 
modernization--democracy--Deng Xiaoping will have been an 
autocrat, identical to Mao Zedong. Therefore, Wei Jingsheng was 
jailed by Deng Xiaoping's "imperial edict," but his subject is 
something which people seek continuously to prove. 
<H5>  People Associate Tang Xuanzhong With Deng Xiaoping </H5>
  Recently, mainland Chinese television carried a lengthy 
series titled "The Tang Ming Emperor," an exquisite, big-budget 
production. In addition to being on mainland TV, this series was 
also released on video tape, bringing to the Chinese community 
worldwide its story of what happened over 1,200 years ago. 
Although Tang Xuanzhong, the Tang Dynasty's "general designer of 
opening and reform" had created an historical era of so-called 
"unprecedented prosperity," his absolute power still led to 
absolute corruption of society and of the autocrat himself. So 
regardless of what kind of prosperous era it was, there was a 
change overnight to troubled times due to absolute corruption, 
with the result being the tragedy recorded by the historical pen 
of Du Fu: The nation disintegrated and was subjugated by others. 
  It could be that the director Chen Jialin [7115 1367 2651] 
and the playwrights Zhang Xian [1728 1720] and Ye Nan [0673 
2809] were not originally motivated to "borrow the past to 
satirize the present"; however, looking at the conclusion of the 
series, it does objectively have that effect--relating the tales 
of history to let people make comparisons with the subject of 
Wei Jingsheng. 
  Forty-four years after the death of the Tang Ming Emperor, 
Bai Juyi wrote the epic poem "eternal regret." At the end of the 
poem, Tang Xuanzhong dies in sorrow due to his longing for the 
concubine Yang, who had been forced to die: "Heaven and earth 
have an end, but this regret is endless." Bai Juyi was a 
contemporary poet, so his description of Tang Xuanzhong's 
feelings before his death should be credible. Logically, the 
ending of "The Tang Ming Emperor" need only adapt Bai Juyi's 
poem to the TV screen, which would have been both easy and good, 
as well as having a romantic artistic sense. However, the 
director and the playwrights purposely ignored Tang Xuanzhong's 
passion and grief over his lost concubine Yang; rather, they 
purposely exercised their imaginations to express how much Tang 
Xuanzhong missed his lost imperial power, his reluctance to be 
alone, his attempts to summon his former officials, to see his 
people, and his dreams of one day regaining imperial power. Even 
when his situation was completely hopeless, he would still sit 
on his abandoned imperial chair, dreaming of accepting the 
adoration of his officials and subjects, clinging with all his 
might to the symbols of the highest imperial power. When Chinese 
people view this TV production, so widely divergent from Bai 
Juyi's poem, how can they not call to mind the reality that Deng 
Xiaoping, a "common party member," still holds the highest power 
in the Communist Party? Absolute power is absolutely attractive, 
so it produces what Wei Jingsheng tried to prove; i.e., that an 
autocracy must produce an autocrat. 
<H5>  Rapid Rise of Reform Under Autocracy </H5>
  "The Tang Ming Emperor" expresses the idea that Tang 
Xuanzhong Li Longji was, in conducting "opening and reform" 
through perceptual knowledge, the most brilliant of the more 
than 400 emperors in China's history. In the process of viewing 
this show, Chinese people will naturally make associations and 
comparisons, forming a hazy proof of reality. 
  When Li Longji first ascended the throne, he immediately 
reformed the bad government left over from the harsh regime of 
Wu Zetian, which had not been reformed by Zhong Zong and Rui 
Zong. In these actions, he was extraordinarily open and 
brilliant. He favored equality under the laws whereby "the son 
of the emperor should receive the same sentence as a commoner 
should he violate the law." He diluted the special privileges of 
the imperial family. He dealt strictly with the "politics of 
exchanging money for power" by which official positions could be 
purchased. He advocated a society of coexisting multiple 
theologies; one in which his subjects could freely choose 
Daoism, Confucianism, or even the outside religions of Buddhism 
and Islam, without the "ideological violence" that comes with a 
single sanctioned religion. His economic policy was one of 
"opening to the outside," where each of the Western nations had 
a flourishing commercial trade with the Great Tang. He was so 
open that he even permitted foreigners (such as the Japanese Abe 
Nakamaro) to be officers in the imperial government. He was 
opposed to witchcraft, paid attention to science, used the 
imperial military forces to destroy locusts, ordered the making 
of a new calendar, and promoted water conservancy projects; 
thus, science and technology were very advanced. He opposed the 
policy begun in the Qin Dynasty of stressing agriculture while 
ignoring commerce. Rather, he implemented the "economic freedom" 
of agriculture and commerce developing together, reformed and 
carried out new policies so that throughout the country emerged 
the boom era of "flourishing markets" and "the nation strong and 
the people rich." He paid considerable attention to 
"intellectuals," established an academy of classical learning, 
and invited people of talent from throughout the world to 
Chang'an, bestowing upon them very high wages and social 
position, making China one of the world's leading nations in the 
humanities and in science and technology. 
  Through economic and cultural (but not political) reforms, 
Tang Xuanzhong indeed lifted the Tang up to an extremely high 
level of prosperity, producing as many talented people as there 
were stars in the sky. Tang poetry was the pinnacle of ancient 
Chinese poetry, while the poetry of Tang Xuanzhong was the 
zenith of Tang poetry. The so-called "poetry immortals" of 
history--Li Bai, the "Saint of Poetry" Du Fu, and the "Buddhist 
Poet" Wang Wei, etc.--all appeared in the Tang Dynasty. In 
addition, there were such masters in the history of poetry as 
Zhang Yue, He Zhizhang, Zhang Jiuling, Meng Haoran, Gao Shi, 
Chui Jin, and Wang Changling. Wu Daozhi, referred to in history 
as the "Saint of Painting," was Tang Xuanzhong's royal court 
painter. Both the great calligrapher Zhang Xu, famed for his 
cursive hand, and the calligrapher Yan Zhengqing, who created 
the "Yan style," displayed their talents in the Tang Xuanzhong 
era. The major Chinese composer Li Gui, who had a voluminous 
output of vocal music, dancing music, and instrumental music, 
was a royal court musician, while the Tang Ming Emperor himself 
was a player and composer. Tang Xuanzhong created theater (by 
absorbing a great many dances from Western regions), which set a 
precedent for Chinese dance. There were such major dancers as 
Lady Gong Shun who was adept at wielding the sword, as well as 
the sword player Fei Weng. At that time, Fei Weng's sword dance, 
Li Bai's poetry, and Zhang Xu's cursive hand were called "the 
three peaks of perfection." Among religious specialists, there 
was the great monk Jian Zhen, who traveled east to Japan and 
established Japanese Ritsu.... 
  There can be accomplishments in reform under an autocracy, 
even great accomplishments. It does not matter whether one is 
speaking of "Weng Jin's reform" or "Zhen Guan's reform" in 
Chinese history, or even the second imperial regime of Napoleon 
the 3rd in the period following the great French Revolution. The 
latter saw the great achievement of completing the industrial 
revolution in France, making France the world's second great 
industrial nation, in which there were such literary stars as 
Hugo and Flaubert, and such great impressionist artists as 
Monet, Degas, Manet, Renoir, Cezanne, and Pissarro, the founders 
of modern painting. Associating with Deng Xiaoping in today's 
China, although his reform achievements cannot be placed on a 
par with Tang Xuanzhong's "unprecedented era" of boom, it is in 
degree several figures higher when compared with the Mao Zedong 
era. In addition, the pace of economic growth over the past 
several years has caused the Western nations, which have been in 
a state of decline, to treat China with increased respect. Like 
the Tang Ming Emperor, Deng Xiaoping has carried out reform only 
in the economy, not in the "imperial regime." Achievements have 
obviously been possible, even great achievements. 
  However, all the boom eras under autocracies in this world 
have the same special features--like a rising balloon, the 
faster it ascends, the faster it will break. "The Emperor's 
achievements" will not last five generations but will frequently 
collapse in "his own era." 
<H3>  "Rapidly Endangered Syndrome" of Reform Conducted by an 
Autocrat </H3>
  Comparing Deng Xiaoping with the Tang Ming Emperor, we find 
that reform under an autocracy has a "rapidly endangered 
syndrome" with the following symptoms: 
  Corruption. Absolute power must accelerate in a 
boom era, leading to corruption of the autocrat himself or his 
governing group. Tang Xuanzhong began by corrupting himself. He 
indulged in women and song and, especially after he obtained the 
concubine Yang, he indulged in "night life" to the point of not 
going to the "imperial court to attend to the nation's 
business." In addition, when a man made it to the top, all his 
friends and relatives made it there with him. This put his uncle 
Yang Guozhong in power, and with this relative running things 
the entire imperial court was soon corrupted. An era of boom 
collapsed in the "Anshi chaos." Although there is nothing about 
Deng Xiaoping which compares to the personal corruption of Tang 
Xuanzhong or Mao Zedong, the Communist regime, its absolute 
power unrestricted by a division of powers and a legal system, 
must corrupt rapidly like the imperial regime of the Tang Ming 
Emperor. In the 1980s, Deng Xiaoping promised that, "Even though 
we risk being shot by people who hide in the dark, we will 
attack economic crimes to the end, and no matter who is 
discovered, we must punish them by the law." The result was that 
even Hu Shiying [5170 4258 5391], the son of Hu Qiaomu [5170 
0829 2606], was arrested for committing fraud then released, 
arrested again, and finally released again after pressure from 
all sides. For other cases, it also is that the law cannot touch 
many people, "there are no results." Now, corruption has led to 
complaints from people everywhere. Jiang Zemin has conducted an 
anti-corruption campaign on his own, trying to save a dangerous 
situation. While it is an incurable disease caused by absolute 
power, no one can effect a miraculous cure and bring the dying 
back to life. 
  Old and useless powers. Imperial power is a 
lifelong system. When the Tang Ming Emperor was 70 years old, 
and the An Lushan rebellion broke out, he lacked the talent and 
strategy that he had in his youth when he rooted out the power 
grabs of Queen Wei and the Princess Taiping. He made many 
mistakes as a military commander, which caused the losses of 
Tongguan and Changan. So also with Deng Xiaoping: When he had 
just regained power, he had a complete doctrine of reform, but 
later violated it completely by such actions as abandoning Hu 
Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, imprisoning Wei Jingsheng, carrying out 
a system of power for life in total disregard of the law, and 
the "4 June" incident. Today, he is close to 90, yet still holds 
absolute power. This presents 1.2 billion Chinese with a 
self-evident truth concerning the old and useless--when anyone 
enters old age, they enter an unchangeable process of decreasing 
talent until they lose their capabilities completely, the final 
stage of life. The wages of old and useless power is often 
manifested in the exercise of power by relatives of the royal 
court, eunuchs, secretaries, and children. This sort of illegal 
power-wielding stems from extreme greed, usually the source of 
the most dangerous disorder. 
  Violent change. For talented people, no matter if 
they be in or out of government, there is a feeling of 
helplessness when confronted with a situation of social 
corruption and treacherous court officials in power, because the 
autocrat's power is for life. Moreover, there are no means of 
correcting the autocrat's mistakes, such as in a democratic 
political system. Therefore, the only recourse is to wait for 
the corrupt autocrat's death, or carry out a palace coup and 
social rebellion in order to accomplish a violent change in 
power. Doing it this way means that society must pay an 
extremely high price, with the immediate destruction of an era 
of prosperity built up through painstaking efforts. 
<H5>  "Tang Ming Emperor"'s Warning </H5>
  The "rapidly endangered syndrome" that "The Tang Ming 
Emperor" warns of is: We are now 1,200 years removed from Tang 
Xuanzhong, and for 200 years there has existed in the world a 
modern democratic political system which can cure the absolute 
power syndrome. How then can the Chinese still stupidly await 
the "new autocrat" who will bring us good fortune? Even the most 
brilliant autocrat, who carries out reform and operates the 
whole era of boom, will also be like a rapidly rising balloon 
which will quickly burst; how can we take a political mirage as 
our future? Reform under absolute power is absolutely unreliable! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59382 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   More On Mao Zedong's Breakthroughs, Tragedies </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0110A Beijing XUEXI YU YANJIU [STUDY AND RESEARCH] in 
Chinese Nos 23, 24; 1, 15 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0110A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XUEXI YU YANJIU [STUDY AND RESEARCH] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu Zhichao (4151 0037 6389) and responsible </F>
editor Liu Xing (0491 1041): "Mao Zedong's Three Great 
Breakthroughs, Three Great Tragedies"] 
<H5>  [1 Dec pp 18-21] </H5>
  [Text] The Second Breakthrough and Tragedy: On 
Contradictions Among the People and the "Double Hundred" (Let a 
Hundred Flowers Blossom and a Hundred Schools of Thought 
Contend) Policy 
  The purpose of socialism is to tackle economic construction, 
develop social productive forces, and make society prosper and 
flourish across the board. This lies at the heart of socialist 
construction. At the same time, it is inherent in socialism to 
develop socialist democracy in national life and social life, 
protect the democratic rights and freedom of the people, and 
promote science and culture. As with the Chinese socialist 
construction road he pioneered on the economic front, the string 
of theories and policies advanced by Mao Zedong about 
contradictions among the people and the "double hundred" policy 
as well as his vision of a lively dynamic political scene indeed 
constituted another great breakthrough in socialism. This 
breakthrough dispelled the clouds that had been hanging over 
socialism in the wake of the revelations about Stalin and 
brought forth the new look of and new development prospects for 
a socialist society. A brave new world beckoned. After Mao 
Zedong put forward these theories and policies, the whole party 
and the entire population, now energized, worked hard to put 
them into effect. Regrettably, things did not turn out as 
originally envisaged. Once again, there were serious setbacks 
and failures mainly because Mao Zedong himself violated the very 
theories and policies he had put forward. First came the 
rightist offensive of 1957. Subsequently, the anti-rightist 
campaign widened. After the failure of the Great Leap Forward 
mentioned above, internal dissensions appeared in the party, 
followed by the struggle at Lushan conference. Legitimate 
opinions and correct proposals within the party were labelled 
rightist opposition and wrongly criticized. Worse, this kind of 
internal party dispute was characterized as serious class 
struggle, the continuation of the life-and-death struggle 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. As domestic 
contradictions multiplied and the international situation 
changed, particularly as tension rose between China and the 
Soviet Union and changes unfolded within the Communist Party of 
the Soviet Union [CPSU], all these theories and ideas were 
increasingly shunted aside by the erroneous theory of taking 
class struggle as the key link between the 10th Plenum of the 
8th CPC Central Committee in 1962 and the Cultural Revolution. 
In his waning years, many of Mao Zedong's ideas and theories, 
whether they be correctly handling contradictions among the 
people, the "double hundred" policy, or creating a lively 
dynamic political scene, had ceased to exist in fact. We cannot 
but regard this as a profound tragedy for Mao Zedong and even 
the entire nation. 
  It is not only theoretically but also practically 
significant 
to analyze the reasons why such innovative theories and policies 
were not carried through but turned out to be disappointments, 
failures, and tragedies, and the lessons to be learned 
therefrom. Needless to say, this analytical exercise would be 
just as complex and difficult as the one above involving the 
economy. What follows is a preliminary analytical attempt. 
  The issue can be analyzed at two levels. 
  At the first level are the direct reasons that prevented Mao 
Zedong from persevering in the policies and theories he had 
advanced and the lessons we can draw therefrom. The reasons can 
be divided into two categories at least. 
  The first category has to do with institutional and legal 
construction. Mao Zedong espoused his theory of contradictions 
among the people and the "double hundred" policy essentially on 
the theoretical plane. He explained them and propagated them 
inside and outside the party. In addition, party and government 
cadres at all levels were required to follow them ideologically, 
as a method of leadership, and as a style of leadership. 
However, he neglected to institutionalize them or write them 
into law. Nor was there enough time to do so. He overlooked 
institutional and legal construction for the party and the state 
and failed to ensure their survival by making them part of the 
institutions and writing them into law, which had greater 
restraining force and was more stable. The distinction between 
contradictions among the people and contradictions between 
ourselves and the enemy was a political concept. This demand and 
some general standards were not sufficient. Appropriate legal 
limits should have been set to ensure that the distinction was 
not obscured. The people should have freedom of speech, freedom 
of the press, freedom of scientific, artistic, and literary 
creation, and even the freedom to demonstrate and hold rallies 
as a way of expressing themselves. However, they must show 
discipline. In exercising their personal freedom, they must not 
hurt social and national interests, disturb social order, or 
interfere with the freedom of another individual. All these 
principles should have been translated into detailed rules and 
regulations to make up part of the legal system. We could not 
afford anarchy if we were to fully exercise democracy, ensure 
the people's democratic rights, and achieve centralization on 
the basis of democracy. This demand should be made part of the 
democratic order and democratic procedures and be legally 
protected. Only thus could we eliminate arbitrariness and avoid 
the kind of change brought about by a change in leadership or by 
a change in the priorities of a leader. This, however, was not 
fully appreciated and emphasized by Mao Zedong at the time. He 
set great store by the leadership of the communist party and the 
socialist road, which he considered essential to implementing 
the various correct principles he had put forward. Yet he failed 
to see that now that the CPC had become the ruling party and the 
leading force of the national regime practicing people's 
democracy, actions should be taken as soon as possible to ensure 
the stability of the regime through legal construction and ward 
off any disruption and damage from all quarters, including the 
leadership itself. At the time socialist transformation was 
still in its infancy and society as a whole was still in a state 
of flux. To institutionalize and write into law a string of 
policies and theories regarding contradictions among the people 
and the "double hundred" policy indeed would have presented some 
practical difficulties. The reason is that institutionalization 
and legalization required a relatively stable order and 
considerable experience. At a minimum, however, the importance 
of institutionalization and legalization should have been fully 
appreciated, which would have served as the starting point of an 
earnest effort in that direction. Unfortunately, Mao Zedong 
overlooked this point. The entire party, including most leaders 
at the top echelon, were equally ignorant. Thus seeds of trouble 
were sown, leading to the arbitrary changes in later years of 
many correct theories, policies, and measures. 
  Then there were methodical errors. Campaigns and criticisms 
in the mass-movement mold were used instead of gentle and 
persuasive ideological education and discussions emphasizing 
reasoning on an equal level. Mao Zedong said, "Let a hundred 
flowers blossom, let a hundred schools of thought contend." With 
a desire for unity as his point of departure, Mao Zedong said we 
should resolve our contradictions through criticism or struggle 
and proceed from there to a new unity. This was a democratic way 
of resolving contradictions among the people that was different 
from the class struggle of the past. From the very beginning, 
however, this method was interpreted one-sidedly and departed 
further and further from its original intent as time went by. 
Contradictions among the people included more than differences 
in ideological understanding. Even more important were competing 
interests, rights, and demands. Accordingly, we must begin by 
spelling out the equality, freedom, democracy and other rights 
that every citizen is entitled to and honoring such rights. 
Needless to say, we should at the same time specify the 
appropriate corresponding obligations. Only by balancing rights 
with obligations properly or through criticism and 
self-criticism can we achieve a new unity. The party as well as 
party and government workers who constituted the principal 
leading force and were primarily responsible for resolving 
contradictions among the people were particularly duty-bound to 
acquire the skill of persuasion by argument and reasoning within 
the framework of respecting the people's freedom, democratic 
rights, and other civil rights and to master the methods of 
reconciling all sorts of interest relations in accordance with 
the law. This required raising the entire population's 
democratic consciousness and legal consciousness and its 
awareness of the citizen's rights and obligations. It also 
required equipping it with skills fundamentally different from 
the confrontational methods of the past. Yet Mao Zedong did not 
make these things his priority. While stressing the differences 
between the two kinds of contradictions and the two ways of 
handling such contradictions, he remained wedded to the mass 
movement so frequently resorted to during the confrontational 
struggles in the past. A rectification movement was launched in 
the spring of 1957 targeting subjectivism, factionalism, and 
bureaucratism in the party. In theory, small democracy, "like a 
gentle breeze and a mild rain," was the modus operandi. In fact, 
the masses were aroused to expose and criticize, which was 
precisely why a tiny handful of rightists were able to mount 
their "big democracy," namely, speaking out freely, airing views 
fully, holding great debates, and writing big-character posters. 
Following the anti-rightist campaign, Mao Zedong ironically 
reviewed and endorsed these methods, adopting them for use not 
only against the rightists but also as a way of handling 
differences of opinions among the people. He applied the 
"four-bigs" in every field and every arena of work, turning them 
into the synonyms of exposure, criticism, and struggle in real 
life. The original goal--having the people engage on an equal 
footing in discussion, debate, criticism, and self-criticism in 
accordance with their democratic rights--was completely lost 
sight of. The worst was yet to come; during the Cultural 
Revolution, the "four-bigs" became a tool of confusing friend 
with foe, the so-called mass dictatorship. 
  The two groups of reasons mentioned above were the obvious 
ones, issues that Mao Zedong failed to clarify and resolve when 
he put forward the idea of contradictions among the people and 
"double hundred" policy. 
  At the second level were the deeper social and historical 
factors that led to this tragedy, as well as reasons that had to 
do with Mao Zedong's own personality. 
  First, let us look at Mao Zedong's personality as an 
explanation. Because he wielded paramount power, his thought and 
conduct could not but have an enormous, even decisive, impact on 
how things actually turned out, whether they be the innovative 
breakthroughs at the beginning or the subsequent changes. Both 
in education and in life experience, Mao Zedong was inevitably 
influenced by China's long feudal past and certain feudal ideas 
still existing in real life, which found expression in his 
actions at critical points in time. All that is undeniable. 
However, this writer cannot go along with those who seek to 
explain Mao Zedong's mistakes with reference to the thought of 
feudal monarchs. Ever since his youth, Mao Zedong had pursued 
individual liberation and democratic freedom. He was a radical 
democrat and populist who abhorred feudal rule. Later he 
embraced Marxism and, analyzing Chinese society from the 
perspective of historical materialism, found the road that would 
lead to total victory for the democratic revolution in China. 
For that he struggled throughout his life, practicing what he 
preached. That he could rise above the Soviet model and Stalin's 
mistakes and come up with creative breakthroughs proves that he 
was a great proletarian democrat. Be that as it may, there were 
also inconsistencies in Mao Zedong's character. Besides the 
feudal ideas noted above, even more important were his extreme 
sensitivity about class struggle, a product of the protracted 
and brutal class struggle and revolutionary war in which he had 
been involved, and his highly developed sense of authority and 
swift manner of making decisions, cutting through all 
opposition, which were the results of his occupying the position 
of party leader, and rightly so, for so long. At the time these 
attributes were correct and essential to defeating the enemy and 
seizing victory. Under the new circumstances, however, they 
became barriers to the transition to a democratic system. For 
decades the goal of the revolution led by the CPC was to strive 
for democracy. Yet the brutal struggle between friend and foe, 
both the climate of the struggle itself and the methods, could 
not but hinder normal democratic construction and prevent 
democratic habits from taking hold. After seizing power and with 
the ferocious class struggle largely behind it, the environment 
began to allow more democracy and freedom and there was a need 
to shift to regular democratic procedures. That Mao Zedong was 
the first to realize. At the slightest sign of trouble, however, 
he immediately tightened the bow of class struggle and went back 
to the old beaten track. The fact of the matter is that a 
revolutionary is most likely to fall victim to this kind of 
tragedy in times of upheaval when his mission as well as the 
circumstances change radically. Something similar happened to 
Mao Zedong's contemporaries, that is, the older generation of 
revolutionaries. It is just that Mao Zedong stood out more. 
  Second, there were China's own social and historical 
reasons. 
Old China was a semi-colonial semi-feudal society without the 
foundation for practicing democracy, operating a free market, or 
creating a free society. Nor were there a democratic tradition 
or democratic practices. The primary mission of the democratic 
revolution of the proletariat under the leadership of its party 
was to overthrow reactionary rule and seize power through a 
revolutionary war. It could only experiment with an elementary 
democratic system to a limited extent (principally revolutionary 
units and revolutionary bases). For China as a whole, 
patriarchalism and ultra-democracy (or crude anarchism) were the 
order of the day. For seven or eight years after the PRC was 
founded, this pattern basically remained intact despite 
earth-shaking changes which vastly complicated the effort to 
correctly handle contradictions among the people, implement the 
"double hundred" policy, and social democratic construction. In 
fact, the process in which the "double hundred" policy and the 
concept of contradictions among the people took shape was 
accompanied by heated arguments and struggles, both inside and 
outside the party, which continued after they were put forward. 
Many unexpected things happened. At first the main problem was 
that many people in the party did not understand, were not 
accustomed to, and had no experience in the new situation and 
the new policies. Comrades with dogmatic ideas also resisted 
them. Wedded to the rigid Stalinist concept of socialism being 
complete unanimity, on the one hand, and accustomed to the 
ideology and practices of fierce friend and foe struggles of the 
past, they found the policy of "letting a hundred flowers 
blossom and a hundred schools of thought contend" unacceptable. 
They contended that it would lead to chaos all over the land and 
undermine the CPC's leadership. Others were full of nostalgia 
for the patriarchal style of leadership. (It may be noted in 
passing that Soviet leaders including Khrushchev at the time 
also disagreed with the "double hundred" policy and the concept 
of contradictions among the people.) Mao Zedong repeatedly 
criticized this situation, pointing out that we must adapt to 
the new circumstances ideologically and, learning from the 
[former] Soviet Union, overcome metaphysics. Later, there was 
also a widespread misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the 
"double hundred" policy and the notion of contradictions among 
the people. Some people even misread it to mean liberalization, 
freedom without discipline, democracy without centralism; 
rejected the Marxist theory of class struggle; and denied that 
class struggle still existed to a substantial degree. There was 
much confusion in the rectification movement between the spring 
and summer of 1957. At the same time, there was indeed a handful 
of people who took an antagonistic stand to the democratic 
revolution and socialist revolution in China and tried to launch 
a counterattack on socialism and CPC leadership by expanding and 
taking advantage of the prevailing confusion. Between them these 
two trends led to the serious error of expanding the 
anti-rightist movement, which, in turn, soon caused Mao Zedong 
to reassess the class struggle situation. These facts show that 
it is an enormously complex and arduous task to develop 
democracy and make democracy and freedom exist side by side with 
unity, stability, and centralization in a society like China 
today with a long feudal history which is also economically and 
culturally backward. Such a task must proceed in tandem with 
economic and cultural development in an orderly way step by 
step. A two-pronged approach covering both ideological education 
and institutional construction is necessary so that the various 
democratic institutions and related laws can be gradually 
created and perfected and that the masses as well as government 
workers can enhance their democratic and legal consciousness 
over time, develop democratic habits, and acquire the democratic 
way of life. We absolutely cannot afford to be impatient and 
resort to the mass movement. On this matter, as with economic 
construction, Mao Zedong failed to fully consider China's 
national conditions or the stage Chinese socialism was in at the 
time. At the beginning, it was full speed ahead; there was an 
over-eagerness for quick success. After running into a problem, 
though, he overreacted and over-corrected, resulting in massive 
setbacks and ups and downs. This is a profound lesson for us. 
  Thirdly, there were changes in the domestic and 
international 
situation. Nineteen fifty six and the spring of 1957 were 
devoted to the "double hundred" policy and contradictions among 
the people--both propaganda and implementation. By the fall of 
1957, an anti-rightist movement was under way, the first setback 
in the drive to carry through with the policies mentioned above 
and develop democracy. At the time, Mao Zedong reiterated that 
class struggle was the principal contradiction, but it was both 
his expectation and his hope that after retraining in the 
"socialist revolution on the ideological front and political 
front," he could refocus his energies on economic construction 
shortly. In early 1958, therefore, he proposed that 
technological revolution be the new center of party work, 
calling on the party to adapt to the existing and emerging surge 
in production, to pay special attention to agriculture, finance, 
and trade, and to catch up with and overtake Britain in 15 
years. In other words, the Great Leap Forward of the future 
would be in economic construction. The expansion of the 
anti-rightist movement was by and large just a temporary, 
limited setback. The resultant reassessment of class struggle by 
Mao Zedong was also a limited one. In general he still insisted 
that we redirect the focus in our work to economic construction. 
Contradictions among the people were legion. The more serious 
setbacks and mistakes came after the failure of the Great Leap 
Forward when the domestic economy was deeply mired in numerous 
problems, and deep dissensions occurred within the party. 
Simultaneously, tension rose in Sino-Soviet relations as well as 
China's relations with the West and a number of neighboring 
nations. In these circumstances, every contradiction worsened, 
objectively presenting the effort to develop democracy, carry 
out the "double hundred" policy, and create a lively and dynamic 
situation with a host of difficulties. Subjectively, Mao 
Zedong's class struggle was intensified. Moreover, the two 
interacted with each other, setting up a vicious circle. 
Consequently, at the Lushan conference of 1959 intra-party 
differences of opinion were elevated to the level of a 
continuation of the life-and-death struggle between the 
bourgeoisie and proletariat. In the next three beleaguered years 
there was a deliberate effort to ease the strained atmosphere 
here and concentrate on economic adjustment. In reality, tension 
both inside and outside China intensified relentlessly. At 
Beidaihe in November 1962 Mao Zedong brought up class struggle 
again, finally totally abandoning the new socialist ideological 
and political society that he had hoped would be established in 
the wake of his "double hundred" policy and contradictions among 
the people. This also paved the way for the 10-year disaster, 
the Cultural Revolution. The lesson here is that it is easier to 
develop socialist democracy and freedom and create a lively and 
dynamic situation when the government is having more success in 
the economy, in domestic politics, and in international affairs. 
In contrast, it is harder when problems are mounting and there 
is tension all around. In the latter situation, leaders are more 
prone to emphasize struggle and rely on the centralization of 
state power and coercive methods. But these simple tactics are 
effective only for a limited period of time and, in the long 
haul, actually militate against the consolidation and 
development of socialism. The only fundamental way to ensure the 
long-term stability of socialism is to build democratic 
institution with perseverance step by step and create a 
political situation in which democracy and centralization, 
freedom and discipline, individual satisfaction and common 
aspirations go hand in hand in accordance with the principle of 
correctly handling contradictions among the people and the 
"double hundred" policy. Troubles and tension at home or on the 
international front hamper the development of democracy and 
freedom to a certain extent, but they should not cause us to 
depart from this fundamental position. Moreover, public 
understanding of this issue and the correctness or otherwise of 
the actions on it in turn play an important part in determining 
the direction in which the situation will evolve. Accordingly, 
whether or not the principal characters have a clear 
understanding and handle the situation properly is critical to 
determining whether or not we will end up with a vicious circle 
or positive circle. In putting forward the theory of 
contradictions among the people and the "double hundred" policy, 
Mao Zedong took warning from Stalin. (As we all know, the 
centralization of state power by Stalin and his despotism had 
something to do with the situation both inside and outside the 
Soviet Union at the time.) Yet after advancing these correct 
theories and policies, Mao Zedong was subsequently forced by 
circumstances to modify them for the worse, with dire 
consequences. This tragedy shows that the odds are stacked 
against those who want to build socialism in a backward nation 
amid difficult circumstances. 
  Today we have mastered and inherited from Mao Zedong his 
correct theories and policies, at the same time correcting his 
errors. Things are now radically different from Mao Zedong's 
days. We stand on the shoulders of a giant. Nevertheless, our 
feet are still planted on Chinese soil. We still frequently 
encounter the kind of objective and subjective conflicts and 
difficulties Mao Zedong confronted back then and are not able to 
resolve them instantly. Thus studying his breakthrough 
innovations and tragic lessons has highly practical significance. 
<H5>  [15 Dec pp 4-8] </H5>
  [Text] The Third Breakthrough and Its Tragedy: On the 
Advanced Nature of CPC and Its Ties to the Masses 
  Mao Zedong knew full well that "seizing national victory is 
only the first step in the long march." "The road after 
revolution will be even longer and more bumpy." To turn 
populous, poor, and backward China into a prosperous and strong 
socialist nation would be an historic and extremely complex and 
difficult mission that required long-term exploration and 
effort. As in the case of revolution, we could not mechanically 
duplicate the experiences of other nations when it comes to the 
construction of China. This was what Mao Zedong always thought. 
As noted above, his goal was to take an economic road different 
from that of the Soviet Union and bring about a lively and 
dynamic social, political, scientific, and cultural scene. In a 
nutshell, to create a socialism bursting with energy that meshes 
with the characteristics of China and meets the needs of the 
Chinese people. Clearly, it was impossible to accomplish this 
mission and fulfill this mission without a CPC that integrates 
theory with reality, that has close ties to the masses, and that 
always maintains a proletarian advanced nature. This is why Mao 
Zedong paid close attention to the construction of the party at 
a time when it was wielding state power and leading 
construction. He studied the matter endlessly and came up with 
major breakthroughs, both theoretical and practical. Here too, 
however, he later failed with tragic consequences. 
  In China, both the democratic revolution and the socialist 
revolution triumphed under CPC leadership. How to build a 
communist party marrying Marxism with the workers' movement to 
take up the heavy responsibility of revolution in a large 
Oriental nation where peasants accounted for the bulk of the 
population, where the proletariat is minuscule, and where the 
people's scientific and cultural standards were fairly low? This 
was a question that deeply interested Mao Zedong and other older 
revolutionaries. Their solution was a good one. An important 
part of this solution was the advanced intellectuals who were 
schooled in modern education and had a personal need for 
national democratic revolution. On the one hand, they applied 
Marxism to the reality in China. On the other hand, they linked 
up with advanced elements among the workers and peasants to 
launch a revolutionary struggle together. The Chinese 
proletariat was under triple pressure. Not only did it unleash 
on its own a mighty anti-imperialist anti-feudal workers' 
movement, but, joining forces with advanced intellectuals, its 
staunchest members went to the countryside where conditions were 
most difficult to mobilize and unite vast numbers of peasants 
and conduct a protracted revolutionary war. Peasants were the 
backbone of the Chinese revolution. It was only natural 
therefore for a host of outstanding elements to emerge from 
among the ranks of the peasantry, educated by the CPC and 
tempered by the revolutionary struggle. China's anti-imperialist 
anti-feudal revolutionary war put the party's key members 
(advanced intellectuals, advanced workers, and impoverished 
peasants) under military communism for a long period of time, 
strengthening their proletarian character. In other words, 
during the revolution not only was the CPC composed of 
revolutionaries most eager to change China's semi-feudal 
semi-colonial look, but it had a proletarian advanced nature and 
was representative of the oppressed masses of workers and 
peasants of China, with whom it maintained intimate ties. All 
efforts on behalf of party construction, including the Marxist 
political line and ideological education, the organizational 
principle of democratic centralism, the practices of criticism 
and self-criticism, and methods of rectification movements, 
rested on this foundation. 
  During the period of revolutionary change, particularly 
after 
the victory of the democratic revolution, Mao Zedong went beyond 
affirming the Marxist revolutionary line; he also took special 
pains to maintain the party's proletarian advanced nature and 
remain in close touch with the masses. During the Yanan era, he 
called for a wide-ranging campaign to study Guo Moruo's [6753 
3106 5387] "Commemorating the 300th Anniversary of Jiashen." He 
wanted the whole party to learn a major lesson from the story of 
King Chuang, who entered the capital but, letting success go to 
his head, became arrogant. Corruption and dissensions set in and 
he was soon defeated. On the eve of the triumph of revolution 
nationwide, he warned all party members to be on guard against 
arrogance, rashness, and the bourgeoisie's sugar-coated bullets. 
After liberation, he repeatedly admonished all party cadres not 
to change their revolutionary nature and degenerate just because 
of the change in their status after victory. In conjunction with 
the solution of the various tasks inherited from the democratic 
revolution and the series of procedures in socialist 
transformation, he took a string of measures to solve the new 
problems that had emerged in party construction. For instance, 
he severely punished the party members and cadres who failed to 
make clear distinctions in land reform and sentenced Liu 
Qingshan [0491 3237 1472] and Zhang Zishan [1728 1311 0810] to 
death during the movements against the three evils and five 
evils. At the time, what needed to be done most of all were the 
tasks inherited from the democratic revolution, such as 
continuing to move troops around to eradicate the bandits and 
oppose local despots and carrying out land reform and other work 
relating to socialist transformation, including the abolition of 
the exploitation system. As far as party construction is 
concerned, past experiences sufficed as a guide. By and large, 
the state of the party was quite good in this period of change. 
  By 1956 and 1957 the situation in which the party found 
itself had changed in a fundamental way and economic 
construction had become the overriding mission. In these 
circumstances, how to mesh Marxism into the new reality and work 
out correct lines, policies, and principles in such areas as 
economic construction, social development, and democratic, 
political, scientific, and cultural construction took on special 
importance. But as ar as the party itself was concerned, even 
more important was how to preserve the party's advanced nature 
and its ties with the masses. For instance, as leaders and 
members of the ruling party, how were CPC members to be advanced 
elements in economic construction and, at the same time, 
correctly reconcile personal economic interests with those of 
the masses? That was a brand-new topic, totally different from 
anything in the revolutionary years. Or how should the party 
correctly handle the contradictions among the people which were 
multiplying? This had become the theme of national political 
life. Many contradictions among the people directly and 
indirectly manifested themselves as relations between the 
leaders and the led. As leaders and rulers, how should CPC 
members handle these contradictions? This was an unprecedented 
topic. For this very reason, since 1956 Mao Zedong had 
highlighted the issue of maintaining the party's advanced nature 
and its close ties with the masses in the new situation, giving 
it special consideration. The negative side of the CPSU during 
the Stalin era that came to light after the 20th CPSU Congress 
as well as complex contradictions inside the CPSU at the time 
only served to make Mao Zedong pay even closer attention to 
party construction. A proposal was made at the Eighth CPC 
National Congress in 1956 to combat subjectivism, factionalism, 
and bureaucratism through party rectification. In the spring of 
1957, after Mao Zedong raised the issue of correctly handling 
contradictions among the people, a party-wide rectification 
movement targeting subjectivism, factionalism, and bureaucratism 
went under way. Masses outside the party were mobilized to 
criticize party members, particularly those in leadership 
positions, so as to help the party rectify its style. At that 
time Mao Zedong sharply criticized the desire for personal fame 
and gain on the part of some people in the party and attacked 
them for forgetting their fine tradition of arduous struggle, 
for losing their revolutionary spirit, and for acquiring such 
bad habits as scrambling for position and fame and putting on 
bureaucratic airs. He emphasized that party members must 
maintain the revolutionary zeal and spirit of the revolutionary 
era and identify themselves with the masses. If combating 
subjectivism was necessary to solve problems relating to 
ideological line, then the fight against factionalism and 
bureaucratism was needed essentially to sort out relations 
within the party and without, particularly those between the 
party and the masses. The goal was to make the party, now that 
it became the ruling party and leader, stay in line with the 
masses in everything, from the way of life to thinking to 
feelings, which would prevent some party leaders from going down 
the road of bureaucratism and privilege. At the time Mao Zedong 
and other leaders were sincere and firm in this matter. 
Unfortunately, they later misjudged the situation and the 
anti-rightist movement spread, so the mission was not 
accomplished. At the peak of socialist construction in 1958, Mao 
Zedong put forward a string of policies, including cadre 
participation in labor, and over time came to endorse two 
participations, one reform, and three-way combination (cadre 
participation in productive labor and worker participation in 
management), reform of irrational and outmoded rules and 
regulations, and close cooperation among workers, cadres and 
technicians). The purpose was always the same: to maintain close 
ties between the party and the people. Unfortunately, because 
the Great Leap Forward proved to be a mistake and soon failed, 
these policies and measures were not systematically followed 
through. After the 1960's, Mao Zedong, learning from the Soviet 
Union, again and again voiced objection to the bureaucratic and 
revisionist thought and style of some party members, especially 
leading cadres, which cut them off from the masses. He called 
for the training of successors to the cause of proletarian 
revolution and opposed peaceful evolution, both indicative of a 
concern to keep the party's proletarian nature, maintain 
intimate relations between the party and the masses, and prevent 
the party's degeneration. At the same time, however, he erred by 
exaggerating class struggle more and more, even portraying 
intra-party contradictions as class struggle on many occasions. 
Misled by this flawed theory, he increasingly confused the 
preservation of the party's purity with ultra-leftist party 
struggle, finally culminating in the tragedy of the Cultural 
Revolution. 
  The tragedy for Mao Zedong here was different from that in 
the two areas mentioned above. It was not a case of correct 
policies and theories going awry and failing in the course of 
implementation. Instead what happened here was that the right 
and the wrong often got confused or a host of erroneous 
conclusions were drawn from a correct premise. The situation 
here was so complex that a serious and careful analysis is 
called for. 
  To begin with, Mao Zedong attached the utmost importance to 
preserving the party's proletarian advanced nature and 
revolutionary purity. His subsequent perception that the CPSU 
had degenerated only served to reinforce his concern for this 
matter. Besides taking care to combine the universal truths of 
Marxism with the actual reality in China and seeking a correct 
way to build Chinese socialism (there were both innovations and 
lessons here, as noted above) Mao Zedong in the early years of 
the PRC emphasized recruiting workers into the party in large 
numbers and enhancing the proletarian element of party 
membership, a proposal that was implemented. Even more 
important, he often emphasized carrying out Marxist ideological 
education among all party members and demanded that all party 
members, particularly the cadres, equip themselves with 
socialist and communist ideals and beliefs and fight for the 
final abolition of the exploitation system in China. He wanted 
all party members to serve the people wholeheartedly and make 
unyielding efforts to bring about China's industrialization and 
modernization and improve the people's lives all round. He 
wanted them to oppose the bourgeois desire for personal gain and 
fame and preserve their revolutionary fervor and revolutionary 
spirit of fighting heroically for the revolution and the people, 
not afraid of sacrificing personal interests. All of that was 
intended to preserve the party's advanced nature during the 
construction period and enable it to become an ideologically 
advanced force that was also capable of leading all strata in 
society in practical action. 
  Secondly, he was always concerned to prevent the CPC from 
degenerating after seizing political power nationwide and for 
this reason never stopped stressing the party's traditions of 
arduous struggle and close ties with the masses. In successive 
party rectification movements, particularly the one in 1957, he 
talked about this issue repeatedly, demanding that leading 
cadres at all levels get along with the workers and peasants as 
ordinary laborers on an equal footing and overcome 
bureaucratism. He even criticized the bureaucratism of those 
occupying high-ranking positions who had no concern for the 
suffering and hardships of the masses and were far removed from 
them and reality as examples of anti-people thinking within the 
party and reactionary KMT practices. Subsequently he sought to 
prove each and every way that if the ruling CPC degenerated, the 
socialist political regime and social system would inevitably 
degenerate also. Many measures initiated by Mao Zedong were 
adopted to solve this problem. In distribution, for instance, 
the party adopted a low-wage system and wage differences between 
party leading cadres and ordinary workers were closely watched. 
Leading bodies at all levels were required to conduct studies 
deep at the grassroots regularly and leading cadres at all 
levels must go to the workers or peasants under their leadership 
and participate in physical labor at fixed intervals. 
  Third, to achieve the objective mentioned above, he set 
great 
store by conducting socialist and communist ideological 
education throughout society, particularly within the CPC, and 
mobilizing the masses to supervise party members. He suggested 
that we emulate Comrade Lei Feng [7191 6912] and turn him into a 
role model for serving the people wholeheartedly. He reviewed 
and promoted the experience. He was constantly on the look out 
for and publicized advanced figures and advanced thought within 
the party and in society at large. This was systems engineering 
aimed at planting over the fatherland the flag of positive 
healthy advancement that was consistent with the principles of 
the CPC and changing the Chinese people's spiritual outlook. 
Throughout Mao Zedong pushed the vast number of CPC members, 
especially leading cadres at all levels, to the forefront of the 
construction of spiritual civilization. He never stopped 
severely criticizing all sorts of corrupt feudal and bourgeois 
thinking for corrupting the party. For instance, he condemned 
pursuing fame and fortune, acting as lords and masters, 
pleasure-seeking, indulgence, love of luxury, worshipping and 
having blind faith in things foreign, and envying and imitating 
the corrupt bourgeois way of life, so on and so forth. By 
consolidating the party organization and rectifying incorrect 
styles of work, he appealed to the masses to criticize and 
supervise those erroneous ideas and practices within the party 
and advocated running the party strictly. 
  By and large the leadership headed by Mao Zedong, or what we 
call the older generation of revolutionaries, and the 
rank-and-file leading cadres all had a high degree of 
consciousness on this matter, so much so that they set a 
personal example in resisting all sorts of privileges and 
corruption. This was an important reason why despite the party's 
numerous mistakes, it still managed to maintain a high degree of 
popular trust among the masses. 
  Mao Zedong put forward the three points mentioned above and 
never loosened his grip on them. In the course of 
implementation, there was one-sidedness sometimes. Other times 
there were ambivalent views and practices. On the whole, 
however, it is critical that he came to grips with these issues. 
As it led the people on the protracted and difficult journey of 
exploring ways to build socialism after seizing state power, the 
CPC must turn itself into an advanced social force, the 
representative of the interests of the vast majority of working 
people, and maintain intimate ties with them. It must burst with 
revolutionary willpower and spirit and be able to resist the 
corrosion by every manner of erroneous and corrupt thinking by 
relying on public supervision both inside and outside the party. 
Wasn't this a basic guarantee of the CPC looking for a way to 
combine Marxism with reality and leading society to move forward 
in the correct direction? From the tumultuous changes in the 
Soviet Union and its disintegration, we learn one lesson: 
Anti-communist forces of all shapes and stripes swept through 
the Soviet Union with full force. The CPSU and the regime it led 
collapsed instantly like a house of cards, demonstrating that 
the party had utterly lost the trust and support of the people, 
totally shorn of its prestige. It also shows that if ruling 
communist parties in socialist nations fail to correct their 
mistakes and stave off degeneration and peaceful evolution, they 
would be overthrown and their nations would change political 
color. Isn't this a profound lesson? Although what Mao Zedong 
proposed at the time seemed commonplace, therefore, we cannot 
but call them major breakthroughs in socialist construction. 
  As noted above, Mao Zedong's thought as to how to intensify 
party construction after it seized power indeed erred in many 
ways, something that was related to his skewed interpretation of 
socialism. Briefly it can be summed up in two ways: First, as 
part of his utopian socialism and egalitarianism, Mao Zedong 
made many unrealistic demands on CPC members and cadres. For 
instance, he correctly opposed some party leaders acting as 
lords and masters and distancing themselves excessively from the 
ordinary people in material living. Yet because of his objection 
to the bourgeois right, he would not permit any status and 
material disparities derived from distribution according to 
work, which was pernicious and totally divorced from reality. He 
called on all cadres, again rightly, to participate in labor. 
During the Great Leap Forward, however, particularly during the 
Cultural Revolution, he demanded that all party members and 
cadres at all levels "learn from the workers," "learn from the 
peasants," and "learn from the soldiers" alongside the masses, 
"criticize the bourgeoisie," and carry out the so-called 7 May 
Directive of 1966, which too was pernicious and removed from 
reality. As a result of these utopian socialist demands, party 
construction in reality had lost all objective criteria. True 
CPC members and cadres were at a loss as to what to do, whereas 
sycophants, opportunists, swindlers, and hypocrites were able to 
advance rapidly, which did enormous harm to the party's image 
and credibility. Second, even more serious, he misapplied the 
concept of the expansion of class struggle not only to a 
socialist society, but also to the party itself. He not only 
regarded some unhealthy trends within the party as signs of 
class struggle, but he also considered many correct ideas, 
policies, and practices within the party as wrong, revisionist, 
and bourgeois, and opposed them vehemently on those grounds, 
citing them as evidence that there was class struggle within the 
party. Worse, he considered the differences of opinion inside 
the party over various specifics in socialist construction, 
primarily the differences in thinking between himself and other 
leaders, as the struggle between the two lines, between the two 
classes. Not only did this confuse right with wrong and blur the 
direction and objectives of party construction, but it also 
gradually led to the Cultural Revolution, which severely 
depleted the party's ranks and undermined its leadership, a 
major tragedy in the history of socialist construction in China 
as well as the history of the party. 
  At a deeper level, there were even more important reasons 
why 
Mao Zedong, having proceeded from a correct premise (preserving 
the party's advanced nature after it became the ruling party), 
went on to draw the wrong conclusions in many ways (demands 
smacking of utopian egalitarianism and the expansion of class 
struggle). It is that he and other top leaders at the time were 
deeply colored by past experiences and traditions. Having done 
no in-depth studies on certain fundamental issues relating to 
party construction at a time when the party wielded state power 
and presided over construction, they could not offer a proper 
solution. 
  The first issue had to do with the party's social and class 
nature. The party was the vanguard of the proletariat; as such, 
it was capable of leading the Chinese revolution and 
construction. In terms of its social composition, the party 
should include a mix of people from the working class and 
advanced elements from the laboring class, primarily advanced 
elements from the workers, advanced elements from the 
proletarian intelligentsia, and advanced elements from the 
collective peasants. These advanced elements must establish 
close ties with the rank-and-file workers, peasants, and 
intellectuals. They should be able to reflect and represent 
their interests and aspirations and should lead and unite them 
to fight for the realization of their interests and aspirations. 
The important thing was that the term "advanced elements" must 
be rethought and redefined in the period of construction 
vis-a-vis the revolutionary years. In the past, advanced 
elements usually refered to people at the very bottom of a 
society where classes were polarized. The subjects of class 
oppression and national oppression, these people realized that 
only by organizing themselves to overthrow such oppression and 
abolishing the social system of exploitation of man by man could 
achieve personal liberation and class liberation. Hence their 
firm commitment to revolutionary struggle. Under the new set of 
circumstances, that is, after the CPC led the people in seizing 
political power and abolishing the exploitation system and began 
socialist construction, "advanced elements" were people who had 
a sober understanding and a correct approach to the class 
struggle that remained to a limited extent. Even more important, 
advanced elements were the active participants in economic, 
political, and cultural construction. They felt urgently about 
changing China's backward and impoverished look and ending their 
poverty and that of the masses around them and through their own 
efforts were able to lead the masses to achieve wealth and 
civilization. Here arises an issue that represented a departure 
from the past. As advanced elements among the masses, and after 
mastering some skills, acquiring a measure of power, and 
obtaining a certain social position and economic interests, how 
should CPC members handle their relations with the lasses around 
them and preserve their advanced nature? In other words, how 
could they continue to appear as ordinary workers, serve the 
people wholeheartedly, genuinely maintain flesh-and-blood ties 
with the people, think what the people think and be eager to 
meet their needs so that they would not become a privileged 
group, a bunch of bureaucrats seriously divorced from and high 
above the masses? Whether or not this problem was handled 
properly had a significant impact on party construction. In a 
socialist society, particularly during its underdeveloped stage, 
there should be differences between one individual and the next 
in social status, especially economic earnings, because of 
variations in nature and nurture. Even in the Mao Zedong era, we 
still affirmed the principle of distribution according to work 
and the principle of the exchange of equal values. On the other 
hand, socialism is basically opposed to people using their 
superior political and economic circumstances to encroach upon 
others' wealth and restoring the social system of the 
exploitation of man by man. Advanced elements from among the 
workers, peasants, and intellectuals therefore should be able to 
mesh their own interests closely with collective and national 
interests. Mao Zedong's limitation was that theoretically he 
could not bring himself to admit the differences in status and 
distribution between CPC members, particularly the party's 
leading cadres at all levels, on the one hand, and the masses 
around them, on the other, even though in reality he had no 
choice but to allow such difference. He constantly called on 
people at the lowest strata of society, the poorest people, and 
the least educated people to rise up and oppose those who had 
obtained secured some social status, knowledge, and wealth, 
calling this sweepingly "class struggle" and "revolutionary 
rebellion" regardless of how the differences came about. The 
most typical examples were the "four clean-up movement" and the 
Cultural Revolution. What Mao Zedong did not only blurred the 
standards for advanced elements but also undermined the forces 
for social development. Subjectively speaking, of course, Mao 
Zedong was well-intentioned in what he sought to do. What 
worried him most was that some people in the party, especially 
leading cadres at all levels, would, after acquiring a measure 
of power, standing, and wealth, seek to aggrandize their power 
and wealth unscrupulously, taking up a position diametrically 
opposed to that of the masses and degenerate, instead of leading 
the masses to achieve common wealth. This kind of people must be 
resisted. But at the time the wrong methods were used to resist 
them. Besides, in general these people were few and few between 
in the party, so the struggle against them should not have been 
a broad-based one. Ironically today the ranks of these people in 
the party have indeed swollen, something we should be on guard 
against. How to combat corruption and resist the degeneration of 
these people has truly become one of the priorities today. In 
short, we must study Mao Zedong's contributions and lessons in 
light of the reality nowadays, clearly define the CPC's advanced 
nature, make it clear that as advanced elements of workers, 
peasants, and intellectuals, CPC members must be people who can, 
on the one hand, effectively lead the masses in obtaining 
practical results in economic, scientific, and cultural 
development, and, on the other, correctly harmonize personal 
interests with collective interests and national interests. The 
CPC is opposed to egalitarianism, but it is also opposed to 
degeneration and bipolarization. Only then can our party develop 
a solid social base and put itself in an invincible position. 
  Second, about democratic life and democratic institutions 
within the party. At a time when it was exercising state power 
and presiding over construction, practicing democracy would have 
been the most fundamental way to preserve the party's advanced 
nature and continuously rid it of corrupt elements and 
phenomena. To begin with, develop democratic life within the 
party and perfect the intra-party democratic system. This was 
actually Mao Zedong's recipe. In 1945, democratic figures like 
Huang Peiyan [7806 3508 1014] went to Yanan on an inspection 
tour. He saw unity between soldiers and civilians in the CPC-led 
liberated area. Everybody from top to bottom was joined in a 
common struggle. The place was bursting with vitality and 
flourishing, in sharp contrast to the corruption-plagued 
KMT-ruled areas. He was deeply moved. He said to Mao Zedong at 
the time, "Be they a person, a family, an organization, a 
locality, or a nation, they all rise rapidly and fall just as 
rapidly. Things tend to go in cycles. Nobody has broken this 
cycle. How is the CPC going to escape from this cycle in the 
future?" Mao Zedong replied, "We have found the solution, 
namely, democracy." 
  After the PRC was founded, particularly after socialist 
construction went under way in 1956, Mao Zedong and the 
leadership core at the time did take intra-party democracy 
seriously, especially after a mountain of facts came to light at 
the 20th CPSU Congress about Stalin's personality cult and his 
destruction of democracy. Before and after the Eighth CPC 
National Congress, Mao Zedong went out of his way to stress 
intra-party democratic construction and made some efforts. By 
and large, however, intra-party democratic construction did not 
receive full guarantee; on the contrary, it was increasingly 
disrupted and weakened. First, there was no sound democratic 
life. On situations, policies, and similar topics, you could 
usually still freely discuss, criticize, and self-criticize 
within the party. But when it came to major topics, however, Mao 
Zedong often silenced others first by flexing his muscle, that 
is, labelling those who disagreed with him as "left," "right," 
or "bourgeoisie." This put the party under some kind of 
pressure, preventing the free and honest discussion of both 
theoretical and practical issues. Over time, this 
one-man-alone-has-the-say situation came to replace what a 
proletarian political party should have: a lively interesting 
political scene of free discussion that aimed to seek out the 
truth. Wasn't that precisely what happened in the "anti-advance" 
movement in early 1958; the "anti-fence sitters" and 
"anti-conservative" campaigns during the Great Leap Forward; the 
full-fledged anti-rightist movement launched after the Lushan 
conference of 1959; the movements against bourgeois reactionary 
line, royalists, and later, restorationists, and a right 
deviationist verdict-reversal trend, all of which happened in 
the Cultural Revolution? Second, there was no institutional 
construction. Democracy is, first and foremost, a set of 
institutions. The fundamental tenet of the party's democratic 
centralism was the minority subordinating itself to the 
majority. It means centralism based on democracy. Other 
principles derived therefrom were the individual subordinating 
itself to the organization, the lower level subordinating itself 
to the higher level, the party subordinating itself to the CPC 
Central Committee, and democracy guided by centralism. 
Principles need to be translated into detailed rules and 
regulations. By regulations, we mean regulations that have a 
universal binding force. For instance, at all party meetings a 
member may express his opinions fully on the party's theoretical 
and policy issues. Motivated by a desire for unity, a party 
member or a lower level may offer all sorts of well-meaning 
criticisms to leaders at all levels. Important policy matters 
are discussed and debated at a conference with a specific set of 
terms of reference. The party's policy must be decided by vote 
in strict accordance with the principle of the minority 
subordinating itself to the majority. Provided they comply with 
the party's resolutions in action, the minority may keep its own 
different opinion. The leaders of party committees at all levels 
are to be elected on a fully democratic basis. Not only are 
detailed regulations necessary, but so were operating procedures 
and methods of supervision and restraint. Once a regulation is 
made, it cannot be violated by anybody. Regrettably Mao Zedong 
and some comrades in our party often looked upon democracy as a 
mere tool, a certain work style. Mao Zedong repeatedly called on 
leaders at all levels to listen to the opinions of the masses 
inside and outside the party, to draw on collective wisdom and 
absorb all useful ideas, and to make the right decisions after 
collecting the masses' opinions. Further, he again and again 
called on them to submit themselves to criticism and supervision 
by people inside and outside the party and overcome 
bureaucratism and other unhealthy trends. But while he often 
publicized and advocated these attributes and practices, he 
seldom made an effort to set up a coherent democratic system 
within the party complete with mechanisms for the effective 
supervision of power. The party constitution and other 
regulations were often too rigid and inoperable as they were 
written and were not strictly enforced after being drawn up. In 
particular, party leaders were the first to break the rules. The 
consequences were disastrous: democracy was damaged and so was 
the force most essential to a proletarian political party: the 
necessary centralization and discipline. During the Cultural 
Revolution, on the one hand, personal arbitrariness, which was 
anti-democratic, reached a peak. On the other hand, anarchism, 
which goes against centralization and unity, also hit an apex. 
This was epitomized by the unprecedented destruction done to 
democratic centralism. 
  Intra-party democracy is the foundation of socialist 
democracy. Practicing democracy inside the party is totally 
consistent with and complements practicing democracy among the 
people. Whether or not we can implement and continuously perfect 
democratic centralism will not only impact party construction, 
but will also decide whether or not there will be a normal 
political life in the nation, whether or not the socialist 
enterprise would develop smoothly. China is fairly backward 
economically and culturally, with a long feudal history behind 
it but no democratic tradition. The creation of socialist 
democratic institutions is a difficult task, a long drawn-out 
historical process. But the CPC, comprising advanced elements 
from the workers, peasants, and intellectuals, is a more 
conscious group. Leading cadres at all levels have a relatively 
high scientific and cultural standard and considerable work 
experience. Thus we can say the CPC is both equipped and 
duty-bound to make rapid progress in the development of 
democracy and democratic institutions, which should serve as the 
engine of the development of socialist democracy as a whole. Mao 
Zedong's failure to tackle this after the PRC was founded must 
be described as a gigantic error that led to a string of other 
mistakes. 
  As a great historical figure, Mao Zedong represents a 
meaningful stage in the development of socialism in China. With 
Marxist theoretical courage, he made bold departures from the 
problem-beset model of socialism fashioned by Stalin. This 
article is a preliminary analysis of the road and model of 
socialist construction, socialist political and social 
development, socialist scientific and cultural development, the 
preservation of socialist leading forces, namely the class 
nature and revolutionary purity of the CPC. The overall sense is 
that while Mao Zedong's breakthroughs and explorations in these 
areas were varied and deep, his tragic failures here also teach 
us an important lesson. In short, both his glorious 
breakthroughs and tragedies bequeath to posterity a precious 
legacy. 
  The best way for a CPC member to commemorate Mao Zedong's 
100th birthday should be to study and learn from Mao Zedong's 
legacy in earnest in order to improve and strengthen our 
socialist construction enterprise. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59383 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Intellectuals on Mao Zedong's 100th Birthday </TI></H3>
<H4>   Wei Jingsheng on Mao, `Accomplices' </H4>
<F P=102> 94CM0078A Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
11, 18 Nov 93 p 8 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0078A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wei Jingsheng (7614 0079 3932): "The Best Lesson </F>
Mao Zedong Taught Us"--first paragraph is editor's note] 
  [Text] Wei Jingsheng specially wrote this short 
commentary at the invitation of this magazine, the very first 
piece of writing he did after he was released from jail. While a 
mere 1,000 characters long, it demonstrates the style of Wei 
Jingsheng of the Beijing Spring era, lucid and lively, bursting 
with a sense of righteousness. His message to the people of Hong 
Kong: Learn from the lessons written in blood on the mainland 
and spare yourselves a good deal of pain. 
  Has a verdict been returned on Mao Zedong as a historical 
figure? No. Because he is still playing a role in real life. To 
put it bluntly, there are still some people who seek to hatch 
all sorts of plots and conspiracies in his name. 
  What kind of person really was Mao Zedong? Most people 
answered that question a long time ago. He dragged practically 
the entire China onto the road of brutality, treachery, and 
poverty, indirectly causing a hundred million people to starve 
to death and forcing another hundred million to leave home and 
wander about as beggars. Because of Mao Zedong, as many as a 
hundred million people were persecuted politically and tortured 
physically and mentally for years on end. Mao Zedong's crimes 
were too numerous to mention. He outdid the worst despots in the 
world, Chinese and foreign. In this sense, he was indeed a 
"giant," "the first since time immemorial," "unique." To be 
fair, though, while Mao Zedong must be held primarily 
responsible for the profound suffering inflicted upon the 
Chinese people for over 40 years and for China's poverty and 
backwardness, he was not the only culprit. There were other 
accomplices who followed him and helped him concoct all manner 
of schemes and plots, bringing calamity to the country and the 
people. They too should be held accountable in a big way. Then 
there were the masses who tolerated their crimes, who revered 
them as gods and encouraged them to commit all kinds of 
outrages. Can they absolve themselves of their culpability? In 
my youth, I was myself an admirer of Mao Zedong. After I woke up 
from my dream, I was filled with remorse and self-blame. Then I 
realized that remorse and self-blame would not do any good. 
Instead we must see Mao Zedong and the bunch of hooligans under 
him in their true colors and stand up to them. That was the only 
way to save ourselves and countless other fellow victims. 
  We could not look to the Savior or some upright magistrate 
to 
save us. Nor can we depend entirely on friends. Only when we 
exert ourselves to save ourselves would others be willing or 
able to help us. Nobody wants to or is able to help weaklings 
who self-destruct or abandon themselves to vice. 
  We Chinese must keep this lesson, so personal and so 
profound, close to our hearts. Otherwise, people who are adept 
at using violence and ready to do so would inevitably ride 
roughshod over us. Like Mao Zedong, they would torment us 
practically to death, while still demanding that we revere them 
as gods. In a certain sense, it is the people's timidity and 
bullyability that brings out the brutality in a ruler. When 
people have the courage to stand up for their rights, it is 
impossible for the ruler not to back down. This lesson, written 
in blood, the Chinese people will never ever forget. I hope the 
people of Hong Kong learn from it and spare themselves a good 
deal of pain. 3 November 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59384 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Intellectuals on Mao Zedong's 100th Birthday </TI></H3>
<H4>   Bai Hua on Mao and `Monarchical Authority' </H4>
<F P=102> 94CM0078A Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
11, 18 Nov 93 pp 50-52 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0078A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bai Hua (4101 2901): "Mao Zedong Inherits </F>
Monarchical Dictatorial Tradition"] 
  [Text] Another lonely century. With countless centuries 
behind it, one more century means hardly anything to China. For 
a generation or two, however, a century covers its entire 
life-span. 
  Eighteen ninety-three. Year 19 of the reign of Emperor 
Guangxu of the Qing Dynasty. At 21, Guangxu had nominally taken 
over the reins of government for 4 years after coming of age. It 
was a time when everybody, from the emperor to his ministers and 
subjects, was committed to strengthening China. 
  In September, the Shanghai Mechanical Textile Factory, which 
produced 600 bolts of cloth every day, was burned down. Li 
Hongzhang [2621 7703 4545] petitioned for its rebuilding. Cheng 
Xuanhuai [4141 1357 2037] was instructed to go to Shanghai. In 
Hubei, Zhang Zhidong [1728 0037 3159] set up a 
self-strengthening academy offering instruction in four 
disciplines: foreign languages, mathematics, natural science, 
and commerce. Lenin, 23, left Samara for St. Petersburg. 
Tchaikovsky, the Russian musician, died, leaving mankind a 
stream of beautiful music that would never run dry. In Britain, 
textile workers and coal miners went on strike one after 
another. In Spain, anarchists set off bombs in the two cities of 
Santander and Barcelona, probably the first acts of terrorism. 
An economic crisis erupted in the United States. To finance the 
construction of warships for use in military actions against 
China, the Japanese emperor issued an imperial edict cutting the 
salaries of civilian officials by 10 percent and dismissing 
3,000 bureaucrats, thus saving 1.7 million Japanese yen. 
<H5>  Mao Zedong Born Into a Troubled World </H5>
  Mao Zedong was born in a tiny mountain village on 26 
December, a time when China was plagued by domestic strife and 
foreign invasion. The following year China suffered a disastrous 
defeat at sea in the Sino-Japanese War. This convinced Sun 
Yat-sen, the pioneer of democracy, that China must reform across 
the board if it was to strengthen itself. So he set up 
Xingzhonghui in Honolulu. Those were troubled times all over the 
world. The great turmoil wrought on by the desire for survival, 
for development, energized human thinking like never before. 
Because of Lenin's passionate actions in Russia, Marxism became 
a worldwide movement. Mao Zedong was born at the right time. 
Although his successes and failures belong in the past, they 
still help shape China today. 
<H5>  Adopting Marxist-Leninist Theory of Class Struggle </H5>
  A century ago, both China's national sovereignty and 
imperial 
power were in the hands of a weak and incompetent ruler. This 
made a profound impact on young Mao Zedong, rural-born but 
lettered. Every Chinese peasant dreamed about a mansion fit for 
a king, even the Forbidden City with all its splendor. 
  Mao Zedong was no exception. He had read all the classics, 
inheriting lock, stock, and barrel that part of Chinese culture 
in which he had an interest. Since China was then an isolated 
empire, Mao Zedong had no knowledge of any foreign language, 
which prevented him from absorbing much of the fruit of human 
thinking outside China. He benefited the most from the theory of 
class differentiation as presented in popular Marxist-Leninist 
pamphlets and made it absolute. During the age of land 
revolution, this spiritual fruit miraculously turned into a 
material force capable of mobilizing the peasants. 
  After the PRC was founded, the class struggle theory, having 
been made absolute, went international. As a result, China at 
peace remained in isolation for years even as one domestic 
struggle followed another on the home front. What should be 
affirmed is this: Mao Zedong took a firm and hard-line position 
in safeguarding national sovereignty even if it meant isolating 
China and falling out and subsequently clashing with the Soviet 
Union after Khrushchev came into power. 
  From ancient books and historical texts Mao Zedong later got 
to learn even more about the experiences of emperors in 
successive dynasties in subjugating their subjects. He never 
shied away from acting imperial in matters of both style and 
substance, adopting the way of might as well as the kingly way. 
As they said, "The style of Emperor Wen and Emperor Wu was to be 
strict and liberal in turns." From the Yanan rectification 
movement of the 1940's to the anti-rightist struggle, Mao Zedong 
copied the best that literary inquisition in one dynasty after 
dynasty had to offer. Through confession movements effected by 
compulsion, Mao Zedong sought to eradicate unspoken criticism. 
Tragically, the overwhelming majority of intellectuals did not 
set out to slander Mao Zedong out of malice. Instead, they were 
persecuted for speaking their minds. Some were even motivated by 
a desire to curry favor with him. 
<H5>  Mainland Intellectuals Trapped in Historical Vicious Circle </H5>
  Mao Zedong's attack on intellectuals was indeed a huge 
success. Only years later did people realize that he simply 
would not let you have a voice. The only thing he would let you 
do was to listen with respectful attention, not even repeat his 
words. In the anti-rightist movement, some people were attacked 
as rightists precisely because they repeated some of Mao 
Zedong's words as yet unpublished at the time. 
  By the time the Cultural Revolution broke out, people no 
longer knew what to believe. On the other hand, they dared not 
omit a single word. Any documents co-signed by the CPC Central 
Committee, the central military commission, the CPC Cultural 
Revolutionary Committee, and the State Council might become 
wrongly transmitted imperial edicts overnight. Mao Zedong's 
closest comrades-in-arms might end up as conspirators the next 
day. All the masses in every faction in the civil war during the 
Cultural Revolution were blind followers who repeated every 
single one of Mao Zedong's words a thousand times. Many of the 
ways, voluntary and compulsory, in which these people pledged 
their loyalty to Mao Zedong reminded us of the scenes that took 
place under a corrupt monarchy. But Mao Zedong had no qualms at 
all, which goes to show that not even he could break the vicious 
circle in Chinese history (The hopes of the Chinese people rose 
and fell with dynastic succession). If nothing else he admired 
monarchical authority in spite of himself. In his old age he 
genuinely believed his words were the golden truth. 
  After his death, Mao Zedong was roundly criticized by many 
people for his personal conduct. As he himself had said, there 
is no perfect human being, just as there is no perfect gold. In 
all fairness, Mao Zedong was largely free from corruption. He 
was a diligent thinker, determined, courageous, and hardy and 
frugal in his personal habits. He was a precocious military 
commander who took war as his instructor, a propagandist and 
agitator who had a profound understanding of Chinese peasants 
and enjoyed their strong support. In the pre-1949 war years, he 
had a knack for spotting talented people and putting them in the 
right positions. Moreover, he was a charming poet and lover. 
  Certainly many emperors who founded or engineered the 
resurgence of a dynasty also possessed these qualities. In 500 
B.C., King Goujian of Yue was defeated in battle and lost his 
kingdom. Enduring humiliation in order to carry out an important 
mission, he even refused to "eat any grain not grown by himself 
and wear any clothes not woven by his queen." What happened in 
the end? After conquering the Kingdom of Wu, he sentenced Wen 
Zhong to death and sent Fan Li into exile. Goujian went down the 
same road that all other kings and emperors had gone down 
before. In its entirety Mao Zedong's legacy is worth far less 
than the ill-gotten gains of some village chief in China today. 
His inheritance consists mainly of the royalties on his writings. 
<H5>  Paying a Hefty Price for Personality Cult </H5>
  My screenplay "Bitter Love" came under attack in 1981. I was 
particularly taken to task for a minor scene in which the 
leading character, then a child, asked the elder of a temple, 
"How come Buddha's face is black?" The elder replied, "His face 
has been blackened by the incense burned by the worshippers." 
  There is no denying the truth I am referring to: The 
cause-and-effect relationship between the worshipped and the 
worshipper in Chinese history. The Chinese paid a steep price 
for Mao Zedong's personality cult. Years of political struggle 
retarded production growth for long periods of time. The Great 
Leap Forward caused a mass famine. The disillusionment resulting 
from the Cultural Revolution caused a nervous breakdown among 
the entire population. In the end Mao Zedong's face was 
blackened by the incense burned by hundreds of millions of 
worshippers. Then came the Tiananmen incident during the 
Qingming Festival in 1976. Only then did Mao Zedong see his own 
blackened face in tens of thousands of eyes. The man, who had 
been spiritually tough and physically strong, never recovered 
from this episode. 
  Chinese intellectuals in the late 1940's firmly believed 
that 
the Chinese nation would henceforth be strong and the nation 
would prosper and live in peace. They also believed that all 
past, present, and future successes should be attributed to Mao 
Zedong Thought, that Mao Zedong Thought was invincible, and that 
it was the beacon for the people of China and even the whole 
world. In short, Mao Zedong was perceived as an omnipotent god. 
<H5>  Please Open the Door of One's Mind </H5>
  Most Chinese intellectuals gave up the right to independent 
thinking of their own accord. Many scholars regressed into 
juvenile or infantile thinking. Because of their intellectual 
sloppiness, they became either wolf-like or sheep-like. 
Intellectuals were completely stripped of their independent 
personality. In addition, a succession of political movements 
objectively drove home the grim fact that other than Mao Zedong, 
it was harmful and downright dangerous for anybody else to even 
think. No matter how senior their positions, however solid their 
credentials, they would all come to grief (Real-life examples 
include Liu Shaoqi [0491 1421 1142] and Peng Dehuai [1756 1795 
2037]). 
  There was a time when people of the Mao Zedong era 
congratulated themselves on the existence of Mao Zedong. Later 
they rejoiced over his passing from the scene. No leader, 
however great, can guarantee a nation's stable sustained 
development. What is needed is a political system that entrusts 
hope, democracy, and freedom to the people and where the people 
can effectively supervise and replace public servants, including 
the No. 1 public servant. 
  Another century. With countless centuries behind it, one 
more 
century, one less century does not mean anything to China. For a 
generation or two, however, a century covers its entire 
life-span. 
  Today, at long last, China has changed its course and headed 
toward the world. China must shed its isolation, poverty, and 
degeneration. But it must never again long for the birth of 
another great helmsman. For starters, everybody must unlock the 
door to his thinking, something that requires courage and 
strength because for too long he has been held prisoner 
ideologically. Then every door in China must be opened to let in 
fresh air. One door, however, must not be opened, namely the 
heavy door leading to the imperial throne. 
  (Bai Hua is a Shanghai writer. His screenplay "Bitter Love" 
came under attack in 1981.) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59385 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Intellectuals on Mao Zedong's 100th Birthday </TI></H3>
<H4>   Intellectuals Confront `Spiritual, Moral Scars' </H4>
<F P=102> 94CM0078A Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
11, 18 Nov 93 pp 56-57 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0078A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zheng Yi (6774 5030): "Intellectuals Confront </F>
Spiritual Ruins After Mao Zedong"] 
  [Text] It seems that without the effort of several 
generations, it would be extremely hard to erase the spiritual 
and moral scars left behind by the autocratic system of Mao 
Zedong. The responsibility of the artist is to remake the soul 
of a nation. Otherwise all that blood would have flowed in vain, 
all that suffering would have been borne in vain. 
  Dear Jin Zhong [6855 6988], 
  How are you? 
  Cai Yongmei [5591 0737 2734] called me a couple of days ago 
to ask whether or not I could write a piece to mark Mao Zedong's 
100th birthday. I agreed right away and thanked her for going 
out of the way to invite me to write an article. After two days, 
however, I realized I had trouble coming up with something; I 
had nothing new to say. Besides, I am dying to get started on my 
long novel. I am too dumb to do more than one thing at a time. 
Fiction-writing is my specialty. Moreover, a couple of ideas 
crossed my mind lately, which is all the more reason why I 
should concentrate. 
<H5>  Only Art Distilled From Suffering Is Valuable </H5>
  When it comes to suffering, China bears a close resemblance 
to Russia. Both peoples have been plagued by disaster. The only 
difference is that a host of artists have chronicled their 
misfortunes, thus transforming them into the treasure of the 
nation, even of all mankind. Tolstoy's War and Peace 
and Anna Karenina, Sholokhov's And Quiet Flows 
the Don, Pasternak's Dr. Zhivago, Tchaikovsky's 
"1812 Overture," Liabin's The Boat Tracker on the 
Volga, Gogol's Dead Souls... (the list goes on 
and on) all strike a responsive chord in our hearts. Why? 
Because it is the suffering of a nation, the spirit of a nation. 
Suffering is more than just suffering. Once transformed into 
art, it takes on a spiritual value, ultimately distilled into 
the indomitable soul of a nation and capable of moving and 
inspiring future generations. 
  We have probably suffered more than the Russians. But our 
suffering has not been written about. No truly great work 
(whether literary, artistic, musical, or dramatic) exists to 
chronicle the Taiping Rebellion, the 1911 Revolution, the civil 
war, the war of resistance against Japan, the Great Leap 
Forward, or the Cultural Revolution. The only thing we have to 
show for our 8-year war of resistance against aggression, for 
instance, is the "Yellow River Cantata," mediocre in quality and 
communist in flavor to boot. For us Chinese, therefore, 
suffering means simply suffering. If our suffering is not remade 
through art, if the soul of the nation is not recast through 
art, then the blood would have flowed in vain and suffering 
borne in vain. Why? That would be for literary historians to 
figure out. Contemporary artists like us must start with 
ourselves. Myself and perhaps 99 percent of modern Chinese 
writers may not necessarily come up with anything remarkable. 
But if we all work hard, we are bound to produce something great. 
<H5>  Nationalism: The CPC's Lone Card </H5>
  In this sense, modern history is over as far as artists are 
concerned, not chronologically but figuratively. The final 
collapse of the communist system and the ultimate demise of 
one-party autocracy are no longer in doubt. No matter what the 
CPC leaders do, history has turned a new page. What remains to 
be figured out is how to rebuild life faced with the painful 
legacy of totalitarianism. In the case of intellectuals and 
artists, the task is to remake the soul of the nation. Truly my 
heart does not seem to belong in real-world politics any longer, 
but is centered on the future. I keep thinking: What should we 
do with the vast spiritual wasteland? It seems that without the 
effort of several generations, it would be extremely hard to 
heal the spiritual and moral scars left behind by Mao Zedong's 
autocratic system. What can I do in the great undertaking of 
national reconstruction? I want to write, I want to do justice 
in words to the suffering, to the glory of human nature that 
shone forth amid the suffering, to the land. To be able to do 
that is the vocation and rare privilege of a writer. 
  The centenary of Mao Zedong's birth should be commemorated. 
The reason is that although he has died, he continues to hurt 
the people of this world. While still alive, many a time did Mao 
Zedong, self-consciously and with a deliberate air of 
casualness, talk about being denounced posthumously. Had he 
examined his conscience, in fact, he would have realized he was 
bequeathing to us a backward, impoverished and autocratic China, 
conditions that would not cease to exist upon his death. Take 
the recent campaign for the right to host the Olympic Games, for 
instance. In the glistening tears of the Chinese people, I 
shuddered to rediscover the defunct spirit of the era when we 
practiced self-imposed isolation, when we "relied on our own 
effort and worked hard for the prosperity of the country." I 
could still recall the wave of nationalist fervor whipped up in 
our hearts by the artificially manufactured enemies of 
"imperialism, revisionism, and counter-revolutionaries," by the 
false idea that somebody was hell bent on subjugating China, and 
by the notion that we must be "ready to fight at all times." 
When they successfully exploded an atomic bomb or carried out a 
satellite experiment, we celebrated wildly through the night. 
Only years later did we realize that the kind of nationalism 
fired up by Mao Zedong was bogus; what was real was his ambition 
to be a world leader. Today, the ideology of communism has 
collapsed. Just about the only card that Deng Xiaoping has left 
to play to incite the masses is nationalism. Things have gotten 
this bad. Still Mao Zedong continues to live and one can hold on 
a little longer by copying his tricks. 
<H5>  Passing of Mao Zedong's Era Irreversible </H5>
  In another sense, Mao Zedong, having passed into history, is 
gone beyond the point of recall. It is in this sense that Mao 
Zedong and his era are being mocked. When overseas exiles get 
together, they often burst into song, saying tunes of the Mao 
Zedong era because they have no other songs to sing, given the 
all-embracing monopoly of communist culture. Some songs remind 
us of our youth, wild and full of suffering. In fact, in the 
case of some songs, just singing them is an act of mockery; we 
inject a vaccine into a human body only after it has ceased to 
be toxic. Only after the myth has been exploded can songs like 
"A Golden Sun over Beijing" and "Nannei Wan" become mockery. Now 
that his halo has faded, God died. We should add this point when 
we discuss "Mao fever." 
  This is true of so many things. Look at a thing from another 
angle and it means something yet more profound. Take, for 
instance, the fact that everybody on the mainland today is going 
into business and shunning politics. You can interpret this 
phenomenon in any one of a number of ways, all of them 
plausible. But may we not also call this the broken heart which 
has lost the courage to live? Long have the people become 
disillusioned with tinkering with the political system within 
the framework of one-party dictatorship. Complaints being heard 
everywhere, popular feelings running high... those are the signs 
that there is still hope. When you hear silence all round, the 
dynasty has truly run out of luck. 
  I have not written anything for KAIFANG for a long while. 
This time I promised to do so only to go back on my word 
subsequently. I could only write and apologize in the hope that 
Jin Zhong and the other friends would forgive me. The curtain 
has gone up on the battle by the Hong Kong people to defend 
press freedom. The best is yet to come. The exiles in Princeton 
and myself deeply admire the editors and reporters who fight for 
freedom once press freedom is finished, so is everything else. 
Fortunately Mao Zedong has become part of history; the current 
trend cannot be resisted. At worst this will be nothing more 
than a brief and farcical setback in modern Hong Kong history. A 
few days ago Situ Hua [0674 1778 5478], Liu Huiqing [0491 1979 
0615], and others were in Princeton to attend an international 
conference on Hong Kong. Before they departed for home, we all 
got together at Liu Binyan's [0491 6333 7159] house and had a 
good time, talking about Hong Kong, its people, its future. The 
friend who gave them a ride to the airport was not familiar with 
the way to the freeway, so I led the way. When the freeway came 
into view and it was time to part company, we could not stop to 
bid farewell because the flow of traffic was so heavy. So I blew 
my horn to salute them and as a way of saying goodbye. To my 
surprise I beeped my horn four times, a faux pas in a country 
where people drive in silence. The reason is quite simple. I 
have deep feelings about Hong Kong and its people. 
  Best wishes, 
  Zheng Yi, Princeton, 31 October. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59386 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhang Zhuoyuan on Developing Socialist Market </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0221A Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] in Chinese No 10, 11 Oct 93 pp 3-7 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0221A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CAIMAO JINGJI [FINANCE AND TRADE 
ECONOMICS] </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Zhuoyuan (1728 0587 0337): "On Nurturing </F>
and Developing a Unified, Open, Competitive, and Orderly Market 
System"] 
  [Text] I. Well-Developed Market System Is Basis of a 
Normal Socialist Market Economy 
  To set up a socialist market economic system, we must 
nurture 
and develop a market system. A well-developed, perfect market 
system is the basis of a normal socialist market economy. 
Without a well-developed, perfect market system, we cannot begin 
to talk about converting to the market economy, nor can we 
successfully develop a socialist market economy. The essence of 
the restructuring of China's economic system lies in developing 
the commodity economy and market relationships and expanding the 
role of the market mechanisms, so that the factors of production 
can change according to the law of value and the supply and 
demand conditions and find their own way into the more efficient 
industries and enterprises, and in turn the in-demand trades and 
industries and advanced enterprises can undergo rapid 
development, while the unwanted trades and industries and 
backward enterprises are squeezed out and even eliminated, so 
that society as a whole can achieve optimal allocation of 
resources. 
  A market system that meets the needs of the development of 
the socialist market economy must necessarily be a unified, 
open, competitive, and orderly market system and a system that 
is fairly well structured. 
  To be unified, we need uniform market rules and regulations 
as well as policies. We must smash all types of artificial 
blockades, overcome market obstacles, and create a nationwide 
great circulation, great market pattern. 
  To be open, we must open up internally--open up the 
provinces 
and municipalities and the localities, and we must open up 
externally--open up to the outside world and link the domestic 
markets with the international markets. 
  To be competitive, we must have an environment to 
accommodate 
complete and fair competition. We must oppose monopoly, 
especially administrative monopoly, and oppose racketeering; but 
at the same time, we must avoid cutthroat competition. 
  To be orderly, all market activities must be put on a 
standardized, legalized track so that all transactions are open 
and all deals are fair and there are laws to abide by and rules 
to follow, creating an orderly market. 
  To nurture and develop the market system, we must set up a 
proper and complete market structure and develop other types of 
markets at the same time. Market construction must meet the 
objective needs of the economy so that "the development of every 
market enlivens a sector of the economy and enriches some of the 
people." We must avoid the situation where after we make a great 
effort to set up a market, there is no market participation and 
few market transactions. We must rectify the chaotic situation 
in the market where: "You build a market, then I build one too; 
since you control a market, I want one too; because you give 
your permission, I will too; your market is big, but mine is 
even bigger." We should develop not only commodities markets but 
also capital goods markets. We must not only help the domestic 
market flourish but also develop international markets. We must 
not only develop spot markets but also gradually set up futures 
markets (We should set up commodities futures market before we 
set up financial futures markets.) We should develop not only 
markets for tangibles but also markets for intangibles, and we 
should set up tender and auction markets. From another 
perspective, developing the market system involves two areas: 
One is to set up the hardware system which includes market 
facilities, warehouse facilities, and railroads and highways. 
The other is the software system which includes management, 
information, telecommunications, and laws and regulations. When 
the government nurtures and develops the market, it should pay 
attention not only to the hardware system, but more importantly, 
it should develop the software system and establish a proper 
framework. 
<H3>  II. Price Reform Is the Key to the Formation of the Market 
System </H3>
  At the heart of the market mechanism is the pricing 
mechanism. Price reform is the key to market development and the 
creation of the market system. The market's role in allocating 
resources is mainly guided by and achieved through the market 
prices and their changes. To set up a socialist market economic 
system, we must deepen price reform, set up a market price 
system that is regulated and controlled at the macro level, and 
give full play to the role of the market mechanisms. 
  After 15 years of price reform, China has made substantive 
progress in this area. Ninety percent of the consumer goods have 
been decontrolled and are now regulated by the market. The 
double track pricing of capital goods is fast merging into a 
single track, and most of them have adopted the market's single 
track price. After rectification and decontrol, the price of 
services has become more reasonable; the process of marketizing 
the price of factors of production has also begun. Meanwhile, a 
new price regulation and control system is gradually being set 
up: For example, the comprehensive use of fiscal and monetary 
measures to control the overall price level has produced some 
results, and we have accumulated some useful experience; we have 
set up a reserve system for important goods and materials which 
can be used to suppress market prices; more than a dozen 
provinces and more than 60 cities have set up price regulation 
funds for key products; and we also have promulgated laws and 
regulations to regulate pricing behavior. 
  Price reform has clearly improved the once seriously 
distorted pricing structure. The long-depressed relative prices 
of agricultural products and basic industrial products have been 
raised: Comparing 1992 to 1978, agricultural product procurement 
price has increased 176.5 percent; the retail price of rural 
industrial products has increased 83.2 percent; prices of 
excavated products have increased 165.7 percent; raw industrial 
materials, 150.2 percent; processed industrial products, 114.8 
percent. More than 95 percent of the imported commodities are 
using the agent system, and domestic market prices have linked 
up with international market prices. 
  Even now, price reform is not yet complete. The saying that 
price reform has successfully climbed ten-thousand mountains is 
not exactly true. Although market mechanisms and pricing 
mechanisms now play an important role in regulating production 
and demand, price reform is still an arduous task. There are 
still no market prices for factors of production, and therefore 
the market's basic role in allocating resources is constrained. 
Some important factors of production are still under the 
double-track pricing system; the task of merging tracks has not 
yet been accomplished. The domestic market prices of some 
products still deviate significantly from international prices, 
and as a result, we cannot use comparative cost as a basis to 
regulate their import and export to improve foreign trade 
efficiency. The price regulation and control system is unsound, 
and we have few material means to keep the market in line, so 
that when the market price of some products begins to fluctuate, 
we cannot effective apply macro regulation and control measures 
and reduce the magnitude of price fluctuation by means of 
expanding or contracting product circulation, regulating import 
and export, or making use of the market regulation fund and so 
on. 
  To promote market development and give full play to the role 
of the market mechanisms and further develop the market system, 
we must accomplish the following price reform tasks: 
  Within the next 3 years, we should decontrol the prices of 
goods and services that are competitive. This also means closing 
the double-track pricing system for factors of production (the 
competitive portion) by shifting to the market price track. 
  Within the next 3 to 5 years, we should sort out and 
readjust 
the government-set prices of goods and services. The focus is on 
raising the prices of basic products and services. 
  In the near-term, we should merge the yuan's double-track 
prices and implement a variable exchange rate system. 
  Domestic and foreign market prices should be pegged. Prices 
of commercial goods should link tracks first. 
  We should accelerate the process of marketization of 
capital, 
land, and other key factors of production. 
  We should further establish and perfect the price regulation 
and control system that focuses on keeping the product price 
level relatively stable (with annual increases not exceeding 10 
percent) and the prices of important commodities relatively 
steady. 
  We should promulgate and perfect laws and regulations that 
guarantee the normal functioning of the market price system and 
set up a perfect and open market information network. 
<H3>  III. Focus on the Development of Markets for Key Factors of 
Production </H3>
  Henceforth, when we further develop and perfect markets for 
goods, we must also focus on the development of markets for 
factors of production. 
  At the end of 1992, nationwide, we had more than 1,000 
wholesale capital goods markets, more than 1,000 wholesale 
markets for industrial consumption goods, more than 1,600 
wholesale markets for agricultural and sideline products, and 
nearly 80,000 township country fair markets, and some important 
commodities exchange markets experimenting with futures exchange 
have also begun to emerge. In the future, as needed by the 
development of market economy, we should set up some 
standardized, nationwide wholesale markets and exchanges for 
industrial and agricultural products in localities where 
important commodities are produced, sold, or collected and 
distributed, and on that basis, we can choose a handful of 
products to test the commodities futures market. In the 
near-term, we can concentrate efforts on setting up proper 
futures markets for grain, cotton, oil, nonferrous metals, and 
crude oil, and we should have strict regulations and gradually 
link these markets with the international market network. We 
should reform the existing commercial and commodity circulation 
systems and gradually create a wholesale system and a retail 
system that integrate large, medium, and small enterprises; and 
that combine and mix different economic formats as well as 
different operating styles. A perfect commodity economy should 
be a large, open system where all kinds of commodities can 
circulate freely across industrial sectors, regions, and 
national boundaries. This system should be able to link the 
domestic and foreign markets and provide strong incentives as 
well as pressure to improve the quality of the nation's economic 
activities and promote the development of the socialist market 
economy. 
  If the market mechanisms are to play a basic role in 
allocating resources, the factors of production must be able to 
circulate in the market. In the near-term, we must put the 
emphasis of market construction on nurturing and developing the 
fledgling capital goods markets. 
  Capital is the most precious, the most scarce resource in a 
market economy. The capital market is the hub of the whole 
market economy. The key to realizing the optimal allocation of 
resources lies in developing a perfect capital market and 
increasing the use-efficiency of capital. In a capital market, 
there are two ways to raise capital--directly and indirectly. In 
the near to intermediate-term, China will still rely on the 
indirect method of raising capital, but at the same time, we 
will actively develop various ways to raise capital directly. As 
for the proportion of funds raised directly and indirectly, it 
cannot be determined artificially; it can only be determined 
amid competition. Today, the development of the capital market 
is plagued by lack of discipline and disorder which have given 
rise to all kinds of reckless fund gathering and distribution 
activities. To develop the capital market, we must gradually let 
the market set the interest rates and promptly end the 
double-track and multiple-track systems. The central bank must 
be able to regulate market rates by taking control of the basic 
interest rates. China already has a fledgling money market. 
Henceforth, using existing regional short-term inter-bank loan 
markets as base, we should smash regional blockades, standardize 
market management, and form a nationwide unified money market. 
We should develop bill discounting and mortgage business, 
further develop the short-term government bond market, and allow 
the central bank to engage in open market operations to buy and 
sell government bonds. 
  Land is a scarce and non-renewable resource. We must 
treasure 
it and put it to proper use. We must take a step further to 
implement a compensated, limited-term land-use system and 
develop the land market to give play to the market mechanisms' 
role in optimizing the allocation of land resource. In the urban 
market system, the state should monopolize the primary market, 
but the secondary market should be decontrolled. Today, whether 
in the primary or the secondary market, we still do not have the 
mechanism that lets the market set the price of land-use rights. 
Henceforth, the sale and transfer of commercial land-use rights 
should be conducted through public tender or auction to make the 
process more competitive and transparent. In the long-run, we 
should concentrate on setting up a "posted-price" system to 
guide and standardize land prices, and it can also be used as a 
basis for levying land tax. By levying a real estate business 
tax, income tax, and value-added tax, the state need not lose 
its share of profit generated by land when land-use rights are 
being transferred or traded. We must crack down on illegal 
speculation of land, reckless jacking up of land prices, and 
other activities to exact exorbitant profit, and we must not 
funnel too much money into the land market. In turning over 
agricultural land to non-agricultural use, we must comply with 
the land-use plan and proceed with restraint. 
  We should gradually set up a labor market. First we must 
acknowledge the market mechanisms' basic role in the proper 
allocation of resources. To this end, we must change the wage 
system. The state should no longer serve as employer or assigner 
of jobs. Wages should be determined by labor productivity rate 
and supply and demand in the labor market. Payment for labor 
should be in monetary terms. We should permit and even guide the 
proper circulation of the labor force and smash the labor 
market's regional boundaries in a planned and systematic way to 
gradually eliminate the iron rice bowl, the iron-clad wage 
system, and the iron chair--guaranteed employment. 
  We must further develop the technologies and information 
markets. Developing the technologies market is of great 
importance to the commercialization and industrialization of 
advanced and new technologies, to the promotion of scientific 
and technological advancement, and to the orientation of 
scientific and technological work toward the main battleground 
of economic construction. We must promulgate a perfect set of 
laws and regulations to protect intellectual property rights and 
protect the transfer of the fruits of science and technology. 
Developing the information market is an inherent requirement in 
the establishment of a well-developed, mature market system. 
Henceforth, the technologies, information, and consultation 
service industries must operate like enterprises. Their services 
should be society-based, and their products and services should 
be commercialized, and we should bring in the competitive 
mechanisms. 
  We should also vigorously develop a market for property 
rights and a housing market and so on. We must control the cost 
and price of houses, so that most urban residents can get into 
the housing market. 
<H5>  IV. Vigorously Develop Market Intermediaries </H5>
  The vigorous development of market intermediaries is an 
important link in the normal functioning and the healthy 
development of the socialist market economy. 
  The better developed the modern market economy, the broader 
the economic entities' market ties, and the busier and more 
specialized and technical the market exchange activities, the 
more we need to have qualified market entities, different types 
of developed markets, and stringent market rules and regulation; 
on top of that, we must also set up and develop market 
intermediaries to serve those taking part in the market 
activities and to promote the orderly conduct of market 
activities. 
  Currently, the kinds of market intermediaries we need to 
develop include the following: Self-disciplinary institutions, 
such as various types of trade federations and trade 
associations, that coordinate and constrain the behavior of 
personnel in enterprises and trades and industries who 
participate in market activities; brokerages, mortgage 
companies, and auction houses that directly engage in market 
transaction services; accounting firms, auditing firms, law 
firms, appraisers--especially land appraisers--who are there to 
guarantee equitable market transactions and fair competition; 
institutions that provide research, consultation, and 
information services to promote market development; 
price-quotation systems, settlement centers, materials 
allocation and delivery centers, and warehouses; arbitration 
organs to settle market disputes; quantity measurement, quality 
control, product inspection, and other production service 
agencies to supervise market activities; a whole spectrum of 
circulation intermediaries, such as rural circulation 
associations, that help develop rural markets and help the 
scattered peasants get into the market; employment agencies and 
personnel exchange centers that promote the circulation of 
well-trained and untrained workers. 
  Market intermediaries generally should be created from the 
bottom up, by enterprises themselves, on a voluntary basis. 
Their main functions are to provide their member enterprises 
with information, advice, and legal and business services; train 
specialized personnel; open up international communications 
channels; represent the member enterprises' and individuals' 
interests in settling business disputes. They draw up guild 
regulations and trade pacts according to market regulations, 
impose collective self-discipline, supervise market 
transactions, fight unfair competition, and guarantee normal 
production and marketing order, and these include conscious 
compliance with the state's quality standards, refusal to engage 
in improper competition, and refusal to enter into collusion to 
set monopolistic prices and divide up the market. They smooth 
the relationship between enterprises and government, so that the 
trade federations and trade associations become self-coordinated. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59387 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hebei Harnesses Floodwaters for Productive Purposes </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  OW0901164594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1517 GMT 9 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0901164594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 9 (XINHUA) -- North China's Hebei 
Province has achieved success in its efforts to utilize 
floodwaters diverted from the Yanghe River. 
  Research into the project, which was undertaken by the Hebei 
Provincial Institute of Water Conservancy and the Yanghe beach 
development headquarters of Xuanhua County, has utilized the 
excess water to serve local farmers, according to local 
officials. 
  The achievement has passed a provincial appraisal and is 
believed to have reached the international advanced level. 
  The Yanghe River is a major tributary on the upper reaches 
of 
the Yongding River. In the rainy season floods used to wash 
down the river large quantities of silt, destroy houses and 
leave the farmland along the river banks seriously damaged. In 
particular, a huge amount of silt used to be washed into the 
Guanting Reservoir, which supplies water to Beijing. 
  In 1989 researchers began to make observations and collect 
data from experimental zones, aiming at making scientific use of 
the floodwaters. 
  After some four years of research and experiment they helped 
local farmers to build 3,000 m [meters] of dikes and 46,100 m of 
canals, and used the floodwaters to irrigate 8,226 ha and grow 
160,000 trees. 
  So far, the efforts have brought about increases in the 
outputs of maize and rice in the locality, and stopped 1.62 
million tons of silt from entering the Guanting Reservoir. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59388 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hubei Promotes Rural Industry </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  OW1201040794 Beijing XINHUA in English 0339 GMT 12 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW1201040794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Wuhan, January 12 (XINHUA) -- Central China's Hubei 
Province has taken advantage of its scientific and technological 
strength to promote the development of rural industry. 
  Last year, the total output value of its rural industry 
reached 90.8 billion yuan and the profits and revenues were 6.22 
billion yuan, increasing by 68.5 and 51.14 percent over the 
previous year, respectively. 
  A government official in charge of rural industry noted that 
the output value and profits brought about by new technology 
programs and technological transformation projects were some 4.7 
billion yuan and 620 million yuan. 
  In order to help the rural enterprises to draw on science 
and 
technology in the development, Hubei provincial Commission of 
Science and Technology sponsored a "Golden Bridge Program" which 
encourages various kinds of scientific and technological 
associations to aid rural enterprises. 
  Last year, rural enterprises in Hubei completed 5,352 
scientific and technological projects with investment of more 
than one billion yuan. 
  The rural enterprises in Zhongxiang city, one of China's 
phosphorus production bases, have shifted from selling ground 
phosphate rock to processing and selling of phosphate 
fertilizer, and to the phosphate chemical industry. Their 
output value increased approximately 100-fold. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59389 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Development Pace Shows `Increase' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  OW0901164294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1510 GMT 9 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0901164294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Changchun, January 9 (XINHUA) -- Northeast China's 
Jilin Province accelerated its pace of reform and opening up in 
1993, and gained strong momentum for further economic 
development. 
  Statistics show that the gross national product of Jilin 
last 
year reached 55 billion yuan-worth, an increase of 14.3 percent 
over the previous year. 
  The total retail volume of commodities topped 35 billion 
yuan- worth -- a growth of 18 percent over 1992. 
  The province has taken bold measures to transform the 
operational mechanisms of its industrial enterprises, and more 
and more state-owned enterprises are being granted 
decision-making powers in management and operation, local 
officials said. 
  Further reform measures have been implemented in the 
personnel and income-distribution systems in about 2,600 local 
state-owned enterprises. Hundreds of state-owned enterprises 
have been auctioned off or sold. 
  The number of share-holding enterprises in Jilin province 
has 
reached 371 so far. 
  Meanwhile, the provincial government has also attached much 
importance to the reform of the price system. The prices of 
coal, refined oil, cement and timber are now under market 
regulation. 
  The number of industrial products with controlled prices 
have 
been reduced from 23 to 12. 
  As one of the country's largest grain producers, Jilin has 
increased its agricultural input and made special efforts to 
lighten the burden on local farmers. 
  In spite of being stricken with serious natural disasters, 
the province still managed to get a bump harvest last year, with 
grain output totalling 19 billion kg and a growth of 7.1 percent 
in the average income of farmers. 
  Taking advantage of the international exploration of the 
Tuman River delta, Jilin has expanded its economic co-operation 
and exchanges with foreign countries, especially neighboring 
countries in northeast Asia. 
  The export turnover of Jilin last year topped 1.6 billion 
U.S. dollars-worth, and the province actually utilized 650 
million U.S. dollars in foreign investment, both substantial 
growths over the previous year. 
  Meanwhile, the improvement of transportation and 
communication facilities, and the speeding up of infrastructure 
construction have created a better economic environment in 
Jilin, the officials said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59390 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> PROVINCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shaanxi's Industrial Output Grows in 1993 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK1101124094 Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
0010 GMT 2 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1101124094 </F>
<F P=104>  Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Shaanxi province's industrial sector maintained 
relatively rapid growth throughout 1993. Industrial enterprises 
at and above the township level in the province turned in a 
gross output value of 51.156 billion yuan for the period from 
January to November, an increase of 15 percent over the 
corresponding period of the previous year. It is estimated that 
the gross industrial output value of enterprises at and above 
the township level in Shaanxi for the whole year will reach 56.3 
billion yuan, and the gross industrial output value contributed 
by all the industrial enterprises in the province will reach 
75.4 billion yuan, an increase of 22.4 percent over the previous 
year. 
  Industrial production in 1993 shows the following principal 
special characteristics: 1) The nonstate-owned industrial 
sector grew drastically. For the first 11 months of 1993, 
nonstate-owned enterprises at and above the township level 
turned in a gross industrial output of 11.377 billion yuan, an 
increase of 38 percent over the corresponding period of the 
previous year, and 28.3 percent points higher than the growth 
registered by state-owned industrial enterprises. Of these 
non-state-owned industrial enterprises, industrial enterprises 
under collective ownership recorded a growth of 32.9 percent, 
while other nonstate-owned industrial enterprises enjoyed a 
growth of 90.7 percent. 2) Central-government-owned enterprises 
enjoyed a growth higher than province-, prefecture-, city-, and 
county-owned enterprises did. In the first 11 months of 1993, 
central-government-owned industrial enterprises turned in a 
gross industrial output value of 15.344 billion yuan, an 
increase of 14.6 percent over the corresponding period of 1992, 
whereas the province-owned industrial sector and its 
prefecture-, city-, and county-owned counterparts only enjoyed 
an increase of 10.3 percent and 4.7 percent respectively. 3) 
The growth in heavy industry was apparently higher than the 
growth in light industry. Pulled by the increase in investments 
in fixed assets, heavy industrial production led light 
industrial production all the way in terms of growth in 
production output. From January to November, the gross output 
value of heavy industry increased by 19.7 percent over the 
corresponding period of the previous year. In addition, the 
production and market sectors coordinated with each other quite 
well. From January to November, the sale volume fulfilled by 
industrial enterprises at and above the township level totaled 
47.579 billion yuan, an increase of 16.1 percent over the 
corresponding period of the previous, and 1.1 percentage point 
higher than the growth in the gross industrial output value. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59391 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> FINANCE, BANKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Financial Situation Improved `Markedly' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0235A Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO in Chinese 9 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0235A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JINRONG SHIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Yi Bian: "Statistics on China for Third Quarter </F>
of 1993 That This Newspaper Has Been Authorized To Publish 
Indicate That Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Produced 
Results, That Financial Operations Were Getting Normal--Increase 
in Money Release Slowed Down, Urban and Rural Savings Increased 
Significantly, Needs of Critical Projects for Credit Funds Were 
Satisfied, and State's Foreign Exchange Reserves Increased"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 8 December--According to the financial 
statistics that the People's Bank of China authorized this 
newspaper to publish today, with the gradual implementation of 
the state's macroeconomic regulation and control measures, the 
financial situation improved markedly in the third quarter of 
1993; the prominent manifestations were: The money release 
decreased from the same period last year; urban and rural 
savings increased significantly; the work of cleaning up 
inter-bank loans in violation of regulations produced marked 
progress; the specialized banks' disbursement fund rate and 
payment capacity grew gradually; the state's foreign exchange 
reserves increased slightly over the end of last year; and the 
exchange rates of the renminbi (RMB) stabilized at a basically 
proper level. The improvement in the financial situation 
contributed to the sustained, rapid, and healthy development of 
the national economy. 
  Increase in the money release slowed down. In the 
first half of the year, because of the overly rapid increase in 
investment, large amounts of money were released continually. In 
the first half of the year the net money release amounted to 
52.8 billion yuan, representing an increase of 55 billion yuan 
over the same period last year. With the implementation of 
macroeconomic regulation and control measures, the situation of 
excessive money release improved on a monthly basis after the 
beginning of July. In July-September the cumulative net money 
release amounted to 21 billion yuan, representing a decrease of 
19.2 billion yuan from the same period last year. The main 
reason was the increase in the credit and commodity recovery 
capacities. Consumption funds increased in a calm manner. 
  Urban and rural savings deposits increased 
significantly, thereby providing stable sources of funds for 
banks' support of economic development. In 
January-September the net growth in urban and rural savings 
deposits amounted to 232.1 billion yuan, representing an 
increase which was 57.6 billion yuan larger than the same period 
last year. In this respect, the third quarter saw an increase of 
107.7 billion yuan, an increase which was 66.6 billion yuan 
larger than the same period last year. The main reason was that 
the central bank substantially raised the interest rate for 
deposits twice, thereby arousing residents' enthusiasm for 
savings; in this way residents' savings deposits which had 
declined for a time grew again, thereby stabilizing banks' 
savings sources. 
  State banks increased their credit supply, thereby 
forcefully helping satisfy the key needs of the development of 
the national economy. In the first half of this year bank 
lending of various types increased by only 99.3 billion yuan, 
representing an increase which was 36.3 billion yuan smaller 
than the same period last year. In the third quarter, after the 
banks adopted measures "to eliminate irregular practices and 
open legitimate channels," the People's Bank of China issued 
100.8 billion yuan in loans to specialized banks; over the same 
period state banks' loans of various types to enterprises grew 
by 100.3 billion yuan, representing an increase which was nearly 
30 billion yuan larger than the third quarter of last year. 
Those funds were mainly used to satisfy the funding needs of the 
state's key construction projects and produced good results. 
  Specialized banks' disbursement funds grew rapidly, 
thereby alleviating payment difficulties. After the 
beginning of July, the situation where specialized banks' 
disbursement fund rate was lower the legally required 
disbursement fund rate was changed through cleaning up 
inter-bank loans in violation of regulations and vigorous 
efforts to secure deposits. By the end of September specialized 
banks' disbursement fund rate had exceeded 7 percent, and banks 
at various levels had increased their payment capacity. 
  The state's foreign exchange reserves increased. 
At the end of September the state's foreign exchange reserves 
totalled $19.62 billion, representing an increase which was 
$3.617 billion smaller than the same period last year; but the 
rate of decline was lower. The amount of foreign exchange 
reserves represented an increase of $177 million over the end of 
last year, thereby changing the situation of net decline in the 
previous several months. The RMB exchange rates were stable and 
kept at a basically proper level, thereby providing a good 
environment for foreign trade. 
  Since the beginning of the third quarter our country's macro 
financial control has produced results, and financial operations 
are getting normal; the financial disorder which existed for a 
time has been resolved. The trends toward overly rapid increases 
in investment and prices have been suppressed. In carrying out 
macro financial control in the period to come, we must both 
consolidate the results achieved and create conditions for the 
various important reforms to be carried out by the state next 
year, so as to promote the sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development of the national economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59392 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Output of Textiles in December </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2001111294 Beijing CEI Database in English 20 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK2001111294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list of the output 
of textiles in December 1993, released by the State Statistical 
Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Item              |Unit              |12/93             |12/92             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000t           |41.07             |41.42             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000pc          |229               |231               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cloth             |100m.m            |17.06             |15.57             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of:Pure cotton    |100m.m            |10.71             |9.49              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chemical fiber    |100m.m            |4.44              |4.40              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk              |10,000t           |0.95              |0.89              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk fabric       |100m.m            |2.59              |2.41              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Woolen fabric     |10,000m           |3249              |3171              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Knitting wool     |10,000t           |3.48              |3.81              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Garment           |100m.pc           |4.89              |3.71              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Notes: t -- ton, pc -- piece, m.m -- million meter, m.pc -- million piece  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59393 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Output of Textiles Jan-Dec 1993 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2001111394 Beijing CEI Database in English 20 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK2001111394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CEI Database </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing (CEIS) -- Following is a list of the output 
of textiles in January-December 1993, released by the State 
Statistical Bureau: 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Item              |Unit              |1-12/93           |1-12/92           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000t           |487.09            |483.10            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn              |10,000pc          |2711              |2688              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cloth             |100m.m            |181.78            |172.26            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of: Pure cotton   |100m.m            |110.15            |100.28            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chemical fiber    |100m.m            |51.82             |53.27             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk              |10,000t           |9.17              |7.22              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Silk fabric       |100m.m            |28.44             |24.42             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Woolen fabric     |10,000m           |27855             |29283             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Knitting wool     |10,000t           |31.25             |29.96             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Garment           |100m.pc           |34.78             |28.51             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Notes: t -- ton, pc -- piece, m.m -- million meter, m.pc -- million piece  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59394 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Implementation of Textile Tracking System Urged </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0230A Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 20 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94CE0230A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Fang Pei (2455 0160): "Urgent MOFTEC Notice </F>
Demands Nation Take Firm Control of Assignment of Textile 
Manufacturer Designators; Textile Export Quota Controls Will Be 
Further Heightened"] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Cooperation [MOFTEC], in the latter half of September, issued an 
urgent notice to economic and trade departments throughout the 
nation demanding that prior to 30 November they complete the 
task of assigning textile manufacturer designators (MIDS) in 
their region. Economic and trade departments in every locality 
are presently urgently carrying out this task, and some 
provinces have completed the task. 
  National assigning of textile manufacturer designators is an 
important condition for the establishment of an export license 
approval system to export textiles to the United States. The 
establishment of an approval system is significant for raising 
China's export quotas for nations that limit textile imports, 
especially the United States. This measure can more effectively 
combat the illegal activity of fabricating false licenses and 
combat illegal textile transhipment and ensure the legitimate 
interests of export enterprises. 
  Manufacturer designators are made up of fifteen digits and 
are mainly used to clarify which manufacturers have textile 
exporting licenses, and to prove the original place of 
production of goods. 
  Textile manufacturers are state, cooperative, individual, 
partially or wholly foreign-owned, and other types of 
manufacturers engaged in the processing and manufacture of 
textiles, clothing, accessories, and other products included in 
bilateral textile agreements. It is reported that some local 
economic and trade control departments only assign the 
designation to manufacturers that provide their region with 
textile export goods. Therefore, some manufacturers that provide 
goods for export enterprises outside of their region and have 
the capability to provide export goods are left out of the 
designation. This leads to some export licenses not being issued 
on schedule because they lack a designated manufacturer, causing 
an adverse effect on normal exports. Therefore, all localities' 
economic and trade departments, based on MOFTEC's requirement, 
should organize all manufacturers and not designate some 
manufacturers. 
  The economic and trade control departments of all localities 
are the departments responsible for organizing all textile 
manufacturers in their region as designated manufacturers. In 
accordance with the demands of MOFTEC, all local economic and 
trade control departments should direct and oversee the 
designation of their region's textile manufacturers, and the 
collection of data and reporting to MOFTEC by all local and 
county departments responsible for economics and trade. 
  Once the manufacturer designation is set up and recorded, it 
should not be arbitrarily revised. The designation should be 
controlled by a person with special responsibility. 
  Every export enterprise, when applying for a license to 
export textiles to the United States, must enter the 
manufacturer designation for the goods in the permit in column 
13 and enter the designation in the MIDS column when filling out 
the visa. Otherwise, the certificate will be considered false. 
Thus, it is mandatory to use the manufacturer designation. 
  Presently, the establishment of the manufacturer designation 
is entering the final stage and economic and trade departments 
from every locality should seize the opportunity and seriously 
and meticulously accomplish this task. Units that still have not 
completed the task when the time expires, after China implements 
the approval system for licenses to export textiles to the 
United States, will not receive certification for the United 
States. This will create a huge economic loss for export 
enterprises. Thus, the economic and trade departments of every 
locality should energetically strive to overcome various 
difficulties and complete the task of establishing textile 
manufacturer designations on time throughout the nation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59395 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN TRADE, INVESTMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Capital Utilization Situation, Focuses </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0229A Hong Kong CHING-CHI TAO-PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] in 
Chinese No 2341, 18 Oct 93 pp 24-25 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0229A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHING-CHI TAO-PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Yajun (0491 0068 6511):"Overview Of Current </F>
Foreign Capital Utilization"] 
  [Text] Utilization of Foreign Capital: Current 
Situation 
  A total of 43,600 foreign-funded investment projects were 
launched nationwide in the first half of this year, an increase 
of 230 percent over the same period last year. The utilization 
of $58.8 billion in foreign capital was agreed upon, and the 
amount of foreign capital actually utilized was $9.4 billion, up 
300 percent and 180 percent, respectively, over the same period 
in 1992, roughly equal to the total for the entire year last 
year and about half of all foreign-funded investments for the 
previous 13 years. As of late June 1993, the grand total of 
foreign-funded investment projects nationwide stood at 134,423, 
actually utilizing $43.75 billion in foreign capital. Over 
50,000 foreign-funded enterprises have gone into production, 
most of them doing well. 
  Hong Kong, Macao, Japan, the United States, Taiwan, Italy, 
Germany, and South Korea continued to be the leading investors 
in China, primarily its coastal provinces and municipalities. 
Nevertheless, China's inland areas have been catching up fast. 
Among the various sectors, industry continued to attract the 
most capital, especially electronics communication equipment, 
machinery, chemical, and electrical appliance industries. 
Meanwhile, however, investment in the tertiary sector posted 
faster growth, with the scale of foreign investment increasing 
steadily. Agreed-upon foreign investment averaged $1.35 million 
per project in the first half of this year, a gain of 22 percent 
over the corresponding period a year ago. 
  Exports and imports by foreign-funded enterprises in China 
continued to grow steadily in the first half of 1993, with a 
total value of $24.63 billion, 49.7 percent higher than the same 
period a year ago and 31.7 percent of the nation's overall 
imports and exports. Of the $24.63 billion, exports accounted 
for $9.32 billion, up 36.9 percent over the corresponding period 
last year, and 21.5 percent of the nation's total exports. Most 
leading exports were found in light industry, textile industry, 
and electrical machinery industry. Imports were worth $15.31 
billion, an increase of 58.7 percent over last year and 37.7 
percent of the nation's total imports. Leaving aside 
investment-related imports, there was a rough balance between 
exports and imports made necessary by their operations. 
Foreign-funded investment enterprises nationwide remitted 
overseas $3.39 billion in foreign exchange in the first half of 
this year, at the same time moving $1.676 billion in foreign 
exchange to China, for a net outflow of $1.714 billion. Overall 
foreign-funded investment enterprises had a foreign exchange 
surplus. 
  That foreign investment in China maintained such a strong 
momentum when the rest of the world was in the grip of an 
economic recession fully testifies to China's political and 
social stability and the soundness of its investment climate. On 
the other hand, China is a latecomer to attracting foreign 
capital, so foreign investment still accounts for a 
significantly smaller share of China's total fixed assets and 
gross domestic product than in other fast-growing developing 
nations. Since most foreign capital is concentrated in 
processing industries, the overall quality of our drive to 
attract foreign capital has yet to be improved. 
<H5>  Focuses of Drive To Attract Foreign Capital </H5>
  In the wake of the deepening of economic structural reform 
and changes in the global economic environment, China will 
adjust its policies after reviewing its experience for the past 
14 years so as to achieve new breakthroughs in the attraction of 
foreign capital. Judging from the string of policies the country 
has adopted recently, we see that China will concentrate on the 
following at least in its drive to attract foreign capital: 
  1. Continue to work hard to improve the investment climate, 
particularly the intangible investment climate. By and large 
China has created the framework of a body of laws on foreign 
capital utilization; it has signed an investment protection 
agreement with more than 55 nations and other agreements to 
avoid double taxation with over 20 nations. All that provides 
basic legal safeguards for the foreign investor. Still there is 
much room for improvement on the legal front. To better the 
legal environment, China will continue to improve its laws and 
regulations, making them more coordinated, more open, and more 
workable; tighten law enforcement; and render its laws and 
regulations uniform nationwide, all of which is most critical to 
improving the investment climate. It is also essential that 
government departments improve their management methods. The 
procedures for reviewing and approving a project are currently 
being simplified. Some localities have set up a single body to 
review and approve project applications from foreign investors. 
In other localities, all the departments involved have decided 
to work together, for instance, by setting up joint offices and 
holding joint meetings, to examine and approve projects, thus 
streamlining the examination-and-approval process and enhancing 
work efficiency. Vigorous steps are being taken by the 
government to encourage the establishment of a host of 
service-providing organizations, such as consulting, legal, 
accounting, and property assessment services, to make available 
a complete lineup of social services. 
  2. China's open policy began in its coastal region, which 
had 
a stronger economic foundation and a long history of overseas 
trade, and gradually spread to the rest of the country, from 
south to north, from east to west. Practice proves that this 
progression is sound and inevitable and has played a significant 
historical role. Be that as it may, with years of development 
behind it, the open policy today should be applied across the 
board. The coast and the interior must develop in a balanced 
manner. Last year China opened up cities along the Chang Jiang, 
provincial capitals in the interior, and a number of border 
cities, and took some steps to encourage the interior to utilize 
foreign capital. Indeed, the interior has made rapid progress in 
utilizing foreign capital since last year, chalking up an 
increase rate higher than that of the coast. With its weak 
foundation and late start, however, the interior still trails 
the coast; the role played by foreign investment in its economic 
development remains minuscule. In the future China will 
gradually replace its policy of favoring some regions with one 
favoring some industries, which means that even as it continues 
to promote the utilization of foreign capital in the coast, it 
will work diligently to create the conditions that would steer 
foreign investors into the interior by playing up the interior's 
resource advantage and strong industries. In particular, it 
would encourage foreign companies to invest in agricultural 
development, resource development, technology development, raw 
material industries, and the technological transformation of 
old-line enterprises in the interior. It would also support 
foreign firms which want to invest in remote border areas, 
impoverished areas, and areas inhabited by minority 
nationalities. 
  3. Further optimize the industrial structure and widen the 
range of industries open to foreign investment. After 14 years 
of development, the industrial pattern of foreign investment has 
become more and more rational. In the last couple of years, in 
particular, a host of projects in the energy, transportation, 
and high-tech industries went under way across the nation that 
involved a large amount of capital, utilized advanced 
technology, and had substantial impact on the national economy. 
Substantial headway was also made in the tertiary industry. As 
we pursue foreign capital in the future, we must continue to 
abide by the principle of balancing development among the 
primary, secondary, and tertiary industries, with equal emphasis 
on large, medium, and small enterprises. Special pains must be 
taken to encourage agricultural technology development projects, 
infrastructural projects, capital- and technology-intensive 
projects, export-oriented projects, and projects in basic 
industries that would turn out more Chinese-made raw materials 
and parts and components. Export-oriented enterprises along the 
coast should be encouraged to upgrade themselves by graduating 
from labor-intensive products to high-tech products with a high 
added value. China has eased restrictions on foreign investment 
in the tertiary industry since last year. Now foreign investment 
is finding its way into finance, insurance, retail commerce, 
foreign trade, tourism, consulting, information, accounting, 
advertising, and shipping. China must continue to broaden the 
reach of foreign capital in the tertiary sector in the days 
ahead both to meet the needs of economic structural reform and 
the operation of the market economy at home and to satisfy the 
objective requirements of rejoining the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade and acceding to other related international 
organizations. In industries mentioned above that are already 
opened to foreign investment, the scope of the pilot projects 
will be broadened after reviewing the experience, while new 
experiments will also be launched in areas untouched by foreign 
investment so far. 
  4. Diversify the methods of foreign investment. In 
traditional methods of foreign investment, the investor invests 
directly by setting up a Sino-foreign joint venture, a 
Sino-foreign contractual joint venture, or a wholly 
foreign-funded enterprise. Or he may invest in compensation 
trade or a processing or assembling project. In recent years, 
especially since 1992, Sino-foreign shareholding companies have 
mushroomed, with dozens of them already in operation so far. 
More than 30 companies are trading special B shares denominated 
in renminbi on the Shenzhen and Shanghai stock exchanges. The 
shareholding system has become the way to go for enterprises 
interested in restructuring in a market economy. Investing in 
shareholding companies is now a new option for the foreign 
investor in China and promises to become increasingly important 
in the long haul compared to traditional methods. Furthermore, 
as China's financial climate further stabilizes and the Chinese 
stock market matures, a growing number of companies will issue 
shares for trading on the market. Foreigners will then be able 
to invest in China through the stock market, a method of 
investment that is simple, quick, and convenient in that it 
allows the investor to move his investment dollars around 
freely. The foreign investor no doubt will become increasingly 
interested in the stock market. To promote the development of 
Sino-foreign joint venture shareholding companies vigorously but 
cautiously, the Ministry of Foreign Economic Cooperation and 
Trade is in the process of drawing up the "Management 
Regulations for Sino-Foreign Shareholding Companies Ltd." 
  To encourage large foreign companies that have ample capital 
resources and advanced technology to carry out their 
multi-industry interregional investment plans in China, the 
country has in recent years approved the establishment of a 
number of investment companies (controlling companies). On 
behalf of their parent companies, these investment companies 
carry out their investment plans and manage the enterprises that 
have been set up. Judging from practical results, the investment 
company does a better job in helping the investor grasp any 
favorable opportunity to increase his investment in China. The 
Chinese government looks upon with special favor multinational 
companies setting up this kind of outfit in China. Recently an 
investment seminar for multinationals was jointly organized in 
Beijing by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Cooperation and 
Trade, the University of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, 
and the United Nations Center for Multinationals. 
Representatives from the various multinationals who attended the 
seminar expressed the utmost interest in this form of 
investment. Those representing some of the most famous companies 
also asked to set up regional headquarters in China, a request 
taken very seriously by the government agencies and figures 
involved. 
  5. Intensify the management of foreign-funded enterprises 
already in existence. As foreign-funded enterprises 
proliferated, it is increasingly essential that China step up 
their management. The management of foreign-funded enterprises 
entails, on the one hand, creating a favorable operating 
environment for such enterprises, especially by nurturing and 
perfecting the financial, foreign exchange, materials, and labor 
markets; helping them solve any problem relating to the supply 
of energy, raw materials, parts and components, and 
transportation; curbing the arbitrary collection of fees and 
apportionment of expenses, irresponsible fund-raising, and 
unjustifiable administrative intervention; and establishing a 
sound social service system. On the other hand, it means 
tightening the supervision of foreign-funded enterprises in 
accordance with the law. Currently the majority of 
foreign-funded enterprises are established and operate in 
accordance with the law. Nevertheless, there are some highly 
problematic enterprises. For instance, a number of them fail to 
deliver the capital or technology specified in the contract, 
import inferior technology at high costs, operate beyond the 
authorized limits, evade paying taxes, infringe upon their 
workers' legitimate rights and interests, and set up bogus joint 
ventures. The departments responsible take these problems most 
seriously and will work out the necessary measures to tighten 
supervision and management, urge enterprises to operate in 
accordance with the law, and crack down on illegal operations. 
  In short, China will be even more diligent in the future in 
improving the industrial and regional distribution of foreign 
investment even as it continues to work to attract more foreign 
capital. It will work harder to improve the quality of foreign 
investment as well as the economic returns and social benefits 
of foreign-funded enterprises. This is where the utilization of 
foreign capital is headed in China. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59396 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangxi Reports 1993 Grain Output </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0257A Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 5 Jan 94 p 
3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0257A </F>
<F P=104>  Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1993 gross output of grain in Guangxi reached 
14,565,000 tons, a 2.65 percent increase over 1992. Early and 
late rice output declined 151,000 tons from 1992, but corn 
output increased 241,000 tons over 1992, and other grains 
increased 286,000 tons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59397 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sichuan Sets 1994 Goals for Rural Economy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CE0257B Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO in Chinese 4 Jan 94 p 
1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0257B </F>
<F P=104>  Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Summary] In 1994 Sichuan Province plans to attain a gross 
value of agricultural output of 85.6 billion yuan, a 4 percent 
increase; gross output of grain 43 million tons; cotton 130,000 
tons; oil crops 1,480,000 tons, an increase of 141,000 tons; 
sugarcane 2 million tons, an increase of 193,000 tons; and to 
remove 68 million hogs from stock, an increase of 620,000 hogs. 
The gross output value of town and township enterprises should 
reach 221 billion yuan, a 30 percent increase. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59398 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpcar007___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Appraisal of Social Development in 1992 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2101045894 Beijing LIAOWANG in Chinese No 1, 3 Jan 94 pp 
8-11 </F>

<F P=103> HK2101045894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing LIAOWANG </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Li Shiyi (2621 0013 5030): "The General </F>
Level of Social Development in China Steadily Rises -- State 
Statistical Bureau Announces Results of Comprehensive Appraisal 
of Social Development of Various Localities in 1992"] 
  [Text] In 1992 the general index of the nation stood at 121 
points, which was 11 points higher than 1991, and there was a 
trend of growth in the general level of social development. 
  Of all provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions, 
the 
general indexes of 14 provinces and municipalities, including 
Beijing, were higher than 121 points. The growth rate of the 
national general index was 10 percent, and those of Anhui and 
other seven provinces and municipalities ranged from 30 to 11 
percent, higher than the national level. 
  Development in the five major spheres of population, 
economy, 
health and medical care, social insurance, and public security 
was in the lead. Development in three other major spheres, 
namely science, technology, and education; environment; and 
culture and sports was lagging behind. 
  A negative growth appeared in the development in the sphere 
of labor, showing a marked imbalance. 
  The second issue of our magazine in 1992 carried a report 
entitled "An Effective Move To Promote Social Progress" in which 
the results of comprehensive appraisal of social development in 
various localities of China was announced for the first time. 
The report evoked nationwide concerns and strong repercussions. 
Now one year has passed. What was the comprehensive level of 
China's social development in 1992? Had it increased or 
decreased? Was the development in the 10 major spheres of 
social life balanced or imbalanced? With these questions in 
mind, this reporter visited the Social Department of the State 
Statistical Bureau some days ago and learned that the results of 
comprehensive appraisal of social development of various 
localities in 1992 had already come out and there were many new 
and fresh changes. 
  Wu Jun, director of the Social Department of the State 
Statistical Bureau, told this reporter that in 1992 the trend of 
healthy development continued in the general level of China's 
social development. According to more than 130 indexes in the 
10 major spheres -- environment, population, economy, residents' 
life, labor, social insurance, health and medical care, science 
and technology and education, culture and sports, and public 
security, the general index of the comprehensive level of social 
development in 1992 was 121 points, which was 10 percent higher 
than that of 1991, or 11 points higher. This fact shows that 
China's social progress was not divorced from the high-rate 
economic growth. This is indeed a gratifying fact. 
<H3>  Order of General Indexes of 14 Provinces and Municipalities 
in the Lead Has Changed </H3>
  The 14 localities whose general indexes were higher than 121 
points, the national average, were: Beijing (189), Shanghai 
(179), Tianjin (170), Liaoning (156), Jilin (148), Guangdong 
(142), Jiangsu (140), Heilongjiang (136), Zhejiang (134), 
Shandong (133), Fujian (129), Hainan (125), Hebei (122), and 
Shanxi (122). 
  Those whose general indexes were similar to the national 
average were: Inner Mongolia (121) and Xinjiang (120). 
  The general indexes of the other 13 provinces and autonomous 
regions, except for Taiwan and Tibet, whose statistical figures 
were insufficient for the calculation, were lower than the 
national average. 
  Compared with the results of the 1991 appraisal, the order 
of 
provinces and municipalities whose general indexes were higher 
than the national average also changed. Of them, Jilin rose 
from sixth to fifth place, Guangdong rose from seventh to sixth, 
Heilongjiang rose from 10th to eighth, Fujian rose from 12th to 
11th, and Shanxi rose from 14th to 13th, while Jiangsu dropped 
from fifth to seventh, Shandong from eighth to 10th, and Hainan 
from 11th to 12th. 
  Zhejiang and Hebei remained in their original places, ninth 
and 13th. The changes show that there has been a trend of each 
trying to overtake the other in striving for social progress, 
economic growth, and harmonious development of the locality, 
just like "the Eight Immortals crossing the sea, each showing 
his or her special powers." 
<H3>  Anhui, Qinghai, and Guizhou Have Roused Themselves To Catch 
Up </H3>
  Most of the 14 provinces and municipalities whose general 
indexes were higher than the national average are in the eastern 
regions, especially the coastal areas. Benefiting from their 
faster pace of reform and opening up and from their superior 
economic and geographical positions, as well as their historical 
and human resources, they are making great efforts to promote 
comprehensive social progress in their respective localities 
with the help of the high-rate economic growth. 
  What attracts people's attention is that in 1992 the 
nation's 
general index of social development increased by 10 percentage 
points and those of eight provinces and regions were higher than 
this. Most of them were localities lagging behind in 1991. Of 
them, the general index of Anhui grew 30 percent, those of 
Guizhou and Qinghai grew 23 percent, that of Inner Mongolia grew 
15 percent, those of Gansu and Ningxia grew 14 percent, that of 
Hubei grew 12 percent, and those of Xinjiang, Jiangxi, Hunan, 
Zhejiang, and Shaanxi rose 11 percent. 
  Compared with the figures published in 1991, we can see that 
the general indexes of Anhui, Guizhou, Qinghai, Gansu, Ningxia, 
and Jiangxi were all among the last 20 in the previous year. It 
is indeed great news that these localities have been promoting 
social progress at a rate much higher than the national average. 
The development rates of Anhui, Guizhou, and Qinghai are 
particularly outstanding. The three provinces can be called the 
three "dark horses" in China's social development in 1992. 
<H3>  Development in the Five Major Spheres of Population, 
Economy, Health and Medical Care, Social Insurance, and Public 
Security Was in the Lead </H3>
  According to the figures promulgated by the State Statistics 
Bureau, the level of development in the 10 major spheres of 
social life in China were fairly high in 1992. The respective 
indexes for the 10 major spheres are as follows: Environment 
(12); population (13); economy (17); residents' life (13); labor 
(12); social insurance (11); health and medical care (11); 
science, technology, and education (13); culture and sports 
(10); and public security (11). 
  Compared with the figures of 1991, the development in five 
major spheres was more attractive in 1992, with indexes growing 
by more than 10 percent: 
  The growth rate of the population index (comprising 12 
specific indexes including the birth rate and the average life 
expectancy) reached 24 percent, showing a marked improvement in 
various profiles of China's population quality. 
  The growth rate of the Central Committee index (comprising 
17 
specific indexes including the GNP and the social labor 
productivity) was 20 percent, showing a high economic growth 
rate for the year. 
  The growth rate of the index of health and medical care 
(comprising 11 specific indexes including health expenses and 
the rate of acute infectious diseases) was 15 percent, 
reflecting a considerably big progress in China's health and 
medical work in that year. 
  The growth rate of the index of social insurance (comprising 
13 specific indexes including labor protection and welfare 
expenses for workers and retired personnel on a per capita 
basis) was 14 percent, showing an increase, rather than a 
decrease, in China's social insurance level while developing the 
economy. 
  The growth rate of public security index (comprising 14 
specific indexes including the number of cases concerning public 
security investigated and handled on a "per 10 thousand people" 
basis) was 11 percent, reflecting progress in China's public 
security situation. 
  In 1991, of the 10 major spheres, population, culture and 
sports, and public security were not developing satisfactorily. 
Through our efforts in the following year, development in the 
spheres of population and public security was promoted, but the 
development in the sphere of culture and sports was still 
lagging. 
<H3>  Development in Spheres of Science, Technology, Education and 
Environment Was Unsatisfactory, Negative Growth Appeared in the 
Sphere of Labor </H3>
  In 1991 the development in the spheres of environment, 
science and technology and education, economy, and residents' 
life was in the lead. One year later, development in the 
spheres of environment and science and technology and education 
slowed down, but the spheres of economy and residents' life 
continued to develop steadily. The growth rate of the index of 
environment was 3 percent and that of the index of science, 
technology, and education was only 1 percent, much lower than 
the high growth rate of the economic index of the same year, 
which was 20 percent. As environment, science and technology, 
and education have an important bearing on the momentum for the 
long-term economic and social development of a country, the 
lagging in these spheres should arouse our serious attention. 
  Another striking contrast to the high economic growth was 
the 
index of the sphere of labor. It comprises 12 specific indexes 
including the unemployment rate in cities and towns. In 1992, 
the growth rate of this index was -5 percent. This shows that 
some unexpected factors had appeared in the sphere of social 
labor in China's towns and country, such as social employment 
and safety in labor. At a time when the economic structure was 
being changed, the industrial structure was being readjusted, 
and the economy was developing at a high speed, the appearance 
of such phenomena is understandable. But it should not be 
neglected either. 
<H3>  In the 10 Major Spheres, Beijing and Shanghai Were in the 
Lead, and Gansu and Liaoning Were Unexpected Winners </H3>
  Classified according to different categories and regions, 
Beijing was first in the spheres of environment, residents' 
life, labor, social insurance, and culture and sports. Shanghai 
was the first in the spheres of economy, health and medical 
care, and science, technology, and education. This is nothing 
unexpected. The two municipalities achieved high scores in many 
spheres in 1991 and were able to maintain the high scores in 
1992. But Gansu and Liaoning were unexpected. The former was 
the first in the sphere of public security while the latter the 
first in the sphere of population. 
  If we make a comparison with 1991 figures, we find many 
significant changes. Some localities rose in certain spheres and 
dropped in others. For example, in the sphere of environment, 
Jiangsu rose from sixth to second place, Tianjin rose from 16th 
to third, Guangdong rose from 10th to fourth, and Zhejiang rose 
from eighth to fifth. But Shandong dropped from the second 
place to below 10th, Shanghai dropped from third to eighth, 
Liaoning from fifth to ninth, and Jilin from fourth to sixth. 
This shows that the positions of various localities in the 10 
major spheres are changing and all can achieve greater progress 
through their efforts. It is very difficult for the localities 
whose general indexes are in the lead to take the lead in all 
the 10 major spheres. It is also difficult for a locality to 
maintain the leading position in a certain sphere year by year, 
because many other localities are trying to catch up. After the 
result of the comprehensive appraisal of social development was 
promulgated, many provinces, municipalities, and autonomous 
regions found their own weak links and increased input in these 
links. They are doubling their efforts to strive for greater 
progress. We can find such traces from the 1992 appraisal 
report. 
  What merits our attention is that in some localities where 
the economy has been growing continuously at a high rate, the 
index of development in the sphere of public security is 
lagging. This has something to do with the large floating 
population in these areas and the insufficient input in this 
field. The experience of other countries proves that population 
flow is a big motive force for economic development. But while 
providing labor for those localities and promoting economic 
development there, the floating population has also brought 
security problems with them. However, after the economy is well 
developed, these localities will be able to increase input in 
this field and social security will be maintained. This is 
common knowledge. 
  Wu Jun, director of the Social Department of the State 
Statistical Bureau, said: In the overall plan, the statistical 
indexes used in the recent calculation, except for some minor 
readjustments, are the same as those used in 1991, so that 
people can easily make comparisons and find out changes. This 
work will be continued, because a statistical plan can show its 
value only through a period of practice. Moreover, time is the 
only criterion for examining the plan, to see whether it is 
realistic, effective, and correct. 
  The director continued: The general level of social 
development in a locality is a result of the long-term 
interaction of various factors, including historical, natural, 
geographical, and realistic factors. It cannot be entirely 
changed in a short period of time. Therefore, if the 
comprehensive appraisal is used to obtain information for 
comparison -- a self-comparison and comparison with others, it 
is certainly useful. But if it is used to compare with one 
another in position, it will lose its meaning, because there are 
many incomparable factors in various localities. The more than 
130 indexes for appraisal and the general plan are not entirely 
perfect. They will be improved in the future. But they must 
also be relatively stable. If they are changed willfully at any 
time, they will lose their scientific value. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1: General Indexes of Social Development in Various Localities in 1992 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Precedence               |Localities               |General Index            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |Nation                   |121                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1                        |Beijing                  |189                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2                        |Shanghai                 |179                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|3                        |Tianjin                  |170                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|4                        |Liaoning                 |156                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|5                        |Jilin                    |148                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|6                        |Guangdong                |142                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|7                        |Jiangsu                  |140                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Heilongjiang             |136                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|9                        |Zhejiang                 |134                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|10                       |Shandong                 |133                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|11                       |Fujian                   |129                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|12                       |Hainan                   |125                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|13                       |Hebei                    |122                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|13                       |Shanxi                   |122                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|15                       |Inner Mongolia           |121                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|16                       |Xinjiang                 |120                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|17                       |Hubei                    |115                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|18                       |Hunan                    |113                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|19                       |Shaanxi                  |110                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|20                       |Jiangxi                  |109                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|20                       |Ningxia                  |109                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|22                       |Anhui                    |106                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|23                       |Henan                    |103                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|23                       |Gansu                    |103                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|25                       |Guangxi                  |99                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|26                       |Sichuan                  |98                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|26                       |Qinghai                  |98                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|28                       |Yunnan                   |83                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|29                       |Guizhou                  |71                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 





  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 2: Localities Whose General Index Growth Rates Are Higher Than the Ave-| 
|rage Level of the Nation                                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Precedence               |Localities               |General Index Growth Rate| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |                         |(percent)                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |Nation                   |10                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1                        |Anhui                    |30                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2                        |Guizhou                  |23                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2                        |Qinghai                  |23                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|4                        |Inner Mongolia           |15                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|5                        |Gansu                    |14                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|5                        |Ningxia                  |14                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|7                        |Hubei                    |12                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Xinjiang                 |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Jiangxi                  |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Hunan                    |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Zhejiang                 |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                        |Shaanxi                  |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|13                       |Sichuan                  |10                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|13                       |Jilin                    |10                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 





  Table 3: National Average Indexes in Various Spheres and Rates of Development in 1992 

             General    Environment    Population    Economy    Resident    Labor    Social       Health    S&amp;T,         Culture    Public 
                                                                                                                         &amp; 

             Index                                              Life                 Insurance              Education    Sports     Security 

Index        121        12             13            17         13          12       11           11        13           10         11 

Rate 

(percent)    10         3              24            20         10          -5       14           15        1            6          11 





  Table 4: Localities in the First 10 Positions in 1992 and Their Indexes 

Precedence    Environment               Population                Economy               Resident's Life        Labor 

              Locality        Index     Locality        Index     Locality     Index    Locality     Index     Locality        Index 

1             Beijing         15.62     Liaoning        20.01     Shanghai     27.55    Beijing      21.23     Beijing         21.62 

2             Jiangsu         14.79     Beijing         19.39     Guangdong    27.51    Zhejiang     20.21     Shanghai        20.56 

3             Tianjin         13.91     Heilongjiang    18.83     Beijing      25.73    Shanghai     19.09     Tianjin         18.95 

4             Guangdong       13.76     Tianjin         18.12     Tianjin      24.10    Tianjin      17.80     Liaoning        15.01 

5             Zhejiang        13.52     Jilin           17.76     Liaoning     21.64    Jiangsu                17.27           Shanxi 

6             Jilin           13.31     Shanghai        17.68     Zhejiang     20.84    Guangdong    15.58     Jilin           14.26 

7             Heilongjiang    13.28     Shandong        14.82     Fujian       20.83    Liaoning     15.47     Heilongjiang    14.15 

8             Shanghai        12.90     Zhejiang        14.77     Jiangsu      19.75    Xinjiang     14.34     Guangdong       13.68 

9             Liaoning        12.82     Inner           14.53     Hainan       19.71    Shandong     14.21     Shaanxi         12.64 
                                        Mongolia 

10            Hebei           12.82     Jiangsu         14.25     Xinjiang     16.18    Fujian       13.97     Xinjiang        12.50 





  Precedence    Social Insurance         Health                   S&amp;T,Education          Culture,Sports           Public Security 

              Locality        Index    Locality        Index    Locality    Index      Locality     Index       Locality    Index 

1             Beijing         17.37    Shanghai        21.04    Shanghai    21.28      Beijing      17.30       Gansu       15.90 

2             Jilin           16.79    Beijing         19.41    Beijing     21.19      Guangdong    13.69       Shanxi      14.73 

3             Liaoning        16.17    Hainan          17.72    Tianjin     19.27      Shanghai     13.68       Shandong    14.63 

4             Tianjin         15.79    Jilin           16.24    Jilin       17.54      Hainan       13.64       Inner       14.52 
                                                                                                                Mongolia 

5             Shanghai        15.04    Xinjiang        16.14    Liaoning    17.35      Liaoning     13.54       Hebei       14.52 

6             Jiangsu         14.87    Inner           16.04    Jiangsu     15.83      Tianjin      13.47       Qinghai     13.89 
                                       Mongolia 

7             Shandong        13.62    Heilongjiang    15.89    Shaanxi     15.83      Jilin        12.44       Jilin       13.88 

8             Heilongjiang    12.61    Tianjin         15.47    Fujian      15.29      Ningxia      12.05       Henan       13.84 

9             Jiangxi         12.27    Qinghai         15.33    Shandong    15.04      Hunan        12.04       Jiangxi     13.44 

10            Hebei           12.02    Guangdong       14.59    Zhejiang    14.36      Shandong     11.61       Anhui       13.32 




</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59399 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpcar007___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLITICAL </F>
<F P=101> AGRICULTURE </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Unprecedented' Level of Unpaid Teacher Salaries </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0059A Beijing LIAOWANG [OUTLOOK] in Chinese No 42, 18 
Oct 93 pp 8-11 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0059A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing LIAOWANG [OUTLOOK] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhou Daping (0719 1129 1627): </F>
"Teacher's Salaries in Default: A Problem Which Must Be Firmly 
Resolved"] 
  [Excerpts] State Education Commission Chairman Zhu Kaixuan 
admitted frankly during this year's Teacher's Festival that the 
current level of default in teacher's salaries in "amount, 
duration, and extent, is unprecedented in the more than 40 years 
of history since the establishment of New China." 
  In December last year, after a Beijing newspaper revealed 
that several thousand teachers in Yilong County in Sichuan had 
not been paid for seven months and were forced to subsist on 
credit, the news poured in of many other places where rural 
teachers were suffering due to varying degrees of defaulted 
wages. The descriptions of their desperate situations proved 
without doubt that this late news story was not just a fable of 
one winter. 
  The problem of defaulted teachers' salaries did not just 
begin recently. During all of the 1980's, many locally hired 
teachers dependent on wages paid by local villagers in large, 
still poverty-stricken areas at times experienced the anxiety of 
not receiving compensation. Because this occured in 
impoverished areas where all the people lived in difficulty and 
because the extent of the problem was limited, it did not 
attract appropriate attention. As of approximately last year, 
defaults on salaries for government-hired teachers occured in 
some counties. The salaries of government-hired teachers are 
allocated in the government budget. The salaries were allocated, 
so why were they not received by the teachers? Unfortunately, 
the relevant agencies did not pay attention to this strange 
phenomenon and thus, this type of default was not curtailed in 
the early stages but allowed to spread to all the provinces and 
autonomous regions. Due to technical reasons (only counting 
recorded salaries without all the supplements) and a lack of 
understanding (fear of affecting one's career), the amounts of 
salaries in default reported by each locality were clearly far 
lower than the actual amounts in default. Even so, the figures 
collected by the State Education Commission indicate that as of 
the end of May of this year, the total amount of rural teachers' 
salaries in default had already reached the magnitude of 1.43 
billion yuan. 
  This large-scale default in teachers' salaries has become a 
social problem which cannot be ignored. 
  In addition to Beijing, Ningxia and Tibet, the areas 
affected 
by this default include all the provinces and autonomous 
regions. In Sichuan, Guangxi, Henan, Hebei, Hubei, and Liaoning, 
teachers salaries are in default in over half of the counties 
and, in some cases, over 70 percent of the counties. In 
duration, the defaults are as short as a few months and as long 
as three years. Under the repeated exhortations by the central 
government to settle these debts, many areas first pay up and 
then default again or pay and default at the same time. For 
example, before Spring Festival this year Liaoning Province 
settled debts and reduced the total of defaulted salaries from 
79.81 million yuan to 50.88 million yuan but by the middle of 
May, the amount had risen again to 78.51 million yuan. Only a 
few provinces such as Guangdong, Zhejiang, and Qinghai are in 
default for only several hundred thousand yuan. Over ten 
provinces and autonomous regions, including Liaoning, Hebei, 
Inner Mongolia, Shaanxi, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Hunan, and Guangxi, 
are in default for 60 to 80 million yuan and those with the 
greatest debt are Henan, Hubei, Sichuan and Heilongjiang, which 
all owe over 100 million in arrears. 
  There is a wide variety of forms of default in teachers' 
salaries, including total default, partial default and other 
forms. Long-term total default is common in most areas with 
default. At a teachers' forum held in Dunhua city, Jilin 
Province, in November last year,the entire audience sobbed as a 
middle-aged husband and wife, both elementary school teachers, 
described how they had not been paid for four months and, with 
no food to cook, their children suffered from hunger. There is 
no lack of examples in some areas of default on supplements 
mandated by the central government or by local governments. The 
long-term default of nine counties in Hainan of teachers' 
locality supplements, inflation supplements, and homeroom 
teacher incentive pay currently totals over three million yuan. 
Some areas even took it upon themselves to eliminate wages for 
teachers during winter and summer vacations, saying "They don't 
teach during vacations, so what wages are there to pay? If they 
want wages they should go find some themselves." Some vilages 
and townships dictated strict income generation targets for 
schools and those schools which did not meet the targets 
received no wages at all. All of the teachers of a central 
elementary school in a certain township in Gansu told news 
reporters in the early summer of this year that the township 
wanted to build a factory but was denied a loan from the bank 
due to the lack of a feasibility study. The local government 
then collected 1,000 yuan from each teacher and issued a 
regulation that those who did not contribute funds would not 
receive any more wages so that the teachers suffered in silence. 
  One can say that during the 1980s, some teachers did not 
receive prompt compensation for their labor but this occured 
mainly in impoverished areas. Thus, in the 1990s, the extent of 
default in teachers' salaries is not necessarily linked to the 
level of economic development. In Henan, which is relatively 
less well off financially, 16 out of 17 prefectures and 
municipalities are in default for a total of 150 million yuan. 
Six places, including Xinyang, Zhumadian, Zhoukou, Nanyang, 
Pingdingshan, and Kaifeng, owe over 10 million yuan. In even 
more financially strapped Guizhou Province, however, even though 
their total revenue to date has only met half of the plan, the 
entire province only owes 4 million yuan in partial defaults on 
teachers' salaries. In economically developed Guangdong and 
Zhejiang Provinces, only a few prefectures owe 500,000 or 
700,000 in teacher supplements. But in Liaoning, which takes in 
over 15 billion yuan in annual revenue, the default has impacted 
nearly 80,000 teachers in 465 villages and townships located in 
over 55 percent of the counties. In Sichuan Province, the "land 
of plenty," the situation is severe, with over 70 percent of the 
counties in complete default to teachers for over 100 million 
yuan. Some education specialists believe that those provinces 
and autonomous regions in default reflect a serious neglect of 
duty on the part of all levels of government in those places. 
  Seventy percent of the 8.5 million elementary and secondary 
school teachers in China are in the villages. One investigation 
indicated that among the salaried classes in society, rural 
school teachers have the weakest economic endurance. Currently, 
the general living standard of this group is at best right at 
the poverty line, with quite a few people very impoverished. For 
example, 52.5 percent of rural school teachers in Rongcheng and 
two other counties in Hebei live below the average local living 
standard. With salaries which are already so meager that after 
supporting a low-standard of consumption there is seldom any 
left for savings, as soon as they lose that minimal material 
guarantee, it is even more difficult for them to maintain normal 
life. When the teachers in Baimiao Village of Bazhong County, 
Sichuan, were not able to draw their salaries, they were forced 
to go from place to place to find meals on credit, to the extent 
that one after the other of the village's canteens and 
restaurants were eaten into bankruptcy. Therefore, as an ever 
increasing number of the several million rural teachers with 
defaulted salaries became indebted and impoverished households, 
the foundation of rural education was severely shaken. 
  The default in salaries has been emotionally damaging to the 
teachers. The daily life hardships created by the defaulted 
salaries has caused teachers to lose emotional stability. Many 
types of social facts entered their field of vision and served 
to make them even more uneasy. Some provinces and autonomous 
regions invest in real estate, buy imported sedans, and 
construct world class hotels, spending hundreds of thousands of 
yuan at every turn, but they still cannot resolve the problem of 
default in rural teachers' salaries. According to the "China 
Youth" newspaper, the amount of funds approved during the first 
half of this year for the purchase of cars by government 
administrative units at the county level or above nationwide 
reached 14.5 billion yuan. In Sichuan, it was possible to give a 
villa worth a million yuan to a movie actor while more than 100 
million yuan was still owed in defaulted teachers' salaries. 
Liaoning Province spent as much as 1.3 billion yuan to purchase 
automobiles last year but paid off teachers' salaries only to go 
into default again. Several townships and counties which have 
defaulted on teachers' salaries were quite extravagant in the 
purchase of cars. The teachers have quite normally asked for 
explanations of this. Exactly what happened to the money 
allocated by the government for teachers' salaries? Will the 
government pursue the individuals who diverted those funds? Who 
will handle this? 
  The default in salaries has exacerbated attrition among the 
ranks of teachers. Any place which has defaulted on teachers' 
salaries has teachers who are forced to give up teaching to stay 
alive. Among those are many who deeply love the teaching 
profession and are reluctant to leave it but ultimately change 
professions just to be able to eat. According to statistics of 
relevant agencies, those prefectures with teacher attrition 
rates above the national average last year were concentrated in 
provinces and autonomous regions with severe defaults in 
teachers' salaries. Fengbei village of Xiong county in Hebei 
lost 42 out of 153 teachers. One hundred-eighteen teachers 
retired early in Lezhi County in Sichuan. In Cangwu and two 
other counties in Guangxi, over 150 teachers "jumped into the 
sea" [left their jobs]. Four hundred teachers in Huaihua 
prefecture in Hunan changed professions, twice as many as the 
previous year. The number of class-one teachers and senior 
teachers among rural teachers between 26 and 45 years old in 
Hebei was reduced by 4,878 (16.7 percent). When a district 
education office in Tianjin municipality conducted a 
questionnaire survey of 1,000 elementary and secondary school 
teachers this year, 70 percent of the teachers indicated "if 
there were an opportunity to choose a profession over again, I 
would not be a teacher." Defaulting on teachers' salaries has 
scared away teachers already working and has scared away future 
teachers. In Sichuan's Yilong county, with its severe default on 
teachers' salaries, teaching college students view the teaching 
profession with trepidation. Out of 151 graduates sent to the 
villages last year only seven reported for duty. Even in the 
Beijing area, which has not defaulted on teachers' salaries, 
only one student listed a teaching university as first choice on 
the college preference section of the college entrance exam. 
  The default in teachers' salaries has increased the 
resurgence in the school drop out rate. In 1988, after 850 
teachers in Ningde prefecture in Fujian Province gave up 
teaching, 148 schools were closed for a time. Since last year, 
this type of situation has not been uncommon in provinces and 
autonomous regions with severe defaults in teachers' salaries. 
Frequently, teachers who have not given up teaching adopt the 
desperate approach of taking leave in turns to work elsewhere 
and scrape together some money. Many teachers, exhausted from 
working desperately to stay alive, have no time to prepare their 
lessons and no time to grade papers after class. Quite a few 
schools have had to turn class time into study hall or simply 
end school early due to a lack of teachers to hold classes. 
There are many instances of classes put on hold because 
teachers were unable to return to school after school started. 
Particularly in remote areas where each school has only one 
teacher, a teacher's departure means the loss of a school. In 
this situation, an increase in the dropout rate is unavoidable. 
Hebei Province predicts that the number of junior high school 
dropouts this year will increase by 55,000 and the drop out rate 
will increase by three percentage points to 8.72 percent. The 
large-scale attrition from junior high schools will not only 
seriously prevent the implementation of nine years' compulsory 
education in rural areas but will also increase the shrinkage of 
ordinary high schools and vocational high schools in rural 
areas. As one education specialist said, defaulting on teachers' 
salaries is no different from killing a chicken to get the eggs. 
In setting their sights on the economic arena, some local 
government officials have demonstrated zeal for quick success 
and instant benefit, not only proving their own ignorance but 
even depriving their descendents of the right to those benefits. 
In a place with a low quality of education, modernization is an 
empty phrase. In many places, however, defaulting on teachers' 
salaries is ruining education, creating new illiterates and 
holding back the next generation. [passage omitted] 
  Why did this strange phenomenon of default on teachers' 
salaries occur? Why would this strange phenomenon spread so 
quickly? All levels of education offices and education labor 
unions are searching for answers. Based on the aspects 
understood thus far, primarily the following factors created 
this situation. 
  Ever since the establishment of the new country, the policy 
followed on the payment of rural teachers' salaries has been 
unified payment by county finance departments. Impoverished 
counties which could not pay government-hired teachers out of 
their own finances (nearly 1,000 in the entire country) received 
assistance from the prefectural or provincial finance 
departments. This guaranteed that salaries for government-hired 
teachers reached the teachers. 
  Around 1991, finance system reform allocating finance 
responsibility to all levels of government in the entire country 
(with responsibility down to the village and township level) 
combined with education management responsibility divided among 
different levels of government brought change. On the one hand, 
county level governments delegated too many of the rights and 
responsibility for education to the village and township level. 
Villages became responsible for managing and supervising 
elementary schools. Townships managed and supervised junior high 
schools. Some government-managed junior high schools were even 
placed under the supervision and management of townships. On the 
other hand, as finance systems were established at the township 
level, the province, prefecture and county level finance offices 
gradually relinquished the planning and regulation of 
educational funding in their areas. As the townships implemented 
the finance responsibility system on their own, many could not 
handle the township educational expenditure. Some used 
educational funding to supplement gaps in township finances or 
diverted the funds to other uses. Some counties even tied 
township education funds to the submission of township revenue 
contributions. If the township did not submit the complete 
required revenue contribution, the education funds were to be 
held and not disbursed and used to compensate for the required 
revenue contribution. The counties thus guaranteed that each 
township would make its required revenue quota and the townships 
were pleased to have compensation funds which saved them part of 
their revenue obligation. What about salaries for teachers? One 
approach is default, bringing misfortune for the teachers; 
another approach is to apportion out the obligation in the name 
of education, thus increasing the burden of the peasants. In 
both cases, the people lose out. 
  After Comrade Deng Xioapeng made a speaking tour of the 
South 
in 1992, the economic pace in the entire country clearly 
increased. All levels of government jumped to increase economic 
investment. Some places were not realistic in their approach, 
blindly setting up businesses, and taking over educational funds 
when funds were very tight. When educational funds were taken to 
do other things, educational funds of course could no longer be 
disbursed monthly. The supplement base set for impoverished 
areas (unchanged for many years) became lower than the ever 
increasing demand. Three prefectures in the eastern foothills of 
the Taihang mountains, Lingshou, Fuping, and Tangxian, for a 
period this year owed an accumulated debt of over 10 million 
yuan in teachers' salaries. This was because government 
allocated educational funds were not disbursed on time for quite 
a long period. 
  Funds for supplements to locally hired teachers are partly 
from supplemental educational funds. Since 1986, it has been a 
special funding item with revenue collected locally by 
townships. But because on the one hand, collection was slack and 
on the other hand it was not well managed, these funds have 
often not been collected, or if collected, were diverted to 
other uses. After the State Council asked that the people's 
burdens be decreased, some provinces and autonomous regions even 
deemed this an excessive burden on the peasants and issued 
decrees temporarily ceasing this collection. For example, in 
Baoding prefecture in Hebei, the 20 counties there should 
collect 73.8 million yuan but as of now have only collected 20 
percent. Without these funds, where will the supplement for 
locally hired teachers come from? 
  The faulty work, bureaucratism, and even violation of laws 
and discipline of some local governments are also factors which 
have contributed to creating or exacerbating the default and 
cannot be ignored. In terms of faulty work, some counties with 
good revenues decreased educational funds to start economic 
projects, creating a major policy deviation. Revenues for 1992 
in Jing County in Hebei were 11 percent greater than those from 
the previous year but educational expenditures decreased by 18.5 
percent. This was in violation of the central government's 
regulation on educational funds that "both will increase." Some 
counties have left the position of vice county head in charge of 
culture and education vacant for a long time, thus losing an 
opportunity to resolve the default problem. Some county leaders 
lack a sense of urgency and responsibility towards clearing the 
debts, making outstanding defaults worsen daily. In terms of 
violating laws and and discipline, some counties have taken 
revenge on those who have honestly reported on the default 
situation. Some townships have diverted educational funds and 
educational supplements allocated by the government to setting 
up factories. Some townships have taken advantage of the time 
lag after educational funds have been disbursed from higher 
levels to loan out the money and reap large profits. The 
government of one county in Sichuan even issued a `red-topped 
document' stipulating that each teacher must donate 300 yuan to 
revive the local tobacco factory. The method used was to "chop" 
it all at once directly out of a teacher salary disbursement 
from the finance department. Based on information from teachers 
in many places, at the same time that local governments were 
defaulting on teachers' salaries, they were constructing many 
buildings of all types, buying many fancy cars, and spending 
money with abandon on travel in China and abroad. If part of 
that money had been used on education, the problem of defaults 
on teachers' salaries would never have developed to this point. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59400 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Bad Blood' Between Public, State Security </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0094B Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] in Chinese No 
83/84, 16 Nov 93 pp 20-24 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0094B </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong KAIFANG [OPEN MAGAZINE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lao Niu (5071 3662): "The Internal </F>
Contradictions Between Public Security and State 
Security"--first paragraph is editor's note] 
  [Excerpts] The author Lao Niu is a former Beijing 
high-level political insider. This article delves into and 
exposes the two main dictatorial systems of the Chinese 
Communist Party: It looks at the mutual contradictions, use of 
power, and evolution of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) 
and the Ministry of State Security (MSS) in the period of 
opening up. It points out that the state security apparatus 
already constitutes the power behind Li Peng's clique, and is 
responsible for controlling and countering political 
dissidents. 
  [passage omitted] The Border Control Department is called 
the 
Sixth Department within the CCP Ministry of Public Security, 
with its two trademarks being the External Border Crossing Usage 
Management Department and the Foreigner Management Department. 
In the more than 40 years since the CCP came to power, it has 
often had the formulations of "public security elders." This 
points to its real position in the political and legal system as 
a public security organ, procurate, law court, and judicial 
department. From a legal point of view, the MPS should only be 
subordinate to one arm of the State Council, and despite the 
fact that its name comes after the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
it still receives the supervision of the highest law court, and 
the highest procurate. In reality, the law courts and procurate 
in fact do not control the MPS. For example, Zeng Qinkou [2582 
6024 0656], of the highest procurate's Court of Law and 
Discipline, told this reporter that within the public security 
system there is widespread extortion of confessions through 
torture and cruelty, and some cases are passed through other 
channels to the procurate, but the Court of Law and Discipline, 
though it sends people to the public security organs for 
investigations, they are without exception turned away, and at 
every turn are told threateningly: Aren't you going to allow us 
to work? After the National People's Congress passed an 
administrative procedural law, a large amount of cases of 
"people versus government officials" came before law courts, and 
the CPC immediately allowed the highest people's law court to 
issue a top secret document, which went so far as to require 
that various local law courts, in cases of hearing complaints 
from the masses against the public security police, and cases 
where public security police refused to accept punishment, as 
far as possible should maintain the original sentence of the 
public security officials, and preserve their "law enforcement" 
image. 
  To not bring a lawsuit, is to have already lost a lawsuit, 
and this explains why the "public security elders" do not have a 
weakness that lends wings to rumors. It has been like this for 
many years. 
  However, this situation began to change in the early 1980s. 
The Ministry of Public Security altogether has more than 20 
departments, but there are only five or six that are directly on 
the front line of enforcing the law. Before the establishment of 
the MPS, the so-called "anti-revolutionary cases," including 
espionage and special cases, were the responsibility of the 
First Department, and this was a very mysterious organization. 
After the establishment of the MPS, a very large number of core 
cadres transferred from the First Department, and the CCP's 
Department of Investigation in Beijing's Western Gardens area 
attracted some of the People's Liberation Army's Second 
Department of the General Staff Headquarter's to form this type 
of special organ for uncovering spies, providing special 
services and handling cases of "subversion of the state." In 
this way, the MPS First Department became a political public 
security body, the Second Department became an economic and 
cultural public security body, the Third Department became a 
public security department, and the Fourth Department became a 
frontier defense unit, the Fifth Department became a punishment 
and investigation department, while the Sixth Department became 
a border administration body. Among these, the bodies with the 
most work load besides the Third, Fifth and Thirteenth 
(Preliminary Investigation) Departments, are some sensitive and 
the most mysterious departments separated from the MPS, but at 
the same time public security has lost a considerable portion of 
its special privileges. While in later name listings the 
Ministry of State Security (MSS) was listed after the MPS, in 
reality in terms of its funds, power and scope of activity, both 
were in position to override public security. 
  The MSS was established in 1983, at a time when Hu Yaobang 
was headed the government. Hu, in order to make political and 
legal work gradually adapt to the circumstances of reform and 
opening, chose former Shanghai Deputy Mayor Ruan Chongwu [7086 
1504 2976] to serve as Minister of Public Security, and Jia 
Chunwang [6328 2504 2489] from the Central Committee system to 
serve as Minister of Security. Ruan had once studied abroad in 
the then Soviet Union, and served in the CCP's Embassy in West 
Germany as a science and technology counselor. This experience 
enabled him to tackle solution of the reform of public security 
work, increase the level of transparency, and within a certain 
period to hold news conferences. In early 1987, Hu Yaobang had 
left the scene, and soon after Ruan was transferred from the MPS 
to serve as the Deputy Director of the State Science and 
Technology Committee. It was clear that he had not reduced the 
level of secrecy. But during the period Ruan served, the work 
style at the MPS had become more enlightened, and outstanding 
achievements were noted, and there was a marked improvement in 
the appearance and attitude of individuals, which had a lasting 
and profound effect on people. In particular, for a certain 
period he met with foreign journalists, and answered questions 
with wit and consideration, in an internationally accepted show 
of good form. Since this time, many officials of the MPS, in 
particular young ones, still cherish the thought of Ruan Chongwu. 
  However, comparatively speaking, when it comes to the MPS, 
the CCP views the Ministry of State Security as its own 
confidential security organ. For this reason, after Ruan Chongwu 
was transferred as the result of Hu Yaobang's departure from 
power, Jia Chunwang has been retained to run the Ministry of 
State Security. Still, because the MSS is favored and has formed 
a arrogant attitude, in terms of the allocation of power, 
especially in the case of overlapping of MSS responsibilities 
with certain tasks of the MPS First Department, the 
contradictions between the two ministries are steadily growing. 
Here are just two examples to illustrate this situation: 
  1. The MPS at present is located on the north side of 
Beijing's Changan Avenue, and on the gate of the MPS there hangs 
not only an MPS sign, but at the same time, there is also an MSS 
sign. In fact, the MPS offices are primarily located at the 
Western Gardens supreme headquarters of the former Central 
Investigative Department. However, since relations between the 
two ministries have become strained, they do not mutually settle 
accounts. For example, normally government personnel and 
professional contacts outside the MPS, provided they go through 
the simple formalities of registering, are able to directly 
enter the MPS main compound, and even some journalists also hold 
credentials and can come and go as they please. But for MSS 
personnel, even if they display credentials, those at the gate 
often make up various reasons for them to be refused entrance. 
  2. Contradictions between the public security organs and 
state security organs are even more acute at the grass-roots 
level. Shenzhen City's Shatoujiao zone contains the 
investigative strongholds of a number of intelligence organs, 
including the Second Department General Staff, the MPS, and the 
MSS. However, the contradictions between the MPS and MSS are the 
most deep-rooted. One Shenzhen City MPS friend told the author 
about how they handle MSS organ personnel. Between Hong Kong and 
Shenzhen there is a forbidden zone, and by and large personnel 
from the MPS, and Peoples' Armed Police (PAP) are responsible 
for inspecting and controlling this zone. Normally, MPS 
personnel, and PAP cadre, General Staff Intelligence personnel 
are able once in a while to enter the forbidden zone to carry 
out tasks, but when it is discovered that there are MSS organ 
personnel entering the forbidden zone, often indiscriminately 
MPS personnel will first "arrest and bring them to justice," 
interrogate them and them suddenly release them. Allegedly, this 
is done on instructions from senior officials. From this it is 
evident that bad blood has been accumulating between the MSS and 
MPS. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59401 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Regulations for Militia, Reserves in Enterprises </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0100A Beijing ZHONGGUO MINBING [CHINESE MILITIA] in 
Chinese No 10, 9 Oct 93 pp 3-4 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0100A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO MINBING [CHINESE MILITIA] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "General Staff Department, General Political </F>
Department, State Economic System Reform Committee, State 
Economic Relations and Trade Committee, Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Personnel, and Ministry of Labor Regulations on Work 
of Militia and Reserves in Enterprises (Issued 14 August 1993)"] 
  [Text] Article 1. This regulation is drawn up in 
accordance with applicable provisions of "Militia Work 
Regulations," and "Regulations for the Transformation of 
Operating Mechanisms in Industrial Enterprises Under Ownership 
of the Whole People" in order to meet needs in building a 
socialist market economy system. 
  Article 2. Militia in enterprises are an integral 
part of China's national defense reserve forces. In wartime, 
they are an important force in urban defensive warfare, and a 
major source of military officers and professional and technical 
troops to augment and expand the PLA. They are a mainstay for 
the maintenance and protection of production and for support of 
the war effort. In peacetime, they are a mainstay for the 
development of production, for the performance of war 
preparedness duties, for safeguarding the social order, and for 
fulfilling emergency, difficult, dangerous, and onerous tasks. 
  Article 3. Enterprises must fulfill militia, 
reserves, and military service work tasks according to national 
laws and regulations. Their main tasks are as follows: 
  1) to establish and consolidate militia and reserve unit 
organizations, to reorganize annually, and to conduct activities 
in a timely fashion; 
  2) to conduct political and ideological work among the 
militia and reserves; 
  3) to complete militia and reserve forces military training 
tasks; 
  4) to control and maintain militia and reserve forces 
weapons 
and equipment according to regulations; 
  5) to organize militia for the performance of war 
preparedness duties, to maintain normal order in their own unit, 
and to work with public security units to maintain social order; 
  6) to complete the call up of new troops, and to carry out 
policies for giving special care to disabled servicemen, and to 
the families of revolutionary martyrs and servicemen; 
  7) to perform preparatory tasks pertaining to reserve 
officers and men, the mobilization of matriel, and the 
registration of vehicles and vessels for wartime mobilization; 
  8) to establish people's armed police according to 
regulations, and to equip and administer full-time people's 
armed police cadres and militia cadres; 
  9) to rally militia and reserve personnel to take the lead 
in 
participating in the building of socialist materials 
civilization and spiritual civilization, to take the lead in the 
development of production, and in the fulfillment of emergency, 
difficulty, dangerous, and onerous tasks; 
10) to organize the militia and reserves in wartime to join 
the armed forces and go to war, to maintain production, to 
protect the masses, to support the front lines, and to complete 
troop mobilization and matriel, vehicle, and vessel mobilization. 
  Article 4. Enterprise people's armed police are an 
integral part of the national defense system. They are the 
leading organization for the work of the enterprise militia and 
reserves. 
  Enterprises required to set up people's armed police work 
organizations shall assign full-time people's armed police 
cadres, applying the principle of maintaining an elite and 
highly effective force. For every approximately 1,900 staff 
members and workers, one full-time people's armed police cadre 
should be assigned. For units having 1,000 but fewer than 5,000 
personnel, one commander and one or two clerical personnel 
should be assigned. For large units having 5,000 personnel or 
more, consideration should be given to the assignment of a 
deputy commander and several clerical personnel. Other units 
that have set up a militia organization but that have no 
full-time people's armed police assigned shall set up a unit and 
designate a person responsible for militia and reserves work. 
The specific organizations to be established shall be decided by 
the provincial military region (the garrison regions and guard 
regions) on the basis of the above regulations through 
discussions with provincial, autonomous region, and directly 
administered municipality CPC committees and governments. 
  Changes in enterprise people's armed policy work 
organizations must be approved by the province, autonomous 
region, or directly administered municipality CPC committee, and 
the people's government and provincial military region (garrison 
and guard regions). 
  Enterprise full-time people's armed policy training, 
selection for promotion, reassignment, appointment and dismissal 
shall be in accordance with provisions of "Militia Work 
Regulations." 
  Full-time enterprise people's armed police cadre wage, 
welfare, and official business expenses shall be the same as 
that of administrative personnel at the same level in the 
enterprises, and be handled according to regulations. 
  The professional and technical duties of full-time people's 
armed police cadres in enterprises shall be set by the 
enterprise itself. 
  Article 5. Enterprise militias and reserves shall 
work under the leadership of local CPC committee, government and 
local military leadership and command organizations, the 
principle practiced of central and local authorities working in 
combination, the local authorities carrying the main burden, and 
the central authorities providing support. The railroad and 
shipping industries may operate in accordance with the 
leadership principle whereby the central authorities take 
primary responsibility, and also accept leadership from local 
military leadership and command organs. 
  Article 6. Enterprises must uphold the principle 
of the Party controlling the gun, making militia and reserves 
work an integral part of the enterprise's work, including it in 
administrative plans, instituting joint Party and government 
control, putting in place a division of labor with individual 
responsibilities, and appointing a single leader in charge. 
  Enterprise authorities in charge shall show concern for and 
support militia and reserves work. 
  Article 7. When an enterprises expands or 
contracts its scale of production, and optimizes or tightens up 
its internal production structure, it shall promptly readjust 
and improve the militia organization, and file a report with the 
county (city, or district) people's armed police headquarters 
for purposes of the record. When the organization of a militia 
anti-aircraft battalion (or regiment) is to be changed, approval 
shall be requested from the provincial military region (or 
garrison district). When changes are to be made to reserve units 
at the squad level and above, approval is to be requested 
according to regulations. 
  Article 8. Enterprises shall made the political 
training of militia and reserves personnel a part of their staff 
member and worker political education plans, the substance and 
scheduling done according to applicable regulations. 
  Enterprise people's armed police shall keep abreast of the 
political and ideological condition of militia and reserves 
personnel at all times. They shall conduct political inspections 
of militia and reserves personnel in conjunction with militia 
reorganizations to maintain the purity and reliability of 
militia organizations and reserve units. 
  Article 9. Enterprises shall make the personnel 
and time needed for military training of militia and reserve 
units a part of the labor management plans and working hour use 
plans of enterprise production control units to ensure that 
military training is given. 
  Article 10. Enterprises having militia weapons and 
equipment shall make control and maintenance of militia weapons 
and equipment a part of the enterprise maintenance and safety 
control plan, providing in accordance with regulations the 
warehouses, safety facilities, and guard personnel needed to 
take care of the weapons and equipment. 
  Article 11. Enterprise people's armed police work 
expenses shall be made a part of enterprise financial control 
plans and posted as an enterprise administrative expense for use 
primarily in the following ways: to pay a food allowance and 
travel expenses back and forth during periods when the militia 
and reserves engage in training; to pay expenses for the 
activities of militia and reserves personnel that the enterprise 
people's armed police headquarters organize; to pay warehouse 
management and maintenance expenses for militia weapons and 
equipment; to pay expenses incurred in the registration of 
reserve officers and men, and the registration of materials, 
vehicles, and vessels for mobilization; and to pay expenses for 
calling up new troops. 
  When enterprise militia and reserves take part in military 
training, they are to receive the same wages and bonuses, and 
the same welfare benefits that their parent unit receives. Food 
allowance and expenses for traveling back and forth shall be 
submitted for reimbursement by the parent unit according to 
regulations. Teaching materials, equipment for the military 
training of militia and reserves shall be centrally purchased, 
made or printed and distributed by the military itself without 
charge to the enterprise itself. 
  Article 12. Enterprises shall conduct militia and 
reserves work with the needs of production and operation in 
mind. They shall organize and stimulate militia and reserves 
personnel to take the lead in fulfilling production tasks, in 
conducting labor competition, technological innovation, and 
product increase production and practice economy campaign, 
thereby making a contribution to improvement of the enterprise's 
economic returns. 
  Article 13. Units and individuals who make a major 
contribution to the work of enterprise militia and reserves 
shall be given a bonus in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 42 of "Militia Work Regulations," the cost to be charged 
to bonuses. 
  Units and individuals who create losses for the work of the 
militia and the reserves in violation of these regulations shall 
be punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 44 of 
"Militia Work Regulations." 
  Article 14. The General Staff Department shall be 
responsible for interpreting this regulation. 
  Article 15. This regulation shall become effective 
as of the date of publication. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59402 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Governor's `New Tactics'; Chinese Response </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0087A Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] in 
Chinese No 335, Nov 93 pp 28-33 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0087A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hong Qingtian (3163 3237 3944): "China, Britain, </F>
Hong Kong At Crossroads of History"] 
  [Excerpts] Patten Poses Seven Challenges to China in 
Second Annual Report--Patten's New Tactics and Challenges to 
China 
  [passage omitted] 
  1. Abandoning his "from politics to politics" stance, which 
is that politics is self-justifying and self-sufficient, Patten 
has now woven politics into the lives of the people of Hong 
Kong, making it part and parcel of the local way of life and 
inseparable from the war on corruption, the rule of law, 
freedom, education, and the quality of governance -- all 
"perennial concerns" in Chinese society. [passage omitted] 
  The way Christopher Patten talked last year, you would have 
thought he were in Britain. Now Patten takes life in Hong Kong 
as his point of departure, arguing that democratic politics of a 
high quality are what the people of Hong Kong need to maintain 
the "Hong Kong system." How can the Chinese authorities be 
persuasive if they reject his argument? What alternative can the 
Chinese offer? If the Chinese come up with their own agenda, 
what must it contain that would invalidate the British position? 
How to sever the linkage between "politics" and the "Hong Kong 
way of life?" When Hong Kong fought for democracy in the 1980's, 
Xu Jiatun [6079 1367 1470] tried countering Hong Kong's 
capitalist primary democracy with advanced socialist democracy. 
Subsequently China rejected Hong Kong's political demands by 
questioning their timetable. After Patten came to Hong Kong, the 
Chinese could no longer keep acting anti-democratic. All they 
could do was to declare that they too were for democracy but 
that the dispute between China and Britain is not one over the 
extent of democracy but one involving trust between two nations. 
Now that Patten has made politics an integral part of the life 
of the Hong Kong people and their institutions, can the Chinese 
continue to counter it with the argument that it is all a matter 
of trust between nations? 
  2. In contrast to his past arrogance and wilfulness, Patten 
now says, "I have grown to like Hong Kong more and more. I have 
deep feelings for this place." He hopes that "as it advances 
with big strides into the 21st century, Hong Kong will be like a 
beacon, shining brightly as if to announce its glorious 
achievements. It will also set an excellent example 
demonstrating that in a system of freedom, people can 
successfully overcome all sorts of adversity and difficulties 
and, hand in hand, create a wonderful future." (Section 190) 
  After the governor presented his first annual report to the 
Legislative Council last year, the Chinese authorities initially 
took a heavy-handed approach. It was so severe and threatening 
that it gave the impression China was prepared for mutual 
destruction, with Britain, Hong Kong, and itself all going down 
the tube. In doing so, the Chinese only succeeded in turning 
public opinion strongly against them. Even as public approval of 
Patten slipped and opposition rose, anti-Chinese feelings in 
Hong Kong also gained ground. Politically speaking, the Chinese 
paid dearly for opposing Patten. At the time the Chinese could 
convincingly attack Patten for his overbearing ways, arrogant, 
domineering, stubborn, and intractable. Now Patten has changed 
his attitudes. He may still be impenetrably thick-headed, but he 
has mellowed considerably and become more practical. What should 
be China's attitude now? If the Chinese try to be as mellow and 
practical as Patten, that may be interpreted as a compromise. 
Yet if they persist in their shrill ways, they may lose points. 
  3. Patten's second annual report to the Legislative Council 
is replete with praises for the people of Hong Kong, for their 
accomplishments, and for the superiority of the Hong Kong 
system, calling it a miracle of human society. The report also 
contains endless comparisons with Britain, Australia, and the 
Netherlands, countries which the local people are familiar with. 
Of course this is the stock in trade of politicians in every 
democratic country, but it also shows that the relationship 
between the ruler and the ruled under a democratic system is 
just what the people of Hong Kong need psychologically at this 
point in time. 
  Having inherited the tradition of the Qing Dynasty and the 
Republic of China, the Chinese Communists have always considered 
Hong Kong alien land. It is hard for the Chinese to sing the 
praises of the Hong Kong system, Hong Kong people, and Hong Kong 
society. During the anti-Patten campaign last year, the Chinese 
opposed everything that was associated with Patten. What Patten 
said about Hong Kong's values and its superiority were all 
satirized by the Chinese media, so much so that one could hardly 
tell right from wrong anymore. The "anti-Patten" campaign came 
perilously close to being an "anti-Hong Kong" movement. The 
objective of the Chinese was to launch an all-out attack on 
Patten, stopping at nothing. In so doing, however, they in 
effect repudiated many of the values of the system of Hong Kong. 
If China continues its negative attitude toward Hong Kong, what 
sort of price will it have to pay? If, on the other hand, it 
echoes Patten and begins heaping praises on Hong Kong and 
emulating the Hong Kong system, can the Chinese Government bring 
itself to do that? Would praising Hong Kong send a wrong message 
to the local people, misleading them into thinking that China 
would compromise with Patten and go along with him? Would that 
encourage "Hong Kong chauvinism?" 
  4. Patten has modified his political reform proposals in two 
major ways. First, he has replaced functional groups with 
statutory bodies even as he insists that voting be based on the 
individual and reduces the overall number of voters from the 
2.70 million called for last year to 1 million. The second 
concession is that the electoral committee would be composed of 
four groups following the organizational model of the second 
legislative council after 1997 as spelled out in the Basic Law. 
Under Patten's original proposal, the committee was to be made 
up of popularly elected district representatives (in its 
entirety or to a large extent). Nevertheless, Patten sticks by 
his original plan to have the 400 members of the electoral 
committee be chosen through election. Moreover, this concession 
comes with strings attached; the proposal that elected 
representatives be allowed to serve out their terms beyond 1997 
(the "through train" concept) is part and parcel of his overall 
plan. 
  Britain and China reopened negotiations in April mainly 
because public opinion forced them back to the conference table. 
Both sides knew full well the price of defying public wishes. 
They may not reach an agreement if they negotiate, but they are 
bound to lose if they don't even talk. Hong Kong people hope 
that something will come out of their talks. A dozen or so 
public opinion surveys by the Hong Kong Statistical and Business 
Research Council invariably came up with one finding: The people 
of Hong Kong want both sides to make concessions and reach an 
accord. Now that Patten has made the first move by taking the 
initiative to give way, naturally the public wants the Chinese 
side to make corresponding concessions in order to narrow the 
difference between the two sides. How should the Chinese 
Government respond? If they continue to insist that Patten is 
guilty of the "three violations" and refuse to make adjustments 
and concessions, they would have a lot of ideological work to do 
on the Hong Kong people, besides giving Patten a reason to 
withdraw from the talks. However, if they give way, they would 
be handing a victory to Patten. Patten's initial demand was an 
electorate of 2.7 million people. It has now been scaled back to 
1 million, still significantly more than the 200,000-300,000 
people who would have been eligible to cast votes for the 
original 21 functional seats. How extensive a concession should 
the Chinese make? What about the "through train" proposal? As 
the seven letters between the foreign ministers indicate, both 
sides agreed that the same electoral arrangements should remain 
in place from 1995 through 1999, allowing legislators elected in 
1995 to serve out their terms through 1999. Then came the 4 June 
tragedy of 1989 and the big victories scored by democratic 
groups in direct Legislative Council elections in 1991. The 
Chinese wavered on the "through train" idea and the British came 
up with their own set of arrangements for the 1995 elections. 
Since the controversy was triggered off by China's plan to scrap 
the "through train" proposal, would it make concessions on this 
very issue? 
  5. Patten's second annual report to the Legislative Council 
was an honest self-examination of his past commitments regarding 
the people's livelihood and the work that had been done. He 
talked about things he had accomplished and things he had not, 
laying it all out in an honest, earnest, and realistic way. One 
year after arriving in Hong Kong, Patten has certainly commanded 
much authority with his solid political ideas. More than that, 
his skills, language, and operating method as a politician as 
well as the closeness between him and the public have also set a 
standard that the leader of the post-1997 special administrative 
region [SAR] must meet. During the subsequent question period, 
Legislative Council members lined up to point out the errors in 
his report. Their exchange, complete with questions, answers, 
charges, and explanations, was democracy in action, live. 
  Public statements by Chinese officials to this date still 
contain a lot of empty bureaucratic gobbledygook, devoid of a 
spirit of seeking truth from facts. They always lecture the 
masses on the omnipotence, all-knowingness, invincibility, 
infallibility, and greatness of government, instead of talking 
about self-restraint, self-discipline, and self-control. The 
real issues are never aired in the open. Patten demonstrates the 
modern Western political approach while the Chinese remain 
wedded to propagating the superiority of "big, complete, and 
all-powerful government" going back thousands of years. How 
should the Chinese respond to Patten's new methods indicative of 
a modern open society? Should they throw a tantrum and pick a 
fight with Patten over this? Or should they take a leaf from 
Patten's book and try to communicate with the masses using 
similar methods? Would the SAR chief after 1997 measure up to 
Patten's standard? After the June 4 incident, Deng Xiaoping 
raised a lot of expectations when he said that he would "get 
several practical things done." Yet no documents have ever been 
issued regarding the "practical issue." Have they really 
materialized? Patten makes endless allusions to what is good 
about the Hong Kong system and what is bad about the Chinese 
system, one obvious example being the way the two governments 
level with the people. Even more striking is the open dialogue 
and debate that took place in an atmosphere of freedom between 
Patten and the people of Hong Kong on an equal plane after the 
governor presented his second annual report (in which the 
Chinese authorities also played an active part). 
  6. For the first time, Patten devoted an entire chapter to 
Sino-British relations. He spent a lot of time emphasizing the 
close ties between China and Hong Kong and the numerous 
connections between the two, including cooperation in 
administrative matters and environmental protection. In the 
future, bridges of the concrete and steel variety will be built 
to link the two together. Even more important will be bridges of 
the invisible type. Sino-Hong Kong relations mean China learning 
from Hong Kong's value system and success story and Hong Kong 
drawing support form China's strengths. Patten said, "When many 
places in the world identify with Hong Kong's value system and 
seek to duplicate its success story, would the world become a 
better place, a more prosperous place? Or will it become less 
prosperous? We all know the answers to these questions." 
(Section 182) Patten took the initiative to define the relations 
between China and Hong Kong, giving substance to their contacts 
as well as clarifying the nature of such relations. Hong Kong 
represents progress and as such should be imitated; China 
represents power and should therefore be a source of support for 
Hong Kong to tap into. Together they can take bold strides into 
the next century. 
  China has always looked at Hong Kong unilaterally from top 
to 
bottom, demanding that it fall in line with China and not the 
other way round. The kind of Sino-Hong Kong relations China 
wants is one in which Hong Kong complies with all China's orders 
and satisfies every Chinese demand. Whatever the merits of the 
case, no matter who represents progress and who represents 
backwardness, the Chinese want Hong Kong to simply blend itself 
into the entity known as China. As for making the Hong Kong 
system "living, automatic, and autonomous," the relations 
between China and the special entity of Hong Kong, how the two 
should be integrated and to what extent, as well as the costs 
and benefits of such integration... none of that has been 
considered at length. Nor do the Chinese allow such 
consideration; mention differences between the two systems and 
they cry "abetting," "sowing discord," "setting one party 
against another." A major incompatibility in Sino-Hong Kong 
relations is that the sovereign body, namely China, is large but 
backward, whereas Hong Kong, which has no sovereignty, is small 
but advanced. A unilateral emphasis on China's sovereignty would 
result in integration of a regressive type, meaning that an 
advanced Hong Kong would have to reach down to accommodate a 
backward China. A one-sided emphasis on Hong Kong's 
non-sovereign status is both impossible and disastrous. How to 
define Sino-Hong Kong relations down to the details is a major 
challenge facing Hong Kong in the future. The success or failure 
of this relationship will impact the relations between the 
mainland and Taiwan and those between the central government on 
the mainland and the localities (a perennial problem in Chinese 
politics going back thousands of years). 
  7. In his annual report to the Legislative Council, Patten 
noted subtly and not so subtly that where Hong Kong was free to 
make up its mind, things had gone well in the past year, but 
where consultation with China was necessary, nothing seemed to 
have worked well. In Section 172, he said. "...outstanding 
achievements have been scored on all fronts during the past 
year...with one lone exception," which was Hong Kong's effort to 
"further its understanding with China" and "replace unproductive 
speculation with sincere trust." (Section 173) Why? "Not because 
of a lack of effort, a lack of determination to improve 
bilateral relations on Hong Kong's part." (Section 174) "The 
reason is that we still have not been able to convince Chinese 
officials that Hong Kong citizens' expectations about the 
development of their political system are in no way excessive 
but are reasonable and should be met, that they form part of the 
natural evolution of a society as it matures and becomes more 
sophisticated. In a certain sense, political development is also 
a prerequisite for Hong Kong's remaining a leading player in 
international trade. These expectations do not constitute a 
threat to China now and will not do so in the future. The fact 
of the matter is that these expectations can be met within the 
framework of "one nation, two systems." (Section 175) Instead of 
saying the Chinese refused to go along or disagreed, Patten said 
euphemistically that they (meaning himself and his associates) 
had failed to convince Chinese officials. In fact his meaning is 
very clear. We all know what the problem is: The failure by the 
Chinese authorities to see what Patten and others have been able 
to see. Cases in point: Pier No. 9, the airport, the harbor, the 
Sino-British liaison group. Patten covered all these problems at 
great length and, in so doing, seemed to have put the ball back 
in China's court. 
  Last year the Chinese tried to shoot down Patten's political 
reform plan in an overbearing way by resorting to economic 
pressure, ready and willing to destroy all three parties. What 
the Chinese wanted to prove was that Patten would not be able to 
accomplish a thing without China's cooperation, that he would 
end up with not just one broken leg, but two broken legs. 
Basically the Chinese have achieved this goal. On the other 
hand, the Chinese were also taking a risk. The people of Hong 
Kong might blame the Chinese Government for the delay in solving 
all those problems that need to be tackled urgently. What are 
the Chinese going to do about these feelings? How to point the 
accusing finger back at the British? How to undo the damage the 
delay has caused Hong Kong and China (particularly Guangdong)? 
Who should be held politically accountable? In the second half 
of the year, will the Chinese continue to relax their economic 
austerity drive or will they tighten the belt again? [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59403 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> INTER-EUROPEAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   * View of Russian Intelligence on NATO Expansion </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CH0149A Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 11 Dec 93 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0149A </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CESKY DENIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Petruska Sustrova: "Russian Intelligence on </F>
Russian Interests--Russian Intelligence Evaluates and Analyzes 
NATO Expansion"] 
  [Text] The possible extension of NATO's 
responsibility to Central and East Europe (CEE) is one of the 
key questions for determining the future look of European 
security and the distribution of forces on the continent in the 
postcommunist era. The shift of CEE countries toward NATO 
affects Russian interests and requires careful analysis. Russian 
intelligence prepared an extensive document, the second part of 
which, called "Russian Interests," follows. 
  From the standpoint of Russian interests, the expansion of 
NATO has several aspects that must be taken into account during 
the process of developing relations with NATO, Central and 
Eastern Europe, and the countries of the near abroad. ("Near 
abroad" is a term for the states on the territory of the former 
USSR--translator's comment.) [previous sentence as published] 
<H5>  NATO's Perspectives </H5>
  In the opinion of Russian intelligence experts, the analysis 
of the impact that an expansion of NATO will have on Russian 
interests requires, above all, a prognostic evaluation of the 
likely evolution of NATO after the end of the Cold War. The 
announced goals and political impulses, conditioned by the 
reality of the situation, affirm that NATO should change from a 
military-political grouping, oriented at repelling external 
threats, into an instrument for guaranteeing peace and stability 
on the basis of collective security. The task of expanding 
NATO's sphere of responsibility to the East is perceived in this 
context. According to the Russian intelligence experts, Russia's 
many concerns regarding the entry of CEE countries into NATO 
would be eliminated or lessened if there were guarantees that 
their entry would be preceded by a process of changing the role 
of the alliance or if the political functions and geographic 
scale of NATO were to be expanded simultaneously. But such 
guarantees do not exist. 
  First of all, however, the question of the prospective 
change 
of NATO has not been sufficiently clarified. The alliance has 
not created a precise concept of its role and place in the 
system of international relations in the postcommunist era. 
Debates on the issue of NATO's political strategy tend to be 
more of an evaluating and preliminary nature. At the same time, 
it is obvious that the Atlantic partners have different views of 
the role and authority NATO has in the security sphere and what 
role and authority other international institutions have. Also, 
stereotypes of "bloc" thinking still persist, which is true 
especially in the case of many representatives of the military 
leadership of Western countries as well as of the alliance as a 
whole. One of these stereotypes is that the USSR, of which 
Russia was the core, was for many years considered the main 
source of a military threat to the very existence of Western 
civilization. As a consequence, NATO is strategically directed 
at the "worst scenario," which is necessarily reflected in the 
character and details of its operational documents, in its 
military structure, and in the military readiness of the 
national as well as the coalition armed forces. The removal of 
these "residues" will obviously require some time. Also, this 
psychological turnaround cannot be painless and cannot but meet 
with resistance from important representatives of the governing 
circles, the military establishment, the academic community, and 
the industrial-military complex of the NATO countries. 
  We cannot expect a reduction of the scope and momentum of 
the 
arms race, which requires that, in the public consciousness, the 
"picture of the enemy," even if only a potential one, be 
maintained. This is moreover reinforced by the concerns of the 
representatives of the leading NATO countries about the possible 
reduction of the role of the economy and science in the military 
sector. Concern is often expressed in the West about the loss of 
the achieved technological level and economic resources if the 
industrial-military complex is weakened in the climate of the 
"postconfrontational euphoria." 
  The effort of CEE countries to compel the West by joining 
NATO to actively participate in solving their internal political 
as well as external problems could bring an unforeseen result. 
NATO, drawn into complicated processes marked by violent 
conflicts in East European countries, could be faced with the 
objective necessity of taking a harder line in its policy. The 
transformation of NATO into a universal peacemaking and 
stabilizing force could be prolonged. In any case, there is the 
danger that this process will not be synchronized with the 
expansion of the alliance. This poses a threat to the interests 
of the Russian Federation because such lack of synchronization 
could reduce the chances for finally putting an end to the 
division of the continent and could lead to a return of the 
"bloc" policy, this happening in a situation where NATO's zone 
of responsibility will move into the immediate proximity of the 
Russian Federation's borders. 
<H5>  Geopolitical Aspects </H5>
  The proponents of linking CEE countries to NATO understand 
that moving the zone of NATO responsibility to the Russian 
borders creates a certain unease in the Russian Federation, and, 
in an effort to blunt the edge of this reaction, they use the 
following arguments: 
  --The sphere of international stability guaranteed by NATO 
will include countries immediately bordering the territory of 
the former USSR, and NATO will thus assume responsibility for 
maintaining peace and forestalling conflicts in this region. 
  --If NATO adopts a course leading to its numerical 
expansion, 
it will be forced to take a clearer position on the fundamental 
issues of Europe's transformation after the Cold War, make an 
unambiguous statement about the goals and character of future 
cooperation with the Russian Federation and other members of 
CIS, speed up the process of reevaluating the political role of 
NATO, and adopt real measures for the transformation of the 
alliance into an instrument of universal security. 
  --Expanding NATO by the CEE countries will open up the way 
into the alliance for Russia as well. 
  The last argument is being emphasized especially now, on the 
eve of the NATO summit meeting. However, Russian intelligence 
experts reached the conclusion that the "probing" offers to 
Russia concerning a partnership with NATO do not imply any 
incentive for creating some mechanism for supporting 
international security, the composition and functions of which 
would accord with the conditions of the postcommunist era. The 
idea of such a mechanism is being discussed in the West. For 
example, specialists in the United States are exploring the 
possibility of creating at this stage an organization of 
collective security that would represent something between NATO 
on one end and the CSCE and the UN on the other. Understandably, 
of fundamental importance to Russia is which alliance it can 
join and in what function, or what kind of partnership relations 
with this alliance it can enter into. 
  On 20 October of this year, NATO Secretary General Woerner, 
in his speech at the conference "Supporting Peace in Europe" in 
Madrid, attended by experts from NATO, the WEU [Western European 
Union], the EC, and the CSCE, pointed out a number of instances 
that could bring about, if not exactly uneasiness, at least 
supplemental questions. He said that in the present situation 
the main goal of the alliance, besides joint defense of its 
members, is to maintain a strategic equlibrium in Europe. This 
second point can be interpreted as a situation in which NATO 
even in the new conditions performs one of the main functions, 
the kind it had during the confrontational period of the Cold 
War. If that is so, the shift of NATO borders to the Russian 
borders requires either a military strengthening of Russia, 
which, however, does not conform with the key tasks of economic 
development, or Russia's acceptance of an asymetry in the 
security sphere, which is also against Russian interests. 
  According to another statement made by Woerner, one of the 
main functions of NATO is to "project" stability into the CEE 
countries and Central Asia. If "partnership" or some other form 
of NATO expansion also includes the interest to bring the 
Central Asian countries into the zone of NATO responsibility, 
this expansion can be explained, not unjustifiably, as an 
alternative to the system of collective security within the UN 
framework. Expansion of NATO's zone of responsibility to two 
areas immediately neighboring the Russian Federation, in the 
west and in the south, can give rise to a reasonable suspicion 
that a new geopolitical situation is emerging that is extremely 
unfavorable to Russia. 
<H5>  Military Aspects </H5>
  At this time, we certainly should not be hearing flat 
assertions similar to those that were common during the Cold 
War--for example, about a hard confrontation between the West 
and the East, NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the United States and 
the USSR. It is difficult to imagine and would be incorrect to 
take as a point of departure that a geographical expansion of 
NATO would serve to create a staging area for striking a blow at 
Russia or its allies. This conclusion, however, does not mean 
that an extension of NATO eastward would not pose a threat to 
the interests of Russia's military security. 
  Lately, various kinds of conjectures about the position the 
Russian Army takes on this issue are commonly put forth in the 
West. In particular, assumptions were made about efforts by the 
generals to use their "growing influence" on the Russian 
Government and "force" it to follow a hard line in guaranteeing 
national security. Such assumptions are an overdramatization. It 
is impossible not to see that the very mission and professional 
tasks of the armed forces condition their particular view of the 
problems connected with the eastward expansion of NATO 
responsibility. Russia's military leadership obviously cannot 
disregard the following facts: 
  1) The fact that, as a consequence of NATO expansion, the 
largest military grouping in the world, which has at its 
disposal a vast potential for attack, will come into the 
immediate vicinity of Russian borders, requires: a fundamental 
reevaluation of all defense concepts, a regrouping of the armed 
forces, a review of operational equipment, the development of 
additional infrastructure, the relocation of large contingents 
of troops, and a change of operational plans as well as of the 
character of military readiness. These measures are from the 
military point of view inevitable and must be realized 
irrespective of the fact that, in NATO's political plans, Russia 
is no longer considered an adversary. In an analogous situation, 
the other side would undoubtedly take similar steps. 
  2) Implementation of the mentioned measures, moreover within 
a limited amount of time, undoubtedly will mean exceeding the 
state budget and result in lowering Russia's defense capability 
during the period of structural rebuilding and relocation of the 
main groupings of the armed forces. 
  3) It is impossible not to be aware that, under such 
conditions, danger will arise as a result of the failure to meet 
deadlines and that existing programs for cutting and 
reorganizing the Army and turning it into a professional force, 
as well as for equipping it with modern, expensive arms systems 
of high technological level, will come to naught. Lagging behind 
in this area means that the military potential of the Russian 
armed forces will be qualitatively limited in comparison with 
the level of the leading military powers. 
  4) If the Russian Government proves unable to guarantee 
normal financing, logistic support, and social security for the 
armed forces, it could create dissatisfaction among Army 
personnel, which certainly is not in the interest of Russia's 
political or military leadership or the country as a whole. 
  Nor can the fact be ignored that the expansion of NATO will 
mean that the zone of its responsibility will encompass that 
part of the European Continent where international borders were 
changed as a consequence of World War II. And this process is 
foreshadowed in a situation in which new states are coming into 
being in Europe, and, therefore, the results of the Helsinki 
negotiations, which established the status quo, cease to apply 
or are significantly weakened. It can therefore be assumed that, 
under the new conditions, the alternative guarantor of postwar 
European borders will be NATO. 
  There is, besides the positive aspects, a flip side to this. 
Many experts closely connect the "expansionary" trend in NATO 
with the growing importance of the FRG in this alliance. The 
"preparatory period" for the entry of CEE countries into NATO as 
full members is also related to the development of their 
bilateral military cooperation with Germany. Many foreign 
political scientists are coming to the conclusion that the 
numerical increase of the alliance will lead to a change in the 
status of the FRG on the European Continent: It will change from 
a "receiver" of security to its "exporter." At the same time, 
there is reason to assume that certain circles in the FRG look 
at the issue of NATO expansion from the viewpoint of further 
developments in the situation concerning the postwar borders. 
  The first set of problems in this area relates not only to 
Germany but also to other countries. For example, won't some 
forces in Romania that are promoting the idea of uniting with 
Moldova begin to carry out this process, in which they will lean 
on their membership in NATO and ignore the interests of the 
Trans-Dniester? One way or another, the opinion that membership 
of the CEE countries in NATO will raise the level of 
international conflicts, including territorial ones, is 
substantiated. 
  Expanding NATO by the Visegrad Group will also serve as an 
incentive to the Baltic States to join NATO. This could result 
in a situation in which the center of gravity of their 
cooperation with the West will be reduced to the military 
sphere. That could be considered a challenge to Russia because 
the military presence of third countries in this region is 
contrary to its geopolitical interests. NATO leadership 
emphasizes that it is not its intention to make the CEE 
countries into a cordon sanitaire that would separate Russia 
from West Europe. Nevertheless, that could happen, even without 
the subjective intentions of the leading NATO authorities. In 
any case, with the entry of CEE countries into this 
organization, a barrier will go up between Russia and the 
remaining part of the continent. It is essential to take into 
consideration the fact that a change in the membership 
composition of NATO will inevitably paralyze a whole number of 
international commitments of the alliance that ensue from 
multilateral agreements and treaties, particularly from the 
Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty, the compliance with which 
is the basis of stability and security of the entire continent. 
  As is known, this Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty was 
based on the concept of equivalent security, and its aim was to 
reach by the end of 1995 an equilibrium in conventional weapons 
between two groups of countries (NATO and the former Warsaw 
Pact) by establishing the same level in the quantity of combat 
equipment of land and air forces. If NATO is expanded by the 
countries of the former Warsaw Pact, the principle of 
equilibrium will be broken. That would call into question the 
quotas of conventional arms equipment not only of the potential 
new NATO members, but also of the CIS countries--above all, 
Russia. 
  In addition, in the countries of the Visegrad Group, a 
problem has arisen with monitoring compliance with the joint 
obligations, especially concerning the handing over of arms and 
the controlling of their numbers (Article VII), carrying out 
controls and inspections (Article XIV), etc. 
  It must be pointed out that any modification of the 
agreement, for which Russia strived during the past 
year-and-half to two years during bilateral as well as 
multilateral discussions, encountered hard resistance and 
negative reaction from NATO. President Yeltsin's message to the 
leaders of NATO (September 1993), which contained a proposal for 
a further review of the "side" limitations on Russian armed 
forces (Article V), was practically rejected by NATO 
representatives. Much evidence exists that this stance will be 
taken by the alliance until the end of 1995--that is, until the 
time when the restrictions on conventional arms according to the 
mentioned agreement come to an end. 
<H5>  Internal Political Aspects </H5>
  Not to be overlooked is the potential unfavorable impact of 
NATO expansion on the political situation in Russia and the 
psychological posture of the Russian people. For a long time, 
public opinion in Russia was formed in the anti-NATO spirit and 
cannot be changed overnight. In view of that, the extention of 
NATO's zone of responsibility to the former USSR allies will be 
seen at this stage by a significant part of the public as 
"danger coming closer to the Russian borders." That could act as 
an incentive for the anti-West forces in Russia, and it could 
provide them with arguments for goal-oriented efforts to 
discredit the government's course of action. In such 
circumstances, there could come about a revival of the 
"encircled camp" mentality and of isolationist tendencies and 
currents flowing from them, negative toward the existing 
reformist line. 
  Russian social consciousness should mature and understand 
NATO as a structure of European security and stability, not as a 
hostile force striving for political and military superiority 
over its main adversary from the time of the Cold War. 
  On the basis of the submitted analysis, which, of course, 
will be modified according to new information, Russian 
intelligence experts arrived at the following conclusions: 
  --In the conditions of the postcommunist period and in a 
situation in which the so-called bloc discipline, such as 
existed before the liquidation of the Warsaw Pact, does not 
exist, Russia has no right to dictate to the sovereign countries 
of CEE whether to join NATO or some other international alliance. 
  --It would suit Russian interests if the process of 
expanding 
NATO's zone of influence would proceed in concert with the 
change of its character and with the adaptation of its functions 
to the requirements of the present stage of historical 
development. 
  --The entry of CEE countries into NATO, its nature, timing, 
and the obligations and rights of the new members, must be 
fashioned in consideration of the viewpoints of all of the 
involved countries, of which Russia is one, and also of the 
prospects for reinforcing the foundations of collective security 
on the continent, the development of Europe-wide cooperation, 
and guarantees that all of the countries aspiring to NATO 
membership will adhere to the international commitments they 
have made. 
  --Only the sum total of the mentioned factors will help 
create the prerequisites and favorable conditions for mutual 
relations between the Russian Federation and NATO, as well as 
for the shift of their relations to the level of real 
partnership. 
  --At the present stage, it would be proper to pursue a 
multilateral policy of global development of cooperation with 
all of the international institutions that are able to 
contribute to the creation of a universal system of collective 
security in Europe. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59404 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Krajisnik Rules Out Further Concessions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20191A Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 27 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20191A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Z.R.: "No More Concessions"] </F>
  [Text] Kragujevac--"The Serbian and Croatian sides have 
made a proposal promising to give 33.5 percent of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina territory to the Muslims. This was not easy; 
great sacrifices were made. However, supported by the world's 
great centers of power, the Muslims have rejected even this 
proposal. They, in fact, want all of Bosnia-Herzegovina. They 
hope to achieve this by retaining the union, which would then be 
abandoned by the Serbs and the Croats," Momcilo Krajisnik, 
president of the assembly of the republic of Srpska, said 
yesterday. 
  Krajisnik pointed out that, "by retaining the union, the 
Muslims hope to acquire Neum and an exit to the sea. They also 
maintain that Sarajevo cannot be divided into two cities, and 
they demand new territorial concessions in eastern and western 
Bosnia." 
  ``The Muslims are making all these demands hoping they will 
get to keep all of Bosnia-Herzegovina. We cannot make any 
further territorial concessions, but the Muslims persist with 
their demands so that the Serbs will be blamed again for the 
failure of negotiations. For this reason, on 15 January we will 
have to make the Muslims aware that this leadership is taking 
them to destruction. In the meantime, prior to 15 January we 
will have a session of the assembly of the republic of Srpska 
where we will ask for the establishment of a new platform for 
future negotiations. 
  ``This will conclude the third round of our struggle for 
freedom; in the pending fourth round, we will have to make the 
international community aware of what the Serbs want. And if 
this does not produce any results, we will have to take our own 
course,'' said Krajisnik, adding that "the Muslims are 
prolonging the war with the intention of first purging central 
Bosnia of Croats, and then, in the spring, turning against the 
Serbs. This is why they want to open the airport in Tuzla, in 
order to get arms through." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59405 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tuzla Muslims Treating Serbs as `Hostages' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20202A Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 27 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20202A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Serbs as Ethnic Hostages"] </F>
  [Text] Zvornik (TANJUG) -- Vojislav Djurkovic, operations 
representative of the state committee of the republic of Srpska 
(RS) for the exchange of civilians, yesterday stated for TANJUG 
that the situation of Serbs in Tuzla and its vicinity is 
extremely critical. He points out that "the Muslim authorities 
treat the Serbs in the Tuzla region as ethnic hostages, 
subjecting them to the most brutal terror and pogroms." 
Djurkovic notes that, "as of now, we have officially requested 
that 16,500 Serbs, individually named, be permitted to move to 
RS territory, but that has not been made possible." 
  Djurkovic also notes that "great quantities of humanitarian 
aid are reaching Tuzla exclusively through the RS. However, the 
quantities reaching the Serbian population in Tuzla and its 
vicinity are only symbolic, intended only to prevent mass 
starvation among them. Even the Serbian humanitarian association 
`Dobrotvor' is under the total control of the Muslim military, 
who take for themselves whatever they consider to be of better 
quality. All this has been going on for months, but the 
representatives of international humanitarian organizations in 
Tuzla pay no attention to the frightful scenes of mass suffering 
of the Serbian people." 
  According to Djurkovic, "Izet Hadzic, chairmen of the Tuzla 
region, is directly responsible for most of the hardship, 
pogroms, and persecution of Serbs." "The training center for 
Islamic terrorists in Tojsici near Tuzla is also under his 
leadership," maintains Djurkovic, noting that "the majority of 
instructors in this center are mojahedin from various Islamic 
countries, and many of them used to be criminals and terrorists 
in Europe. The Serbian side has evidence about the activities of 
Fadil Prcic, who has his own jail for Serbs and his private 
Muslim police. He, together with his assistant, Sherija 
Zajmovic, who is in charge of private jails for Serbs in Tuzla, 
has personally ordered and participated in the elimination of 
many Serbian families." In Djurkovic's opinion, it is becoming 
increasingly clear that the Serbs will have to determine the 
fate of their compatriots in the Tuzla region in response to the 
general mood of the people of Semberija, Majevica, and Posavina. 
He notes that Dr. Radovan Karadzic, president of RS, has 
recently also called attention to this necessity. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59406 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Leaked Documents on Liquidation of Serbs, Croats </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94BA0155A Zagreb GLOBUS in Serbo-Croatian 24 Dec 93 pp 3-5 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0155A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb GLOBUS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Butkovic: "Tomislav Mercep's Death Squad, </F>
Operating From a Base in Pakracka Poljana, Has Been Executing 
Serbs and Croats!"] 
  [Text] Mihajlo Zec (age 38), a butcher, a Serb who came 
from Bosanska Krajina, and said to be a member of the HDZ 
[Croatian Democratic Union], was murdered on 7 December 1991 in 
Poljanicka Street on Tresnjevka in Zagreb. The killers kidnapped 
his wife, Marija, who owned a little cafe on Dolac which the Zec 
family had obtained in the past thanks to good connections with 
powerful people, mainly Serbs in the communist system, and his 
daughter Aleksandra (age 12). Marija and Aleksandra were later 
shot and killed. The bodies were found near the Adolfovac 
mountain lodge on Sljeme. 
  A week after that crime the Croatian police arrested 
suspects 
who confessed to the murders during the investigation. They were 
Nebojsa H., Munib S., Sinisa R., and Igor M., who took part in 
Zec's murder and the kidnapping of his wife and daughter, and 
Suzana Z., who accompanied the murderers. 
  In mid-December of the year before last, all the suspects 
were already in prison pending the investigation. It was learned 
from police circles that they had confessed to that and certain 
other crimes. The Zec case seemed to have been solved. 
  But some 10 months after the murder of Mihajlo Zec, his wife 
Marija, and his daughter Aleksandra, charges were dropped 
against the arrestees because of procedural mistakes in 
investigatory proceedings. Their lawyers felt that there was a 
good chance of an acquittal even if there had not been those 
procedural mistakes, because under the conditions of an 
immediate danger of war (and those conditions prevailed in 
Croatia in the fall and winter of 1991) even members of the 
reserves of the Ministry of Internal Affairs [MUP] had the right 
to use firearms in a number of critical situations, for example, 
if a person attempted to flee to avoid arrest. 
  All those suspected of having murdered the Zec family were 
members of a reserve unit of the MUP whose commander was 
Tomislav Mercep. This is Mercep's famous unit that played a 
decisive role in the defense of Gospic and liberation of part of 
western Slavonia; it was initially founded back in the time of 
Vukovar, when Mr. Mercep was responsible for defense of that 
city, and from time to time serious violations of the rules of 
war have been attributed to its members. 
  At the time of the crime against the Zec family, there was 
talk in Croatia about the disappearance of a certain number of 
Serbs from Zagreb. There was also talk about the mysterious 
disappearance of certain Croats well-known to the public. 
  The best-known of these cases was the disappearance of Mrs. 
Marina Nuic, president of the Kraljevica branch of the HDS 
[Croatian Democratic Party]; nothing is known about her fate 
even today. 
  Not only that, but several members of the Croatian Armed 
Forces, most of them members of the MUP reserves, have also 
disappeared. 
  Two years after these enigmatic disappearances, some of 
whose 
victims were relatively well-known, representatives of the 
United Nations want to do some digging in the area of Pakrac, 
where it is said that several murdered Serbian civilians have 
been buried. 
  According to the information we have obtained, those buried 
in the zone of Pakracka Poljana are not only Serbs, but also 
Croats, indeed distinguished Croatian nationalists who in the 
dramatic months toward the end of 1991 seemed dangerous to 
someone. 
<H5>  How the Zec Family Was Killed </H5>
  The Croatian police have reacted promptly and effectively to 
a number of the mysterious disappearances. The contents of an 
extensive police investigation were submitted to a few of the 
highest officials of the Croatian Government some six or seven 
months ago. That "report" ran to 13 typed pages and was 
classified as a state secret. 
  "The report was written by one of the Croatian intelligence 
services," says a government official who has had it in his 
possession. 
  The full title of the document, which we obtained from the 
very top leadership of the government, reads: "Report Drafted 
Concerning the Criminalistic Workup of the Murder of Mihajlo 
Zec, His Wife Marija, and His Daughter Aleksandra, and Also 
Related to Information About Persons of Serbian Nationality 
Taken From the City of Zagreb and Other Areas to the 
Headquarters of a Reserve Unit of the MUP of the RH [Republic of 
Croatia], Where Several of Those Persons, as Well as Members of 
the Reserve Unit of the RH MUP, Were Killed." The "Report" 
begins with a description of the murder of the Zec family. It 
states precisely that on or about 2300 hours on 7 December 1991 
members of the MUP reserves in camouflage uniforms were taken in 
a van and a VW Golf automobile to No. 22 Poljanicka Street in 
Zagreb. 
  According to the police report, which was later published in 
all the major Croatian newspapers, they were Munib Suljic, who 
was age 32 at the time; Sinisa Rimac, age 19; Igor Mikola, age 
20; Nebojsa Hodak, age 25; and Snjezana Zivanovic, age 20. 
  Because Mihajlo Zec attempted to flee from the house, one of 
these five members of the MUP reserve unit killed him with 
rounds from an automatic rifle. Following the murder, the 
persons in camouflage uniforms took about 30,000 dinars from the 
house and took away the murdered man's wife and daughter. They 
took them to the Adolfovac, where they bound, gagged, and 
blindfolded them and then killed and buried them. 
  The statement by Munib Suljic, who allegedly led the 
suspects, is quoted in the "Report." According to that 
statement, at the Zagreb fairgrounds, where the equipment 
storehouse of their unit was located, he was given the 
assignment of finding and bringing in Mihajlo Zec by the 
commander Zvonko Trusic in the presence of Tomislav Mercep. 
  When the police searched the house of the Zec family, they 
found a threatening letter sent to Zec from Zagreb on 29 
November 1991. We quote the letter in its entirety: 
  ``1. You have until 24 December, and by that date you must 
leave Croatia. Beginning on 25 December and thereafter, your 
life will not be worth anything. 
  ``2. You may not convey your house and other real estate 
(Tresnjevka Opstina and the Assembly of the city of Zagreb have 
been notified). It will all be turned over to the Croatian state 
to care for Croats who have been the victims of genocide. 
  ``3. We know that you have sent out foreign exchange along 
with your gold, but because this was taken from Croatia there 
will also be punishment for that. 
  ``HOP 
  ``Croatian Defense Movement 
  "It is our sacred duty to cleanse Croatia within a period of 
24 months so that not a single peasant sandal [opanak] treads 
any longer on this holy land." 
  The police officials who drafted the report added that the 
HOP [Croatian Defense Movement], along with certain people from 
abroad, had been established by certain well-known politicians 
of the Republic of Croatia so that they could operate outside 
the legal and political system of the Croatian state. 
  The case of the Zec family was obviously an occasion for the 
Croatian security services to devote serious attention to 
discovering those responsible for the disappearance of several 
people of Serbian and Croatian nationality. Some of those 
disappearances are described in detail in the "Report." 
<H5>  The Horrible Deaths of Ivosevic, Paic, and Gruic </H5>
  The case of Milos Ivosevic is the first one mentioned after 
the killing of Mihajlo, Marija, and Aleksandra Zec. 
  According to the "Report," on 31 October 1991 members of the 
reserve unit of the MUP already mentioned picked up Ivosevic, 
who headed the customs office in the Zagreb railroad switchyard, 
whose address was No. 81 Rudeska Road, and took him to the 
Zagreb fairgrounds along with Rado Paic and Marko Gruic, whom he 
knew. Ivosevic, Paic, and Gruic were later taken to Pakracka 
Poljana. A fairly new Golf automobile, 20,000 dinars, and about 
300 German marks [DM] were taken from Ivosevic. 
  The "Report" said that Ivosevic, Paic, and Gruic, along with 
nine other persons unnamed from Pakracka Poljana, were taken to 
the basement of a house in the village Bujavice near Pakrac, 
where B.M., J.A., A.A., Z.A., and a person known as "Bego," 
members of the reserve unit of the MUP which has been mentioned, 
shot and killed them. 
  The bodies of those killed were found in the village 
Bujavice 
and were taken to the Bureau for Forensic Medicine and 
Criminalistics in Zagreb, where an autopsy was performed, and 
after that they were taken by their families. 
  It is of particular interest that the automobile of the 
murdered Milan Ivosevic was found in the possession of those 
suspected of having murdered the Zec family. The police returned 
that car to the Ivosevic family. According to the testimony of 
one of the members of the MUP reserve unit who was interrogated, 
Milos Ivosevic was arrested by order of Zvonko Trusic. 
<H5>  The Murder and Robbery of Stevan Brajenovic </H5>
  The next case that the "Report" describes in detail concerns 
another customs officer, Stevan Brajenovic, head of the Dobovo 
customhouse, who on 8 November 1991 was taken from his residence 
at No. 14 Djuro Simunic Street in Zagreb by B.T., M.B., and two 
other members of "Mercep's unit." 
  According to the "Report," the auxiliary police also drove 
away Brajenovic's Toyota Corolla. Brajenovic was taken to the 
Zagreb fairgrounds and then to Pakracka Poljana, where on 12 
December 1991 he received a wound in the abdomen. He was shot by 
a guard nicknamed Karlo. At the time when the "Report" was 
written, Brajenovic's car was being used to meet the unit's 
needs, and the money taken from Brajenovic (about DM10,000) was 
delivered to P.Dj., an active employee of the Police Department 
in Zagreb, who for a time was commander of the unit in Pakracka 
Poljana. 
<H5>  The Murder of Ina Zoricic-Nuic </H5>
  The authors of the "Report" make reference to the statement 
by M.S., who said that Brajenovic was arrested by order of 
Zvonko Trusic. The following case, which the "Report" describes 
in detail, does not involve Croatian citizens of Serbian 
nationality, but a Croatian woman, whose disappearance has been 
frequently discussed in our media. We are referring to Ina 
Zoricic-Nuic, known as Marina Nuic, born 1960. Marina Nuic was 
the head of the HDS in Kraljevica. Her father was a member of 
the HDZ, and Mrs. Nuic was responsible for the housing of 
refugees from Slavonia in the coastal area known as Primorje. 
  According to the "Report," she was arrested on 3 November 
1991 near the Mirogoj Cemetery in Zagreb at the funeral of Pavo 
Mlinaric, a member of the MUP reserve unit that has been 
referred to here. 
  The authors of the "Report" think that Ina Zoricic-Nuic was 
arrested because she had prepared an assassination attempt on 
Tomislav Mercep. In any case, she was also taken to the Zagreb 
fairgrounds, where she was interrogated by P.Dj., the unit's 
commander who has already been mentioned. Following the 
interrogation, Ina Zoricic-Nuic, the "Report" explicitly states, 
was taken to Pakracka Poljana by order of Tomislav Mercep 
himself. J.A. and S.R., members of the MUP reserve unit, shot 
and killed her in Pakracka Poljana. Ina Zoricic-Nuic, according 
to the "Report," was buried approximately 1 km from the 
improvised prison in Pakracka Poljana in the direction of Janja 
Lipa. 
<H5>  The Murder of Aleksandar Antic </H5>
  One other Croat was killed at that time in Pakracka Poljana. 
This was Aleksandar Antic, who himself belonged to the MUP 
reserve unit. Aleksandar "Sasa" Antic was allegedly killed 
because he had taken from Tomislav Mercep's car "a sizable 
number of blank identity cards of reserves of the MUP of the 
Republic of Croatia." The "Report" says that Antic was killed by 
I.M. and S.R., members of the same unit, and that the commanders 
of that unit knew about the murder. 
  The "Report" also states that N.P. and B.V., Serbs from 
Kutina who had to dig the grave in which Aleksandar Antic was 
buried, were present at the murder of Aleksandar Antic. 
  N.P. and B.V., Serbs from Kutina, are the only victims whose 
names we are not publishing, solely because these are people who 
survived Pakracka Poljana. According to the police report, they 
were arrested by K.P., a member of the MUP reserve unit who 
owned a private butcher shop in Zagreb, with the help of several 
persons whom the police had been unable to identify at the time 
when the report was written. 
  Two Mercedeses and one BMW were taken from the Kutina Serbs, 
as well as appliances and equipment from their homes. N.P. and 
B.V. spent about a month in prison without any court order 
whatsoever. During that time, according to the "Report," they 
were tortured (electric current was applied to them, wire and 
nightsticks were forced into their rectum, and so forth). They 
were released on 18 December 1991. One of them spent some time 
in Zagreb hospitals, where he was treated for injuries received 
while he was in prison. 
  The "Report" says that several dozen persons from the area 
of 
Zagreb, Kutina, and other towns were taken to the prison in 
Pakracka Poljana, "from what we know now." The drafters of the 
"Report" suggest that the persons taken were mainly quite rich, 
and "quite valuable personal property" was taken from them at 
the same time. 
<H5>  The Murder of Djuro Dobrota and Nedeljko Igric </H5>
  Certain cases of the unclarified disappearance of Croatian 
citizens in other parts of the country are also mentioned near 
the end of the "Report." It says first that "the unit of the MUP 
RH reserve unit under command of Mr. Tomislav Mercep" took part 
in military operations in the region of Vukovar and then in the 
region of Gospic. It says that on the territory of Gospic that 
unit operated the same way it had on the territory of Pakrac. It 
refers to several cases of murder or kidnapping. 
  Thus, in Karlobag, according to the "Report," members of the 
MUP reserve unit that Tomislav Mercep formed took custody of and 
arrested the retired policeman Djuro Dobrota, whose personal car 
they confiscated. S.J., M.I., and R.S. shot Dobrota on the road 
between Velebeni and Ostarija. 
  These same reserve policemen, members of the special Mercep 
unit, arrested in Karlobag Nedeljko Igric, whom, according to 
the "Report," they beat with a metal rod in a police Landrover. 
Then they executed him before a firing squad. 
  The automobile of Momcilo Cipcic of Gospic, who was taken to 
Karlobag with his wife Veselinka and two Croats, was also found 
in the possession of members of that unit. The Ciplic family and 
their friends, who disappeared in the autumn of 1991, had not 
been found by the time when the "Report" was written. 
  The "Report" also mentions a case from Vukovar, where 
Tomislav Mercep was the principal organizer of the city's 
defense until the arrival of Mile "Hawk" Dedakovic, who is being 
tried right now in Zagreb for having embezzled money. 
  The authors of the "Report" believe that a person nicknamed 
"Gango" in the group of M.P., one of the leaders of the defense 
of Vukovar in the summer of 1991, murdered the director of the 
SDK [Social Accounting Service] in Vukovar and took from the 
safe a large amount of money (the figure of no less than DM20 
million is mentioned!), as well as jewelry, gems, and works of 
art. 
  At the very end of the "Report" it is said that the cited 
information was obtained through talks with the murder suspects, 
who were all members of the MUP reserve unit under the command 
of Tomislav Mercep. 
  The suspects were arrested and detained in the rooms of the 
police administration headquarters in Zagreb on the basis of the 
Decree on Internal Affairs in Wartime or Time of Immediate 
Threat to the Independence and Unity of the Republic of Croatia. 
  It should also be emphasized that the drafters of the 
"Report," operatives in one of the Croatian security services, 
mentioned the possibility that the members of the MUP reserve 
unit, which was stationed in Pakracka Poljana, had lists of 
people they were supposed to arrest and execute. Those lists 
included names of Serbs and Croats, including even certain 
employees of the Zagreb Police Department and the MUP of the 
Republic of Croatia. 
<H5>  Will Any Members of the HDZ Be Charged With War Crimes? </H5>
  Members of the unit in Pakracka Poljana obtained the 
necessary information about employees of the Zagreb Police 
Department and the MUP by telephoning the Zagreb Police 
Department, according to the information of the authors of the 
"Report," mainly after 2100 hours. It is also important that 
some members of the reserve unit, who had been under suspicion 
of having actually committed murders, kidnappings, and 
robberies, were recorded in police files even earlier as 
criminals and thugs. 
  The Croatian police obviously took extensive steps to combat 
the lawlessness and violence that existed in certain parts of 
the Croatian Government. Much of the information published in 
the "Report"--which is classified as a state secret--was 
gathered back in late 1991 and early 1992. 
  The "Report" itself was submitted to several of the highest 
officials of the Croatian Government this past spring. 
  Before we came into the possession of one of the few copies 
of the "Report," one of the ministers in the Croatian Government 
warned us that in view of the interest of UN representatives in 
war crimes on the territory of Croatia some of the Croatian 
politicians might soon find themselves before an international 
court! 
  If certain Croatian political leaders received the "Report" 
back in the spring, it is logical to put the question: Why was 
nothing undertaken by the judiciary, especially the state 
prosecutor's office? Did Stjepan Herceg have to resign because 
he did not win a single important case, or because he did not 
want to act against people suspected of serious crimes who at 
the same time had played a heroic role in the homeland war? 
  One of the most difficult postwar problems in Croatia is the 
attitude toward those volunteers in the homeland war who 
violated international war conventions (which Croatia has 
adopted) and who committed crimes which cannot be justified from 
the civilian and peacetime standpoint. 
  This problem is especially serious if any politicians still 
active are among the perpetrators. 
  One of the most complicated aspects of the conflict in the 
Croatian Democratic Union concerns the fact that certain 
distinguished members of the incumbent party may be charged with 
war crimes as well as with wrecking the political and legal 
system of the Republic of Croatia. 
  The leadership of the government and party still have not 
found the strength to face this danger. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59407 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Four Rightist Parties Issue Joint Program </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20194A Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 18-19 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20194A </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M.D.Z.: "The Fight for Principles"] </F>
  [Text] "We see the need for the establishment of a strong 
right-wing party, including all of those who accept the view 
that Poland can no longer be a territory for socialist 
experiments and that freedom, property, and respect for our 
nation's traditions are the foundation of its social order," 
stated Aleksander Hall, Janusz Korwin-Mikke, Pawel Laczkowski, 
and Jozef Slisz, in a joint programmatic declaration. 
  The leaders of the Conservative Party (PK), the Union for 
Real Politics (UPR), the Party of Christian Democrats (PChD), 
and the Christian Peasant Party (SLCh) on Friday [17 December] 
signed a declaration that, according to Pawel Laczkowski, is 
aiming at a "clear description of programmatic criteria for 
acceptance to the right side of the political scene." 
  The four parties of the "economic right" support, among 
other 
things, a presidential-parliamentary system of governing, with 
the president elected through popular elections. "It is very 
important for the group `Poland After 1980' to be able to 
support a single candidate for president, but this will first be 
discussed in our own circle," said Aleksander Hall. The current 
head of state is treated by the four parties with some distance. 
Janusz Korwin-Mikke, when asked whether the group counts on 
cooperation with the president in building a strong right, said 
"The right must be able to stand on its own feet. Many thanks, 
but I think we can manage." As for cooperation with the BBWR 
(Nonparty Bloc in Support of Reforms), "The bloc has four 
`legs'; we'll see with which one of them we can talk, and which 
one will kick us." 
  The signers of the agreement emphasized their attachment to 
the Christian tradition and the need for church-state 
cooperation. They favor restrictions on trade unions and on 
state intervention in the economy. They prefer the limitation of 
overly liberal concessions granted to radio and TV, and they are 
against state control over the economy, saying that "the state 
monopolies and concessions are in fact making criminal 
activities possible." Their program also supports competition in 
agricultural production. 
  The UPR, the PK, the PChD, and the SLCh insist on the 
lowering of most taxes, the reprivatization of property seized 
under the communist regime, and extensive privatization of the 
public sector without delay. In the declaration, there are 
specific principles such as the abolition of the inheritance tax 
and the gift tax. 
  The "Agreement of Four" supports Polish aspirations to be 
included in the Atlantic Alliance structures. However, NATO is 
not mentioned by name in the document. There was a passage on 
"the need for pursuing a security guarantee from already 
existing military structures that defend the principles of our 
civilization." RZECZPOSPOLITA reporters were told that this 
particular statement was forced out because of the aversion of 
some UPR members to an explicit declaration for NATO. 
  "This is a program of the Polish Right," Aleksander Hall 
recapped. The agreement was reached according to Hall so "that 
no one from the rightist electorate will be lost--neither those 
who are attracted by UPR radicalism nor those who value KP 
moderation." What makes this group different from the alliance 
of the PC (Center Accord), the ZChN (Christian-National Union), 
and the PL (Peasant Accord) is the "new style in conducting 
politics." 
  Integration cannot be based on the party leaders' fears of 
the party members, said Laczkowski. "Political configurations 
may change, but our views will not," underscored Hall. "The 
`acceleration concepts' did Polish politics much harm. It is 
better to build understanding on a solid foundation," maintained 
the Conservative Party leader. Korwin-Mikke and Hall agreed that 
the beginning must be the creation of a program rather than the 
signing of tactical agreements. 
  "The Right--and this is what distinguishes it from the 
Left--is a struggle for principles and not for [government] 
jobs," contended the UPR leader. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59408 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Aviation Industry Status Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20167A Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA in Polish 13 Oct 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20167A </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ryszard Rogon: "Aviation Industry Potential and </F>
Prospects"] 
  [Text] Recently a PAP [Polish Press Agency] 
correspondent reported from Vienna on the long line that formed 
by our helicopter at the air show in Wiener Neustadt in Austria. 
Unfortunately, there was no such line to purchase the 
Sokol--only those who wanted to take rides in it. Because of its 
good qualities and the international acclaim it has garnered, 
the helicopter competes strongly with others in its class. 
However, the general crisis in the aviation branch has made the 
competition considerably tougher. 
  The Sokol is now the best-known Polish aviation product. It 
comes in many different versions: fire-fighting, luxury, 
medevac, air-sea rescue, combat, etc. Work is constantly being 
done to improve it. An important asset of the Sokol is its 
price: less than half as much as other similar designs. The WSK 
[Transportation Equipment Plant] PZZ Swidnik, which produces it, 
is counting heavily on strong export sales. 
  The flattering reviews that have been picked up during the 
shows and international exhibitions clearly favor this effort. 
The most reliable market, however, even though it is not as 
receptive, is the domestic one. The military, the police, and 
the other state training organizations are now committed 
customers. Regular orders are growing. The military, for 
example, is already flying several Anakond aircraft--that is, 
modifications of the Sokol that are designed for air-sea rescue. 
Preparations are also being made for the production of a 
transport helicopter version for the Army that can carry about 
15 soldiers. In the combat version, the proposals include the 
Salamander and the Huzar, which is outfitted with Western 
equipment and weapons. 
  The Swidnik plant can also make money on the production of 
the PW-5, a glider that has won in world competition. 
Cooperation with the company ATR should also yield profits. The 
modernization of several sections of the plant is just the first 
result of preparations to manufacture subassemblies for the 
ATR-72 aircraft. 
  Mielec or, more accurately, the Transportation Equipment 
Factory in that city, is the largest and best-known aircraft 
plant in our country. A special economic zone was to be 
established here as an "incubator" for business, and the 
production of subway cars for the Warsaw metro has even been 
undertaken. Finally, the Iryda, the An-28, the M-20 Mewa, the 
Iskierka, and the Dromader aircraft are also being produced 
here. Cooperation with Boeing (in the production of aircraft 
doors) is also raising hopes for the future. The designers are 
working on several new projects. It will soon be possible to 
talk about them. Thus far, orders from the military (for the 
Iryda) have constituted the best source of funds. There are not 
enough sales of them, however, to finish work on a contract (for 
the purchase of engines and equipment) amounting to 58 Mewas for 
a U.S. company. This year the military may also procure 10 An-28 
Bryza aircraft. The sale of several tens of Dromader aircraft 
has also been finalized. It has turned out that all of the 
aircraft, when properly advertised, still consistently find 
buyers. 
  Everyone in Mielec is hoping that the worst is now over. 
Despite what some of our former "politicians" may think, they 
feel that, in the future, they will no longer be condemned to 
produce just golf carts. Among other things, historical 
tradition (the plant dates back to the 1930's) favors the 
appearance of an aviation plant that will be able to handle 
government orders and production for export. 
  The PZL [Polish Aviation Plant] Okecie is primarily a 
manufacturer of aircraft such as the Wilga, the Koliber, the 
Orlik, and the Flaming. However, the enterprise should most of 
all tout (if it manages to begin production of it) the widely 
renowned Skorpion battlefield aircraft. The best-sellers at the 
moment are the Orlik and the Wilga. There are high hopes for the 
Flaming, which may break into the U.S.-Canadian market. There is 
a real chance of selling about 2,000 copies there. 
  Basic information about other Polish enterprises in the 
aviation industry, along with their production profiles, can be 
summarized in several sentences. The Institute of Aviation is 
involved in the development and design of aircraft and engines. 
The Combine for Standard Hydraulic Parts, PZL-HYDRAL, in Wroclaw 
produces fuel regulators for turbojet and turboprop engines, 
hydraulic components, and systems, and turns out heating 
equipment and electronic gear. The Transportation Equipment 
Plant PZL-Rzeszow produces a whole line of engines for aircraft 
and helicopters, as well as various kinds of engine parts. The 
Transportation Equipment Plant Kalisz also has a similar 
production profile. 
  A completely atypical aviation plant that is currently 
experiencing growing organizational-financial difficulties is 
the Glider Experimental-Production Enterprise PZL Bielsko."The 
enterprise is struggling to survive. We should recall that the 
most famous Polish glider designers (Foka, Cobra, Jantar, etc.) 
once came from there. It is now producing the Puchacz, Junior, 
and the Jantar Standard, as well as three record-holding 
gliders: the SZD-55 (15-meter class), the SZD-56, and the 
aerobatic SZD-59. 
  The search for optimum solutions that could help solve the 
aviation industry's main problems has already begun. Efforts at 
cooperation are being renewed, and cooperative ties are being 
steadily tightened. In the near future, there should be a 
clearly formulated concept of how military and civilian aviation 
will develop. At that point, it will be realistically possible 
to evaluate the prospects for our "wings" and those who build 
them. 
  The search for optimum solutions that could help solve the 
aviation industry's main problems has already begun. Efforts at 
cooperation are being renewed, and cooperative ties are being 
steadily tithere should be a clearly formulated concept of how 
military and civilian aviation will develop. At that point it 
will then be possible to evaluate realistically the prospects 
for our "wings" and of those who build them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59409 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Future Production Analyzed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P21023A Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNE in Polish 13 Oct 93 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> 94P21023A </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNE </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Apolinary Wojtys: "What's the Talk in the </F>
Aviation Industry?"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Dreams and Reality </H5>
  Once Deputy Prime Minister Goryszewski was put into a 
plastic 
and wood mock-up of the Skorpion, set up at the PZL [Polish 
Aviation Plant] Okecie. In response, a competitor from behind 
the fence, the Institute of Aviation, presented the Kobra 
design, with a great deal of fanfare. 
  Subsequently, absolutely nothing more was heard about the 
Kobra, while, for the Skorpion, there were still all kinds of 
offers, even at the government level. Several ministers had 
apparently signed something like a "declaration of intent," but, 
ultimately, (officially at the International Defense Industry 
Show in Kielce), Henryk Goryszewski himself declared, with a 
note of sadness in his voice, that "at least for the time being 
nothing is going to happen with the Skorpion." 
  Everyone knows the problem is money.... 
  Roman Czerwinski, deputy minister of Industry and Trade (as 
one of the few people in government who really understand 
aviation), told POLSKA ZBROJNA that additional thought needs to 
be given to the question of a new Polish "battlefield" aircraft. 
He also asserted, "As long as I am here, I will not allow the 
plants to limit themselves to research and development work." 
There is hope that a team of designers will appear who are 
detached from their home plants and will take a serious interest 
in this subject. The money that is reallocated to this will not 
be eaten up by the factories as a whole. 
  It is possible that this opinion has reached other ears as 
well. The reason is that the editors recently received two 
invitations: the first from the Institute of Aviation, and the 
second from the PZL Okecie. There was again talk of "the need to 
preserve the Polish defense [industry]" and of "the need for 
assistance from the government." (We do not question either 
one.) A large number of urgent warnings and sounds of 
disappointment (which we understand) were heard. In this entire 
outpouring, however, we got the feeling that they had their feet 
more firmly planted on the ground (which is otherwise 
understandable from people who deal with aviation) rather than 
floating around up in the clouds. 
  It turns out that neither the Institute nor Okecie has 
stopped working on its ideas because "right now you have to make 
proposals rather than just sitting around waiting for offers." 
"We finance what we can from our own resources," said the 
director of Okecie, Ryszard Leja. The PZL was recently visited 
by representatives of a possibly interested party in the United 
States, saying that there are several engines set aside for the 
Skorpion. "They are waiting, as are we, for a decision." 
  "We are doing the work on the D-18 power plant (a 
double-bypass engine with the thrust of about three tons) almost 
on a charity basis," was what we heard at the Institute of 
Aviation, where they also claim that they are ready to take part 
in an actual military aircraft program that would be 70 percent 
Polish-designed and developed. 
  Right now the best advertisement for the PZL Okecie is 
Lieutenant Colonel Andrzej Strigl. What he does during 
demonstrations on the Orlik is a piece of aerobatics in the 
shape of a large "S." He is convinced that the aircraft is 
outstanding. 
  "I have been flying it for quite a while now. I have also 
written an item on training pilots how to fly the Orlik. So that 
my younger colleagues will be able to feel safe in it, I myself 
have tested out many unconventional elements." 
  Lt. Col. Strigl currently flies nine types of aircraft, 
including the latest creation from the Institute of Aviation. He 
is thus in a position to compare: 
  "These are different aircraft in their classes. Flight 
students can go from the Orlik to the Iryda, but never the other 
way around. They may not be top of the line compared to 
corresponding world designs, but Poland is not that far 
behind...." 
  However, Andrzej Stigl has not yet flown the Iryda with the 
1.5-ton-thrust K-15 engines. To date, the only one to do so has 
been Ludwik Natkaniec, the Polish aviation legend, who has spent 
10,000 hours in the air, mainly in prototypes. 
  "This is the aircraft we have been waiting for," he says 
after 50 hours of testing the Iryda with Kaszub [engines]. The 
more he learns about the aircraft, the more it impresses him. 
Favorably. He had not expected that all of the designers' 
calculations would turn out to be so accurate. 
  "On paper, these calculations are one-dimensional. It is 
only 
in the air that you can really feel what this aircraft is 
capable of. It is dynamic and easy to operate because its 
performance has so much in reserve that even high temperatures, 
heavy loads, and heavy weather do not overwhelm it." 
  Natkaniec has looked "into every nook and cranny." He has 
verified that the aircraft remains stable at maximum speeds, 
when diving, when pulling up, and in spins. The tests obviously 
still have to be run again, but it can already be said that the 
Iryda has already done extremely well, even in situations that 
are not provided for by the requirements. It is a safe aircraft. 
Its takeoff run has been shortened by 40 percent (compared to 
aircraft equipped with the Iskra power plants). It climbs very 
quickly (its rate of climb is 40 meters per second). The pilot 
sitting in the cockpit has a very good field of view. 
  "It is an aircraft that is fun to take through the air. Yes, 
an old pilot would like to emphasize that strongly." The test 
pilot from the Institute of Aviation is afraid that the M-93 
version, bristling with automated equipment, will not measure up 
in this regard. 
  "Which does not mean, of course, that it is not necessary to 
go in that direction...." 
  The Kaszub engines were developed and built entirely in 
Poland. 
  Domestic Polish materials are also used in it. With one 
exception: In the first compressor stage, titanium vanes, the 
forgings for which come from Russia, are employed. This 
considerably lengthens the service life of the power plant. 
  Docent Martin Kowalski, who oversees the work on the Iryda 
as 
regards the use of the K-15 power plant in it, thinks it will 
easily pass the 600-hour government test that began on 1 October 
in a test bed. The K-15 has already achieved the other design 
parameters. And, most important, it has proved itself in the air. 
  Work has now been completed that will make it possible to 
increase the aircraft's load capacity and check the resistance 
of the gas-dynamic curve of the power plant under combat 
conditions, as well as increase the flight range to the absolute 
minimum limit of flutter resistance. 
  The next stage will be the Iryda M-93, which should be a 
very 
strong competitor for the best aircraft in its class worldwide. 
  The Iryda M-93 is the immediate future for the Polish 
aviation industry and that of the former Central Industrial 
District, and, consequently, for the Polish Air Force. 
  Its chief designer, Wlodzimierz Gnarowski, says that the new 
Polish trainer-combat aircraft, which took a long time getting 
born through the fault not only of the designers (although they 
obviously had to overcome certain, not insignificant limitations 
of knowledge and experience), will ultimately be just as we want 
it to be. The most important thing is that the designers of the 
Iryda and its manufacturers from Mielec and Rzesow are not 
telling fairy tales illustrated with wood and plastic mock-ups. 
  The Iryda can already easily reach a speed of 830 kilometers 
per hour ("We feel we will soon be up to 920 kilometers per 
hour"). There are real prospects for export, which will improve 
even more as the avionics of the aircraft are modernized. 
Unfortunately, with the production base that now exists, we are 
not in a position to domestically produce for the Iryda highly 
integrated systems that would meet NATO requirements. 
  The Institute of Aviation and the WSK [Transportation 
Equipment Plant] of the Polish Aviation Plant Mielec have thus 
entered into a cooperative venture with the French firm SAGEM 
[Company for General Electrical and Mechanical Applications], 
which is disposed to invest its own funds in modernizing the 
avionics of the Iryda, accepting a minimal return. The French 
also want to undertake broader cooperation with the Polish 
electronics industry. Engineer Gnarowski has issued an 
invitation to a demonstration of the Iryda with the new 
avionics, which is scheduled to take place in late January or 
early February. 
  "In my view, this will be the culmination of a multiyear 
effort on the part of designers and manufacturers whose names 
are worth mentioning here: Faleski, Rucz, Pogoda, Szelag, 
Jonski, Zawadzki, Kania, Lipinski, and Kowalski from Warsaw, and 
Potapowicz, Sek, Kozik, and Wojtkowski from Mielec. We should 
mention that none of them have yet said the final word...." 
  The Polish aviation industry, which has been hardened on the 
roller of its survival, wants to keep rolling, undertaking the 
venture that is associated with this or relying on what it has 
already learned. It is typical that those who most often speak 
well of the Iryda are those who have flown it, including people 
in the military. And they are considerably more enthusiastic 
than those who just think they know it, including people in the 
military. 
  At the Institute of Aviation, there is the hope that in the 
near future the Command of the WLiOP [Air Force and Air Defense 
Forces] will pick it up unconditionally--equipment decisions 
uninfluenced by economic pressures. An increase in orders would 
reinforce a normal path toward coming up with a fully mature 
design for a Polish "battlefield" aircraft. On the basis of the 
experience gained with the Iryda and the K-15 and D-18 engines, 
it is possible (it appears) to consider it entirely realistic to 
make this transition. 
  And, after all, this is not the only asset. All calculations 
indicate that every aircraft made by the Poles themselves will 
be 25-50 percent less expensive than comparable foreign ones. 
  What Poland can do, however, is also indicated by the 
example 
of the Transportation Equipment Plant of the Polish Aviation 
Plant Swidnik. It is unfortunate that, in order to get even 
Polish decisionmakers to like its Sokol, it first had to gain 
recognition from overseas specialists. 
  "It is important that Polish aviation design thinking, which 
was once well respected throughout the world and still is, not 
be lost even now, despite what some people may think. This also 
depends on MON [Ministry of National Defense], where a 
tremendous variety of views and ideas now prevails," Wlodzimierz 
Gnarowski told us. However, he unfortunately lacks a solid, 
economically realistic understanding of the military's equipment 
policy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59410 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Effectiveness of Civic Alliance Assessed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20161A Bucharest ADEVARUL in Romanian 11 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20161A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ADEVARUL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Civic Alliance as Seen From the </F>
Inside and the Outside"] 
  [Text] We addressed the following questions to some 
outstanding personalities who are active in the Civic Alliance 
[AC] and to others who broke away from this group or have not 
belonged to it and, as a result, have a more detached view: 
  1. Do you think that the AC is addressing itself to all of 
Romanian society? 
  2. How would you evaluate the effectiveness of the AC? 
  3. Could it be more effective? What has prevented this? 
  4. What do you think the AC will be like five years from 
now? 
And what will civil society in Romania be like? 
  Gabriel Andreescu, chairman of the Civic Alliance, 
responded: 
  1. The Civic Alliance is addressing itself to the entire 
Romanian society, but this does not mean that the entire 
Romanian society is receptive to the AC. However, the principal 
values that it would like to impart--human rights and freedoms, 
the principles of the state of law, the "humanistic" rationality 
of social and political life--are, certainly, general problems. 
  2. The ensuring of a convincing selection system in regard 
to 
the candidates for president in September 1992 was a concrete 
success. But, certainly, there are indirect results. We must not 
forget that the AC provides humanitarian assistance, through its 
medical-social center, as well as juridical and other assistence. 
  3. The AC could be better than it is. The failure of the 
cooperation between the AC and the AC [as published -- probably 
the PAC (Civic Alliance Party)] seems to me the most important 
obstacle. 
  4. The optimistic response is: The civil society is an 
independent reality in a Romanian society in which institutional 
mechanisms, which are certainly imperfect, develop, 
nevertheless, in the direction of democracy. The pessimistic 
variant is: Heroic groups of the civil society are operating in 
a society dominated by a Latin American type of oligarchy, 
accepting sacrifices to the point of the physical elimination of 
members so that the mechanism and human dignity will resist in 
this new form of historic bankruptcy. 
  According to the two variants, the AC will either be the 
shield of a variety of civic institutions (for example, "the 
Institute for the Study of Totalitarianism") or it will signify 
the street revolutions of December 1989, and June 1990, 1991, 
1992, 1993.... 
  Ana Blandiana, member of the Steering Committee of the Civic 
Alliance 
  1. Yes. It definitely addresses itself to the entire 
society. 
The impression that it might address itself to only side comes 
from the fact that its obvious impact is in that part of society 
which accepts the rules of the democratic game. Through its 
activity, the Alliance is trying to make this part of society 
larger. 
  2. The nomination of a candidate for president or the 
creation of a party regardless of how relations have developed 
with this party --or activity within the framework of the 
Democratic Convention, of which I was one of the founders. The 
true success is, I believe, the existence throughout the country 
of branches which live and breathe even under these conditions, 
in which difficulties of all types affect not only the people 
themselves but also their ability to associate and join together 
in organizations. These branches, with everything around them, 
are nuclei, seeds of a civil society, which are essential for 
democracy. 
  3. Yes, indeed. The way in which it began three years ago 
showed more promise. But then came the difficulty of organizing 
a group of people under conditions in which we did not have any 
headquarters -- as of now we have only three rooms, which we 
have subleased in Bucharest -- or basic material resources. The 
fuel on which we operated was and is nothing but moral drive. 
  4. If I were optimistic, I would have to imagine that, in 
five years, there will be the solemn moment of the dissolution 
of the Civic Alliance because the civil society no longer has 
any need of it. The Alliance has as its principal tasks the 
teaching of the alphabet of democracy, the transformation of the 
mentality of a population that, for years, has voted for its 
masters, into that of a sentient electorate which must vote for 
its servants, whom it can recall if they do not fulfill their 
contract with the civil society. 
  Alina Inayeh, coordinating chairman of the Pro-Democracy 
Association 
  1. I do not believe that it addresses the entire society. 
  2. It does not seem to me that the activity of the AC has 
been effective since it has not addressed all the segments of 
society. 
  3. If it had known how to use the immense political capital 
which it had and the confidence placed in it when it appeared on 
the scene, then the message of the AC would have been able to 
penetrate into the entire society. 
  4. The role of the AC in five years depends greatly on the 
AC 
itself and if it is able to recover the confidence lost. 
Otherwise, there is a danger that its importance will be 
diminished even more. As for civil society, in general, it will 
continue the process of crystallization without achieving a 
perfect society. 
  Bogdan Hossu, chairman of the "Alfa" cartel, deputy chairman 
of the World Confederation of Labor 
  1. We hope that this is the role of the Alliance and that it 
includes all segments of the civil society. 
  2-3. I could not say right now. The only thing which comes 
to 
mind is a good meeting that they had. I know of several 
roundtable sessions which they had with representatives of the 
executive branch, the governing party, and the opposition. You 
should know that civil society has taken a big step forward 
through this initiative. 
  4. I hope that civil society will be much more deserving and 
more aware of its strength. 
  The leaders of the Students' League hesitated to make a 
statement about the AC, on the grounds that they have belonged 
to the League for only one year, during which time they did not 
have any cooperation with the AC. In addition, the AC lost 
points for being caustic and radical. 
  Dan Martian from the Party of Social Democracy of Romania 
politely, but firmly, refused to give any statements on the 
occasion of the anniversary of the Civic Alliance but provided 
us, instead, with pertinent definitions of the concept of civil 
society. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59411 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Report on National Debt, Credit Strategy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94BA0085A Bucharest TINERETUL LIBER in Romanian 26 Oct 93 p 
3 </F>

<F P=103> 94BA0085A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest TINERETUL LIBER </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report on country's national debt and credit </F>
strategy: "The National Debt: Between the Strategy of 
Indebtedness and the Indebtedness Imputed to Unprofitable 
Activities"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  There Should Be Legislation on the National Debt </H5>
  Expressed in lei, at the current exchange rate of 
almost 1,000 lei to the dollar, the credits which have been 
incurred are up to somewhere over 4,000 billion; if we add the 
accrued interest to this figure, the total amount exceeds 6,500 
billion lei. If we also figure in the current domestic national 
debt, together with the projected budget deficit for the current 
year, we will have reached a total debt of approximately 7,500 
billion lei by year's end. This poses the problem of where we 
will get the resources to repay this money, since the majority 
of the credits have been earmarked for consumption, which means 
that they are not producing anything. The situation would be 
different if these sums were utilized productively, in which 
case repayment could be made from the value which would be newly 
created as a result of the utilization of the productive 
capacities in question. 
  In the report concerning the economic and financial 
situation 
of the country during the first six months of this year, which 
the Ministry of Finance presented to the government, a separate 
chapter is devoted to the national debt. This concept has been 
brought back into currency after having been abandoned during 
the communist period. The first reference to this term was made 
over 100 years ago, in 1865. Romania has had national debt 
during the whole period since then, with the only difference 
being that this fact was no longer acknowledged during the past 
45 years. 
  At present, despite the fact that people talk many times 
about the Romanian state's national debt, the country lacks a 
general framework of regulations concerning methods for 
constituting it. For this reason, we believe that it is of the 
utmost importance for the bill to be passed which has already 
been submitted to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance; at the 
present time, this bill is being discussed by the committees of 
the legislative forum. According to the provisions of this bill, 
the national debt represents the sum total of pecuniary 
obligations incurred by the state through domestic and foreign 
loans, in its own name or guaranteed by it abroad. 
  As you can see, the state can procure the necessary 
financial 
resources both on the domestic market and from abroad. In other 
words, the national debt has a domestic and a foreign character. 
The loans incurred on the domestic market can be utilized to 
cover some needs generated by the existence of a budget deficit, 
temporary cash shortfalls, public expenditures of national 
interest, and the refinancing of the national debt. The foreign 
portion of the national debt can be constituted as a consequence 
of the medium- and long-term loans that have been contracted 
directly or by commercial companies, self-governing public-works 
administrations, and local public authorities with state 
guarantees. These loans are for the realization of economic 
development, recovery, and adjustment programs, for objectives 
and actions in the public interest, and for the creation and 
maintenance of the foreign-currency reserve, but also for the 
cancelling out of the effects of calamities. 
  The loans taken out by the state appear as an understanding 
between, on the one hand, a physical or juridical person and, on 
the other hand, the state, through which the former consents to 
make a sum of money available to the state, in the form of 
reserves, for a fixed period. At the time a loan is taken out, 
the state sets the date repayment is due, which can be closer or 
further off in time, depending on certain conditions. The loans 
are effected through the issuance of transferrable securities: 
bonds, annuity deeds, and other government certificates. For 
example, if the borrower is the central bank, treasury notes are 
issued. These public certificates ensure the holders of a 
certain counter-benefit, in the form of interest, gains, or 
other material advantages, besides the repayment of the amount 
that was borrowed. 
<H5>  The Figures Show the Debt Statistics </H5>
  The medium- and long-term credits contracted by the Romanian 
state as of of 30 June 1993 amounted to the sum of $4,339.9 
million, of which $2,869.8 million were incurred directly by the 
state (66.1 percent) and $1,470.1 million were contracted by 
economic agencies (33.9 percent). Out of the total foreign 
credits incurred and guaranteed by the state, $2,827.3 million 
have been drawn on. Out of the value of the foreign credits 
contracted directly by the state, $2,605.9 million are earmarked 
for consumption, which represents 90.8 percent of the incurred 
debt; the remaining $263.9 million (9.2 percent) are earmarked 
for development. 
  The domestic portion of the national debt as of the same 
date 
of 30 June 1993 was 482.7 billion lei and consists of: the 
financing of the state budget deficit for the year 199 [as 
published] (32.9 billion lei), the bank loan to cover the 
domestic portion of the national debt, which has been created 
through the state's taking over the losses and the nonperforming 
credits of the state-financed economic agents as stipulated by 
Law 7/1992 (155.9 billion lei), the state budget deficit for the 
year 1992 (261.3 billion), the loan for the financing of the 
expenditures which revert to the Romanian side from the 
intergovernmental Convention concerning the collaboration on the 
construction of the Krivoi-Rog Industrial Complex (21.5 
billion), and the loan incurred through the issuance of 
government bonds for the financing of the state budget deficit 
for the years 1991 and 1992 (11.1 billion lei). 
  I should explain several terms so that we can better 
understand these figures. Thus, incurred credits are understood 
to mean the sum total of the credits contracted by Romania, 
while credits drawn on mean the amounts which have already been 
utilized. The mathematical difference between the two represents 
the value of the foreign credits which our country has a right 
to use, but which are frozen due to our failure to fulfill some 
contractual clauses. A third term that is used is the service of 
the national debt, which is, in the opinion of many specialists, 
the best measure of a country's debt. A country's debt includes 
the payments owed for the repayment of the national debt, which 
represent the installments falling due, but also the interest 
payments and any possible commissions. 
<H5>  One Government, One Compensation -- Until When? </H5>
  As one can see, one part of the domestic portion of the 
national debt is constituted through the state's absorbing the 
losses of some economic agents, of the unprofitable ones. In 
other words, the ordinary citizen is compelled to pay the bill 
for the inefficiency of companies that, since they are treated 
with leniency, consider it normal to operate with losses, for 
which they can in no way be blamed. They think that the state 
will probably take care of them no matter what! And it would 
seem that they are right, when the Executive, not finding (or 
not wanting to find) an alternative, is scheming up a new 
so-called compensation, by means of which the arrears will once 
again be absorbed into the national debt. 
  Is this how people wish the much-trumpeted financial 
discipline to be enthroned? We doubt that the IMF experts, who 
are expected in Bucharest this week, will agree with this way of 
thinking. Or, probably, the government is waiting for those 
experts to leave so that in the end, once the agreement has been 
signed at last, it can finally act undisturbed. If the other 
previous experiments were not sufficient proof that this 
solution (which treats the effects and not the causes) leads 
nowhere except to a new financial freeze, as has already been 
demonstrated, then the same thing will be tried again, based on 
the principle of one government, one compensation. Until when, 
however? 
  Where have we found the resources to finance this debt up to 
now? In the case of the domestic loans, one part was paid off 
through the agency of the National Bank, by resorting to the 
printing of money. This has led to the growth of the currency 
mass which is in circulation, without any quid pro quo in the 
way of commodities and services, and it has led to the reduction 
in buying power of our money and to the increase in prices. And 
we still ask ourselves what the source of the inflation was! 
  In the case of the loans contracted at the banks and by 
public offerings, since the state is obliged to pay those loans 
back at their nominal value, the amount the state owes will have 
been seriously eroded by inflation by the due date. This means 
that in real terms the obligation will have been liquidated. 
  All that notwithstanding, the foreign credits contracted 
from 
various international bodies have the greatest weight. Unlike 
domestic debts, they labor under the disadvantage of being 
expressed in dollars. This means that they are constantly being 
revalued through the depreciation of the exchange rate, so that 
they actually keep pace with inflation. Expressed in lei, at the 
current exchange rate of almost 1,000 lei to the dollar, the 
credits which have been incurred are up to somewhere over 4,000 
billion; if we add the accrued interest to this figure, the 
total amount exceeds 6,500 billion lei. If we also figure in the 
current domestic national debt together with the projected 
budget deficit for the current year, we will have reached a 
total debt of approximately 7,500 billion lei by year's end. 
This poses the problem of where we will get the resources to 
repay this money, since the majority of the credits have been 
earmarked for consumption, which means that they are not 
producing anything. The situation would be different if these 
sums were utilized productively, in which case repayment could 
be made from the value that would be newly created as a result 
of the utilization of the productive capacities in question. But 
due to the fact that the first installments will be due starting 
in 1995, this question does not yet trouble government circles. 
They are probably working on the premise that, by that point, 
others will be called on to pull the chestnuts out of the fire. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59412 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Relations Between Government, Trade Unions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20185A Bucharest TINERETUL LIBER in Romanian 10 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20185A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest TINERETUL LIBER </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liana Buligan: "And Still the Trade Unions Did </F>
Not Sell Out"] 
  [Text] Under the bombardment of motions and official 
complaints, the government has barricaded itself in the Victoria 
Palace, besieged more by the internal dangers that it imagines 
await it than by those that might come from trade union 
insurgents, who are suddenly radicalized at the end of the year. 
Government sources, which we do not wish to reveal, declare that 
distrust and isolation play havoc among the members of the 
executive, who have reached the point of impossibility in making 
any decisions in task forces except when direct decisions come 
via prescribed channels. The anxiety that overwhelms the 
executive team is, however, a faint echo of the stress borne by 
the top of the establishment pyramid, that is the PDSR [Social 
Democracy Party of Romania] and the Presidency, which, instead 
of enjoying the time-out created by the signing of the agreement 
with the International Monetary Fund, must face a coalition, 
inconceivable a few months ago, among the opposition parties, 
trade unions, student leagues, and revolutionary associations. 
The dance of the motions unfolding in Parliament would remain a 
benign aerobic exercise if nearly all Romanian social forces had 
not been concentrated behind one of these motions. They decided 
to maintain unity around their only common and indisputable 
demand: the resignation of the current government and the 
formation of a governing coalition excluding the PSM [Socialist 
Labor Party] and the PRM [Greater Romanian Party]. In this 
context, the PSM motion appears as a slight diversion. It is 
"just a joke," as the chief executive recently declared at the 
National Confederation of Free Trade Unions, because no matter 
how much we could approximate the movement of the electorate to 
the left, thanks to the galloping impoverishment of the 
population, and consequently, the existence of the voters' 
interest forecast by Ilie Verdet [leader of the PSM] in view of 
the obvious alliance between the opposition and the trade 
unions, any hope for an official socialist restoration is 
ludicrous. 
  The effecting of subversive ideas--according to which the 
large trade unions would be divided through a "betrayal" by the 
CNSLR-Fratia [National Conference of Free Trade Unions - 
Brotherhood] who allegedly entered into an alliance with the 
government for the pay of a few deputy ministerial 
positions--proved completely false. On the contrary, the 
strategy the CNSLR-Fratia used proved to be one of faultless 
sophistication. After the meeting in November offered a respite 
to the government in order for it to act upon the trade union 
demands that it had promised to satisfy, thus leaving the 
curtain raised in front of the trade union base and the domestic 
and international political forces, in order to see how the 
current government acquits itself in the responsible manner of 
the promises it made. Thus, no one will be able to accuse the 
trade unions of not having exhausted every peaceful negotiating 
formula with irrefutable arguments. The government, however, 
fulfilled nothing it had promised, and, moreover, it considered 
the wish of the trade unions to participate along with employers 
and the MMPS [Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare] in a 
tripartite administration of the unemployment compensation funds 
and social assistance as just an intrusion into the executive's 
prerogatives, and therefore the trade union's attempt to 
participate in the decisionmaking process was criticized. Proof 
of this is the fact that the CNSLR-Fratia declared that, 
together with Cartel Alfa, BNS [National Trade Union Bloc], the 
student league, and revolutionary associations, it would 
organize and participate in the trade union's struggle, which 
has already been launched. Thus, we learn that the trade unions 
are united and will organize jointly a large meeting in 
Timisoara on 16 December, after which they plan to stage strikes 
by federations and a general strike. The time for negotiations 
has ended exactly in these days of sensitive and deep 
remembrance of December 1989. The trade unions' consultations 
with the opposition parties are no longer a secret, and, as 
Victor Ciorbea, the president of CNSLR-Fratia says, "the motion 
brought by the opposition is an approach from the political 
point of view toward the government's performance, and it is 
complemented on a social level by the beginning of the trade 
unions' struggle." In other words, the sanction is applied to 
the Vacaroiu government as much by the opposition for the 
government's political policy as by the trade unions for the 
government's social policy. A government which shows itself to 
be politically and socially inept after one year should be 
replaced by another government from a broader coalition, from 
which, perhaps, the two parties which are considered extremist 
and restoration-communist are excluded. This is the point of 
view of the trade unions, whose great trump card is the alliance 
that has been made. In view of this situation, it is no longer 
possible for the government to avoid giving an answer, because 
negotiating a pact for social tranquility, which is so 
necessary, cannot start without getting rid of the existing 
team. These are difficult times for the PDSR, which sees its 
alliances and friends as seriously compromised and is placed in 
the situation of betraying someone in order to maintain a part 
of its power. It remains to be seen who.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59413 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Almost 4 Million More Tons of Grain Than in 1992 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20156A Bucharest ADEVARUL in Romanian 11-12 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20156A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ADEVARUL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Four Million More Tons of Grain"] </F>
  [Text] The leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
the Food Industry organized a meeting with the directors general 
of the county agricultural directorates, providing an 
opportunity for evaluating this year's activity and results. 
This year, the agriculture sector was able to put an end to the 
alarming drops in yields. For the first time in the past three 
years, all the arable land in the country was sown to crops. As 
a result, Romania harvested 14.5 million tons of grain, almost 4 
million more tons than in 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59414 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Toxic Waste Found in German Aid to Hospital </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20155A Bucharest ADEVARUL in Romanian 11-12 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20155A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ADEVARUL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mona Scarisoreanu: "Eight Tons of Toxic Waste as </F>
Humanitarian Assistance--for the Husi Hospital"] 
  [Text] Mr. Jelev, state secretary, head of the Department 
of Environmental Protection in the Ministry of Waters, Forests, 
and Environmental Protection, gave the following information 
exclusively to ADEVARUL: 
  "We are constantly confronted with pressures from abroad for 
the illegal entry of toxic wastes into Romania. These activities 
proceed in the same way as drug trafficking and are therefore 
very hard to control. Recently, there have been many of these 
situations. The first took place at the Husi hospital. Aid that 
was brought into Romania from Germany included about eight tons 
of substances that fell under the category of toxic waste, 
substances whose expiration dates have passed or even prohibited 
substances. Discovered with the assistance of customs organs, 
the Vaslui environmental protection agency, and the police, the 
load was taken to the border under escort and left the territory 
of Romania. It was fortunate that it was identified in time, 
before the waste material was unloaded. Otherwise, the problem 
of sending it back would have been much more difficult." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59415 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Slovak, Czech Attitudes Toward NATO Compared </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CH0147A Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK in Slovak 26 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0147A </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ivo Grycz: "In NATO's Anteroom"] </F>
  [Text] Before the January meeting of the North Atlantic 
alliance, the countries of Central Europe, mutually among 
themselves, intensified their diplomatic activity in seeking 
alliance membership, unfortunately more in order to inform their 
partners of their own ideas of association and less to 
coordinate a joint approach by the Visegrad Four. 
  Its weakest member, Slovakia, naturally wants to lean on the 
power of the Visegrad Group, which does not fully correspond 
with the relatively closest foreign policy, that of the Czechs. 
President M. Kovac's visit was immediately significant for his 
Czech partner, V. Havel, for two reasons: to acquaint the Slovak 
side with the priorities of the Prague government, which it sees 
in the U.S. plan "Partnership for Peace," and to verify the 
German attitudes, which are somewhat different in questions of 
association and logically apply to the entire Central European 
area as a bloc. The Slovak president also clarified Poland's 
positive response to the French-German initiative, which 
promises to create a geopolitical giant from the Atlantic to the 
eastern borders of Poland. Undoubtedly, these offers to Poland 
also caused Czech diplomacy to look eastward from the Morava 
River and to gain an ally for the U.S. plan. 
  Despite the many compatible positions that he holds in 
common 
with M. Kovac, the Czech president, in keeping with the ideas of 
the Klaus Cabinet, makes it obviously clear that the Czechs are 
closer to the U.S. plan, which figures on individually arranged 
security guarantees for the states of Central and East Europe, 
of course with the quiet concurrence of Russia. The Partnership 
for Peace would make judgments according to the degree of 
economic and political maturity of the countries and to their 
observance of human rights. It is evident that the Czech 
Republic does not want to allow Germany hegemony over the 
Euro-Atlantic integration efforts, but, at the same time, it 
refused to identify itself with the "package without contents" 
of the Visegrad Group. One must add that this is particularly 
true because of the unresolved Slovak-Hungarian relations. 
  The Slovak foreign policy architecture sees the Visegrad 
Group as a possible intermediate step toward the European Union, 
but G. Jeszensky's cool attitude to the readmission agreement 
forces Slovakia to pin its hopes rather on Prague and on the 
Partnership for Peace, even though verbally our diplomatic 
policies still support the joint approach of the V 4 [Visegrad 
Group]. 
  In connection with an improvement in Czech-Slovak relations, 
which is promised by the creation of a goods and capital union 
between the two countries and a satisfactory solution to the 
question of moderation in the matter of foreigners, it is the 
Czech lands and Slovakia that have the greatest chance of 
becoming a model and a driving force for union in Central Europe. 
  It is true that everything will also depend on the Slovak 
domestic policies and the nonconfrontational diplomatic 
offensive that J. Moravcik has so far successfully conducted. It 
is also thanks to him that Slovakia is beginning to present 
itself to the world as a stabilizing element of Central European 
integration, which of course turns people's eyes to the 
Hungarian diplomacy, which is markedly more aggressive. It would 
be a mistake to attack the hesitant attitude of our southern 
neighbor on the question of the readmission agreement with 
Slovakia. When G. Jeszensky only calls for solidarity among the 
Central European nations and recognition of the Slovak-Hungarian 
borders appears unnecessary to him, the question comes up 
whether he is such a unionist that they do not want to see at 
all (Slovakia and Hungary could agree to even mutual recognition 
of the original boundaries) or that they do not want to see 
someplace else. However, Jeszensky's announcement must be 
understood as a preelection presentation by a party, and the 
reaction to it must be on a material basis. 
  Guaranteeing rights to minority nationalities is not such a 
problem for Slovakia as Hungarian diplomacy has presented it, 
and, also, economic and political relations with the Czech 
Republic, as well as model relations with foreigners whose 
concept was born in discussions between Presidents M. Kovac and 
V. Havel in Lany, put us in promising positions before the V 4 
meeting with President Clinton. 
  After the division of the federation without any conflicts 
and the hopefully developing union relationships, we can state 
that the two new Central European countries have been 
established as an important factor of European stability and 
integration. We should by now not be unaccepted strangers in the 
anteroom of NATO. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59416 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Filkus on Reasons for Joining Alliance of Democrats </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CH0147B Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK in Slovak 3 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0147B </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Rudolf Filkus, deputy chairman of Alliance </F>
of Democrats, by Ivo Grycz; place and date not given: "Through 
the Spectacles of the Economy"] 
  [Text] Parties change, but professors and their ideas 
remain. This is possibly connected with the fact that 
politicians know sufficiently well how to make use of the ideas 
of the professors. The Alliance of Democrats has elected Prof. 
Rudolf Filkus as its deputy chairman, and his ideas have also 
found their application in the economic program of this party. 
We took an interest in the political views of Mr. Filkus after 
his finding a home in a liberal organization, and we received 
the economist's answers to our questions. 
  [Grycz] At one time the SDSS [Social Democratic Party of 
Slovakia] offered you the position of chairman. You decided in 
favor of the Alliance. Why? 
  [Filkus] First of all, no one offered me a position in the 
SDSS. But the essence of the matter is that I perceive the 
transformation process in social terms even now, when I speak of 
liberal steps toward a market mechanism. I understand this 
process as being without direction by the state while 
maintaining continuity with the steps we have already taken. 
This does not mean that I do not perceive the social barriers 
that could be formed by some liberal measures or that would 
prevent the transformation of the economy. And this is connected 
with social democracy. 
  [Grycz] So you see the Alliance as a moving force for the 
transformation of the economy? 
  [Filkus] Yes, because we will get to a market economy most 
rapidly by steps of a liberal nature, with the exclusion of 
direction by the state. In my concept, this is not connected 
with centralized macroeconomic actions. The economic center is, 
for example, the National Bank, which must see to currency 
stability, and the center must take care as well of the 
infrastructure and take action especially under conditions when 
the market is still not fully functioning. But it cannot be 
allowed to act on prices or regulate wages, production, or its 
composition. 
  [Grycz] The population has been offered declarations of 
liberalism in the programs of the movements and parties since 
November. Unfortunately, in its practical political and economic 
form, the people perceive it more as a negative, which the 
forces oriented against the liberals are naturally exploiting. 
Does the Alliance have a chance after its previous failures in 
the application of liberalism in Slovak conditions to acquire an 
adequate voter base for its program? 
  [Filkus] The liberal process was discredited especially by 
insufficient social sensitivity. The social explosions that can 
take place represent insurmountable obstacles, which prevent any 
kind of movement forward. In addition to this, I reckon with the 
fact that the macroeconomic restrictive policies of a budgetary 
and currency nature have already brought about their sacrifices, 
and we are now further along. We know more, we know that it 
works, but, on the other hand, it is necessary to clean up this 
entire process of transformation. It is not possible to let the 
process of privatization, which is an economic tool for changing 
the composition of ownership, become a tool of political power. 
This has happened and we cannot accept it. 
  [Grycz] But don't these tendances move the voters' opinions 
rather to the left? 
  [Filkus] That depends on the makeup of the voters. When I 
put 
in the program revitalization of the economy through foreign 
capital, acceleration of privatization, assistance to small and 
medium-sized businesses, I am addressing a specific group of 
voters. I meet with them in the okreses and I know that they are 
the tradesmen, the bankers, the intelligentsia, and the small 
and medium-sized businessmen. That is, we deal with the 
countervailing, most affected strata of the populace. 
  [Grycz] Alliance means doing things together. With which 
personalities and groupings to the right and to the left of the 
center do you mean to cooperate? 
  [Filkus] We look at this in economic terms. We will join 
those who agree with us that it is necessary to continue with 
the liberalization of the marketplace. We will also join those 
who are against the state directing the economy but who do not 
exclude some economic initiative by the center. And we also 
accept those who do not overlook the social aspects of the 
transformation process. Whoever is against misusing the process 
of privatization for the sake of acquiring political 
power--well, we will join them. I think the type of our 
potential allies should now be clear to you. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59417 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Profile of AD as New Political Force </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CH0147C Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK in Slovak 3 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0147C </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SLOBODNY PIATOK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ivo Grycz: "Democrats"] </F>
  [Text] Gone are the times of the founding of mass parties 
and movements that were born in the hectic atmosphere of 
meetings and whose main goal was represented by a single slogan 
or person. The democrats who after the revolution formed a 
monolithic bloc fighting against something are now searching, 
after the completion of the historic democratic and state legal 
composition processes, for their significance in the decisive 
process of transformation of the state's economy. 
  It is paradoxical how four years after the revolution there 
appears a party for which the ideal of the free citizen is the 
central theme. The creation of the Alliance of Democrats 
testifies to the need to search for dialogue, partnerships, and 
tolerance in politics. At the constitutional congress of this 
Alliance, we would have searched in vain for two rows of desks 
for the chairman and his advisers, delegates bargaining over 
permits for mom-and-pop stores, cheap populist shouting, and the 
shooting down of those in opposition. The tasteful Knazko 
management located the congress in the attractive environment of 
the Hotel Forum, but, in the discussion hall, there was not a 
trace of elitist snobbery--only a serious and material attitude. 
  If we should look for the central idea that forces citizens 
to get back into politics, I guess the most interesting one 
would be the warning by the chairman of the Alliance of 
Democrats, M. Knazko, who sees the method of privatization as 
practiced by the government as a tool for acquiring political 
power. "It is unacceptable that the process whose distributive 
consequences predetermines the social structure for several 
generations should not take place in a transparent environment 
in which there is strict control in maintaining the rules that 
have been agreed upon; it cannot be in an environment of 
Mafia-like spheres of protection in dividing up the state 
property. Underrating the need for the transparency and correct 
nature of this operation can create serious social and political 
tensions." 
  An important feature of the Alliance is also its lack of 
historical boundaries. It rejects a historical interpretation 
and sees the state as an expression of the individuals. From 
this viewpoint, the approach to foreign policy should also 
constantly be derived from a view of what the individual steps 
will bring to the free individual, the citizen. 
  This noncollective and nonnational view of statehood speaks 
of the liberal expression of the Alliance. But the actual 
relationship to statehood distinguishes it from the 
organizations that are historically unreconciled with the 
breakup of the federation, the KDS [Conservative Democratic 
Party] and the DS [Democratic Party] and also the leftist SDSS 
[Social Democratic Party of Slovakia]. The Alliance also wants 
to get rid of historicalizing the subject of the Slovak state in 
politics because it is just this approach that prevents, for 
example, the KDH [Christian Democratic Movement] from closer 
cooperation with the right-wing parties. At the congress, there 
was not a single attack against the HZDS [Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia] or the SNS [Slovak National Party]--that 
is, the parties of the governmental coalition--to be heard. By 
doing this, the Alliance itself got rid of its resentments, 
which were attributed to it in connection with the breakup of 
the HZDS. Its criticism of the government is to the point and 
always starts from the viewpoint of the legal guarantees of free 
operations in all spheres. The Knazko criticism of the triune 
nature of the government on the financial market is in this case 
grandiloquence. The government is the creator of rules, is 
responsible for keeping to them, and, at the same time, is the 
co-owner of monopolistic financial institutions. According to M. 
Knazko and the Alliance, it is not possible under such 
conditions to have an effectively functioning monetary market, 
which makes a solution more difficult in the fields of 
privatization, indebtedness, and a rational allocation of 
resources. 
  In addition to speeches by a number of foreign guests and 
partners from all of the important Slovak parties (with the 
exception of the HZDS), President M. Kovac also spoke to the 
delegates to the congress. And one must say that he did not 
spare sympathetic remarks. He brought up the question of full 
citizenship, which was the motive force for the development of 
the Western democratic countries. "Citizenship also means 
respect for a person, his vital interests, his creative and 
entrepreneurial activities," said the president. "I get a lot of 
signals that our public institutions so far have not 
incorporated this imperative of the liberal culture." 
  What can we add to this? I guess only that we already have 
democracy and democrats, but we also have a lot of mom-and-pop 
stores and their owners. What we lack is just the alliance of 
the democrats against the tobacconists. It is possible that we 
have begun to search for it at the congress of the party that 
has "Alliance" in its name. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59418 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Road to Political Stability Proposed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CH0148A Bratislava MOSTY in Slovak 23, 30 Nov 93 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0148A </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava MOSTY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Grigorij Meseznikov: "Slovakia: Factors of </F>
Political Stability Under Conditions of Social Transformation"] 
<H5>  [23 Nov p 6] </H5>
  [Text] The stability of social life in the countries 
that are experiencing the process of transformation is of 
special significance today. It is one of the fundamental 
conditions for advancing the transformation process and, in its 
ultimate consequences, for the success of the process itself. 
Moreover, the factor of political stability plays a substantial 
role in determining the relationship of the West toward the 
countries of Central and East Europe, influences the interest 
shown by West European countries and institutions in 
collaborating with the postcommunist countries, and acts to 
qualify the approach of the West with respect to the possible 
integration of these countries into West European 
structures. 
<H5>  Stability Under Conditions of "Real Socialism" </H5>
  The model of "real socialism" tended to solve the problem of 
social stability resulting from the essence of an order that was 
based on the principles of monodomination (state ownership in 
the economy, unlimited power exercised by the Communist Party in 
the political and ideological spheres, etc.). The foreign policy 
framework of the systems stability of that society was based on 
the status of the limited sovereignty of the individual Central 
European countries and the fact that the function of securing 
the military-strategic balance was left to the Warsaw Pact, 
headed by the USSR. Any kind of manifestations that tended to 
destabilize the social situation or that had the potential to 
result in similar destabilization in the economic sphere, the 
social sphere, the political sphere, or the nationalities 
sphere, as well as international relations, were "solved" with 
the aid of administrative methods of varying intensity, which 
were adequate for this system, including the use of force and 
military might. Such a model for securing social stability could 
temporarily eliminate the elements of permanently emerging 
tension but was unable to eliminate the deep internal 
destabilizing tendencies, which, in the end, brought about the 
downfall of the system. 
<H5>  The Social Value of Stability </H5>
  The assumption is that the goal of the transformation in 
postcommunist countries is the creation of a society that will 
be compatible with a "Western-type" society in terms of its 
parameters of economic, social, and political development. But, 
in a "Western" society, stability itself is one of the principal 
values. Social stability in a society based on liberal and 
democratic principles is primarily a matter of an established 
social and political order, reliable guarantees that protect 
citizens against violations of their economic, social, and 
political rights as outlined in the law, the inviolability and 
the unassailability of their ownership and residence, respect 
for the dignity of the human personality, and confidence in 
functioning state institutions. It can therefore be said that 
one of the principal goals of the transformation is the 
attainment of a status of authentic social stability. The 
process that leads to the creation of a socially and politically 
stable society in the countries of Central and East Europe is 
accompanied by numerous moments containing risks of potential 
destabilization. Actually, this is a road toward stability via a 
period of certain destabilization, having to do with the 
changing of the model for social development. 
<H5>  The Key Importance of the Pace of the Progress of the Reform </H5>
  We believe that a determining question in this regard is the 
question of the pace of the reforms being effected. In other 
words, the question sounds as follows: Must the pace of the 
transition be gradual (slow) or "drastic" (rapid)? 
Understandably, proreform forces are confronted with the danger 
that the cost of increasing the pace of economic reforms could 
be quite high, something that could manifest itself in the form 
of resistance on the part of significant masses of the 
population with respect to the course of the reform and to those 
forces striving to realize it and, in the end, could lead to 
threatening the course of the reform as such. However, the 
experiences already gathered today from postcommunist countries 
indicate that gradualism, efforts to gradually install market 
mechanisms, even at the margins of an administrative system, 
appear as ineffective or even as being harmful. They lead to the 
intensification of existing social problems and tensions, result 
in multiplying the negative influences of the residues of the 
former period, lead to the creation of stable antireform 
stereotypes, and result in the creation of prerequisites for 
long-term overall economic and political destabilization. It 
turns out that the entire sphere of the economy must be 
liberalized simultaneously and that this liberalization must be 
adequately significant in order to, in the end, "shake up" the 
entire system. The political prerequisite for such an approach 
is the unequivocally articulated will to actually undertake such 
a course, legitimized by support on the part of the dominant 
portion of the population. 
<H5>  The Given Facts for Slovakia </H5>
  What are the prospects for the developing situation in 
Slovakia from this viewpoint? In the context of the division of 
Czechoslovakia and its immediate and long-term consequences, the 
Slovak Republic attracts special attention abroad. Today, 
Slovakia is the smallest country in Central Europe that came 
into being as a consequence of the disintegration process in the 
postcommunist countries with multiple-nationalities 
compositions. It is a country that has weaker economic potential 
in comparison with the Czech Republic. It is a country that has 
a numerically strong nationalities minority (Hungarian), which 
represents 12 percent of the population; the question of the 
standing of this minority, as well as its relationship with the 
majority constitutional nation, is a permanent component of the 
topical social context, the object of political "in-fighting," 
and a factor influencing mutual relationships with the 
neighboring Hungarian Republic. Today, from the viewpoint of the 
topical needs involved in the development of an independent 
state, Slovakia is a country with an inadequately profiled 
industrial structure that is, moreover, beset by the 
disintegration of a common economic area at this time, by the 
reorientation of the production programs in individual 
enterprises within the framework of conversion, and by the 
disintegration or the loss of so-called Eastern markets. It is a 
country that borders immediately on Ukraine, a country whose 
economic situation is in a desperate state today and that, 
moreover, is experiencing problematic relationships with the 
largest successor state to the USSR--Russia. 
<H5>  Economic Prerequisites for Political Stability </H5>
  If we assume that the determining moment in terms of 
securing 
political stability in Slovakia is the successful and rapid 
implementation of the transformation course (that is to say, 
essentially, the course of privatization), it is clear that 
prolonging the crisis status of the economy as a consequence of 
any kind of retardation of the pace of economic reform can 
become a burdening test for political stability in Slovakia, 
with not particularly favorable consequences. The present 
governmental movement, which declares its devotion to the ideas 
of economic transformation, is at the same time pursuing a 
policy aimed at "modifying" it. Mostly, the privatization 
process is substantially retarded today. And the economic policy 
of the present government differs from the notions of the HZDS 
[Movement for a Democratic Slovakia] regarding the methods of 
economic transformation, as well as from the objective status of 
the economy--there is a general shortage of financial resources, 
an inadequate influx of investments from abroad, and economic 
difficulties resulting from the disintegration of the CSFR. As 
is well known, the HZDS government movement was victorious in 
the last elections under a slogan that was critical of the 
"Klaus" federal economic reform, and it promised strong social 
policies that resulted in intensive social expectations among 
its followers. These social expectations, fulfillment of which 
would today at the very least mean additional substantial 
slowing of the reform course, are undoubtedly a factor that 
exerts its influence on the economic policies of the government. 
An inadequately proreform-oriented policy that could, within a 
certain time frame, even appear as a factor assuring immediate 
social and political stability is a moment, from the long-term 
viewpoint, that acts to increase the danger of total 
destabilization. 
  Maintaining the original pace of economic changes or, 
rather, 
increasing that pace today means the adoption of a whole series 
of unpopular measures. Here, the question of confidence in the 
political force that resorts to similar measures arises. But it 
turns out that the present government and the HZDS have 
substantially exhausted the reserves of confidence on the part 
of the population and are approaching the limits of this 
confidence, which, if exceeded, makes the acceptance of 
unpopular measures appear problematic. From this viewpoint, the 
most optimum variation of development in Slovakia, from both the 
short-term standpoint and the long-term view over the next 10-15 
years, would be the formation of a credible "coalition of 
reforms," which would implement the introduction of liberal 
values and which, at the same time, would enjoy the support of 
the decisive portion of the population. 
<H5>  [30 Nov p 6] </H5>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Economic Prerequisites for Political Stability </H5>
  If we assume that the determining moment in terms of 
securing 
political stability in Slovakia is the successful and rapid 
implementation of the transformation course (that is to say, 
essentially, the course of privatization), it is clear that 
prolonging the crisis status of the economy as a consequence of 
any kind of retardation of the pace of economic reform can 
become a burdening test for political stability in Slovakia, 
with not particularly favorable consequences. The present 
governmental movement, which declares its devotion to the ideas 
of economic transformation, is at the same time pursuing a 
policy aimed at "modifying" it. Mostly, the privatization 
process is substantially retarded today. And the economic policy 
of the present government differs from the notions of the HZDS 
regarding the methods of economic transformation, as well as 
from the objective status of the economy--there is a general 
shortage of financial resources, an inadequate influx of 
investments from abroad, and economic difficulties resulting 
from the disintegration of the CSFR. As is well known, the HZDS 
government movement was victorious in the last elections under a 
slogan that was critical of the "Klaus" federal economic reform, 
and it promised strong social policies that resulted in 
intensive social expectations among its followers. These social 
expectations, fulfillment of which would today at the very least 
mean additional substantial slowing of the reform course, are 
undoubtedly a factor that exerts its influence on the economic 
policies of the government. An inadequately proreform-oriented 
policy that could, within a certain time frame, even appear as a 
factor assuring immediate social and political stability is a 
moment, from the long-term viewpoint, that acts to increase the 
danger of total destabilization. 
  Maintaining the original pace of economic changes or, 
rather, 
increasing that pace today means the adoption of a whole series 
of unpopular measures. Here, the question of confidence in the 
political force that resorts to similar measures arises. But it 
turns out that the present government and the HZDS have 
substantially exhausted the reserves of confidence on the part 
of the population and are approaching the limits of this 
confidence, which, if exceeded, makes the acceptance of 
unpopular measures appear problematic. From this viewpoint, the 
most optimum variation of development in Slovakia, from both the 
short-term standpoint and the long-term view over the next 10-15 
years, would be the formation of a credible "coalition of 
reforms," which would implement the introduction of liberal 
values and which, at the same time, would enjoy the support of 
the decisive portion of the population. 
<H5>  Political Prerequisites for Social Stability </H5>
  The unavoidable political prerequisites for stability 
include 
the following: 

  -  The process of acquiring a definitive image of the Slovak 
political scene; the overcoming of the fragmentation of 
political entities and their establishment at the level of 
"conservatism--liberalism--social democracy." 
  -  The maintenance of 
a state of law; the undisrupted and effective functioning of a 
system of parliamentary democracy; the intensification of 
experiences and customs of parliamentarism, which unavoidably 
raises the level of respect for valid legal standards and 
strengthens the will to solve conflicting or crisis situations 
with the aid of the laws. 
  -  Consistent adherence to the principle 
of separation of powers and utilizing the existing political 
mechanism to restrict authoritarian tendencies and efforts to 
prioritize the interests of the executive at the expense of the 
other components of power. 
  -  The achievement of such a status in 
which, in the event of nationwide conflicts, regional conflicts, 
industry and local conflicts, such conflicts would be 
formalized, institutionalized, and incorporated into the overall 
social context, and the transparency of their solutions would be 
promoted (experiences in postelection Slovakia indicate that the 
current power structure attempts to solve some problems by 
"lobbying," based on priorities of the executive). 
  -  Maintaining a 
balance between the actions of economically active individuals, 
the functioning of an independent judiciary, and the legislative 
power. The rights of private ownership must be unconditionally 
maintained. Failure to adhere to these rights is a destabilizing 
factor that casts doubt upon any intent to become a liberal 
society, acts to weaken economic activity, and creates a climate 
for the failure to observe other rights, primarily civil rights. 
  Positive influence and stabilization effects can undoubtedly 
be had from changes in the social structure of society, from the 
creation of an entrepreneurial class that supports the 
continuation of economic changes, as well as from the 
strengthening of the middle class, interested in maintaining 
social stability and representing the natural voter base for 
liberal parties (in the economic and political sense). 
<H5>  Potential Sources and Factors of Instability </H5>
  The creation of an independent Slovak state acted to remove 
the potential source of tension and destabilization resulting 
from the overall lack of a solution to the constitutional 
problem. But other factors have appeared, which can act in a 
destabilizing manner. This has to do mostly with problems 
connected with the division of a unified Czechoslovak economy. A 
division multiplies economic difficulties resulting from 
transformation processes or methods by which the transformation 
is being pursued. The economic recession, the decline in the 
standard of living for certain categories of the population, 
increased unemployment--all of these tend to lead to 
disillusioning those citizens of Slovakia who voted for the HZDS 
because of its promises to overcome existing problems. 
  The disappointment can be all the greater, particularly 
because many of the voters who voted for the HZDS did not desire 
the division of the CSFR. Consequently, it is possible to 
anticipate a specific amount of social frustration. The 
positions of political and social entities that could somehow 
"shortstop" this frustration must be kept in mind. The idea to 
utilize social dissatisfaction among the population to achieve 
immediate political goals (including the threats of civil 
disobedience) has thus far been introduced into the Slovak 
social context even by some representatives of the HZDS and at a 
time when the movement was in the opposition. It is unlikely 
that any of today's opposition parliamentary parties would 
resort to mobilizing the dissatisfaction of the masses to 
demonstrate civil disobedience. The same will obviously also be 
true of the trade unions, which, although they subject the 
economic and social policies of the present government to hard 
criticism, prefer a dialogue with the government and elect to 
use more moderate forms for their possible protests. 
<H5>  The Possibility of the Development of Civil Unrest </H5>
  The prerequisites for the development of civil unrest, of 
uncontrollable mass protests and resistance are the catastrophic 
decline in income for a large number of people, the total 
destruction of the social security system, an absolute 
deterioration of everyday living conditions, a deep decline in 
confidence in the government, a decline in authority of those in 
power, and an absolute lack of confidence in the institutional 
forms of resolving conflicts, but also the existence of a social 
force capable of channeling such forms of protest and 
coordinating them. It is highly unlikely that developments in 
Slovakia (despite all difficulties and problems) would culminate 
in a social explosion in the form of civil unrest and 
disobedience. In view of the distribution of political forces in 
parliament, it can almost be expected that, in the event social 
conflicts become exacerbated, the opposition parties would 
initiate changes in the government team or would conclude new 
coalition agreements, create a government of "specialists" with 
the broad support of parliamentary entities, or call for early 
parliamentary elections. 
  Selectivity in applying legal regulations, most of which 
originate in the environment of state organs and institutions, 
inconsistency on the part of courts in defending the legal order 
in cases where violation of a law has broader social 
implications, manifestations of cronyism and clientelism--these 
can be destabilizing factors. These manifestations undermine the 
confidence of the citizenry in the effectiveness of the legal 
system and create fertile ground for legal nihilism. 
<H5>  The Problem of the Hungarian Minority </H5>
  In judging the prospects for political stability, it is 
necessary to take into account the comprehensive problems having 
to do with the standing of the Hungarian minority, problems 
having to do with the relationship between citizens of Slovak 
and Hungarian nationality in regions in which the population is 
mixed. This is also the place for questions connected with the 
realization of cultural rights by Hungarian fellow citizens, 
questions dealing with the application of the language law, 
questions of territorial administrative arrangements of this 
area. The approach of the Hungarian political parties consists 
of stressing the connection between the 
nationalities-emancipation efforts of the Slovak people and 
efforts by the Hungarian ethnic minority to make its share in 
creating the newly constituted state visible, particularly 
because, according to representatives of the Hungarian parties, 
this share is not being adequately stressed. According to the 
representatives of the Hungarian parliamentary bloc, a 
comprehensive solution to the problem is only possible by 
adopting the law on minorities, for which they have submitted a 
proposal. In general, it can be said that the basis for stable 
development in this area will be the positive resolution of 
questions involving the citizenship status of a minority member, 
the political status of the minority as a whole, and the 
safeguarding and protection of minority rights. (N. Kusy: "The 
Hungarian Proposal Is Full of Discrepancies," NARODNA OBRODA, 7 
May 1993) Experiences thus far indicate that, for example, the 
language problem is perceived by Hungarians as well as Slovaks 
as a very sensitive one and that the social situation was 
already once destabilized significantly (in 1990), precisely 
during the time at which the language law was being adopted by 
the Slovak National Council. 
<H5>  The Security Situation </H5>
  Social stability is directly connected with the overall 
security situation in the country. Today, Slovakia is becoming a 
sought-after region for the functioning of organized crime 
originating in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union. Slovakia 
is particularly attractive to the mafias from CIS; it is a quite 
well "mapped area," presenting the opportunity for further 
penetration into Europe, a minimal language barrier, and having 
a certain sociocultural and psychological proximity, as well as 
a well-known postcommunist atmosphere. The penetration of Mafia 
capital, when seen against the background of economic problems, 
intensifies the risks of criminalizing the political life in the 
country. Today, this destabilizing moment is all the more 
disturbing now that large quantities of weapons originating in 
areas of armed conflict, drugs from the Caucasus countries, 
Central Asia, and the Near East, as well as nuclear materials 
are virtually moving around freely on the territory of CIS. 
<H5>  Geopolitical Aspects of Stability </H5>
  A separate chapter is the problem of geopolitical stability 
of the Central European region. For Slovakia, it is of 
extraordinary importance to cooperate with the other countries 
of the Visegrad Four. Today we are witnessing certain 
differences in the approach regarding the intensity and the 
method of institutionalizing these relationships. A stabilizing 
moment in terms of mutual relations among Central European 
countries is their unified declaration of interest in entering 
into the European Community organizations or NATO. Because West 
Europe will be accepting for membership in its economic, 
political, and military groupings only countries with balanced 
mutual relationships, this creates pressure upon individual 
countries to resolve problems in dispute (for example, the 
problem of the Gabcikovo water-management project involving the 
Slovak Republic and the Hungarian Republic) by way of a dialogue 
and with the help of existing international legal mechanisms. 
Undoubtedly, an important influence on developments in Central 
Europe will be exerted by the situation on the territory of the 
former Soviet Union. For Slovakia, as a small country 
immediately adjacent to the territory of CIS, for which economic 
ties to the East still continue to be vitally important, any 
kind of major political destabilization in Russia or Ukraine or 
any possible deterioration in their mutual relationships could 
be a destabilizing element in terms of internal development. A 
possible change of regime in Moscow, the advent of reactionary 
nationalistic forces to power in Russia, and efforts to renew 
the previous imperialist structure could result in great 
tensions developing in the relationship between Russia and 
Ukraine. For Slovakia, this could mean that it would find itself 
in the position of being an object of superpower politics. That 
is why it is vitally important for Slovakia to guarantee its own 
security through the most intensive relationships with the West 
European defense community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59419 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Right-Wing Parties DS, KDS Announce Merger </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20197A Bratislava MOSTY in Slovak 14 Dec 93 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20197A </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava MOSTY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Proclamation signed by Pavol Hagyari, chairman of the KDS, </F>
and Anton Duris, chairman of the DS: "A Statement Concerning the 
Merger of DS and KDS"] 
  [Text] The parliamentary elections of 1992 have clearly 
demonstrated that the setback suffered by the Slovak civic right 
was primarily the result of its fragmentation. As a result of 
its inability to form a preelection coalition, more than 10 
percent of voters today have no representative in the Slovak 
parliament capable of promoting their political interests. 
Having learned from this experience and, in accordance with the 
will of our voting membership, having resolved to continue the 
process of integration of the Slovak civic right, the 
Conservative Democratic Party [KDS] and the Democratic Party 
[DS] have concluded a merger agreement. 
  This new political entity intends to resume the traditions 
of 
the DS, which succeeded in concentrating all of the civic forces 
that opposed fascism and, after the liberation [of 1945], fought 
for the reestablishment of parliamentary democracy, a 
law-governed state, and the protection of private property and 
private enterprise. At that time, the DS demonstrated that it 
could successfully defend these values in Slovakia while 
struggling against communist expansionism, aggressive 
proletarian dictatorship, and totalitarianism. 
  We will strive to renew, advance, and preserve democratic 
values, and to create a civic society that will promote the free 
development of individual citizens. We are convinced that only 
a principled transformation of society and the economy will 
enable Slovakia to join the community of democratic and 
prosperous countries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59420 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Dec Inflation Rate 1.5 Percent </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20203A Ljubljana SLOVENEC in Slovenian 28 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20203A </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana SLOVENEC </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Slovenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by D.H.: "December Inflation Rate 1.5 Percent, </F>
Yearly Inflation Rate 22.9 Percent"] 
  [Text] Ljubljana -- The Statistical Institute reported 
yesterday the latest data on inflation and retail price growth. 
For the month of December, retail prices and inflation rose 1.5 
percent, with inflation reaching 22.9 percent for 1993. In 
December, the cost of living increased 1.8 percent, resulting in 
an increase of 22.8 percent for 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59421 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Macedonia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Gasoline Smuggling on Macedonian-Serbian Border </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20117A Skopje VECER in Macedonian 26 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20117A </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje VECER </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S. Padori and Z.P. Mokrova: "`Wild' Gasoline </F>
Pumps on the Macedonian-Serbian Border: A Black Market With the 
Blessings of the State"] 
  [Text] In conjunction with the incident last Sunday at the 
Macedonian-Yugoslav border near the village of Dojane, in which 
two MVR [Ministry of Internal Affairs] officials and one ARM 
[Army of the Republic of Macedonia] soldier who were guarding 
the state border were kidnapped, it turned out that what was 
involved was the smuggling of fuel--the topic of much gossip and 
an activity well-known to government authorities, although they 
do not lift a finger to stop it. And, after an evening's tour 
around the Kumanovo-Tabanovce region, it became obvious that the 
incident was a coincidence; nothing was meant by it. Both the 
"wild" and the "tame" gasoline pumps (not including those of 
Makpetrol) are largely pouring derivatives for the enterprises 
of the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia]. It is understood 
that the price for one liter of diesel is 1.8 German marks, and 
that fuel is available in unlimited amounts. 
  Greek and Bulgarian gasoline, and perhaps even some from the 
"Skopje" refinery (?) [as published], is sold exclusively for 
vehicles with registrations from Gnjilane, Vranje, and Kraljevo. 
But, as is pointed out both at the customs section at Tabanovci 
and among the inhabitants of Kumanovo, who have noticed 
especially increased traffic toward the north, there is 
obviously one purpose--the smuggling of fuel. 
<H5>  Gasoline in Little Kegs and Plastic Bottles </H5>
  Througout the day yesterday, the dozen or so illicit pumps, 
as well as the legal private pumps that we observed, were 
operating mainly for FRY citizens. As we traveled from Kumanovo 
to Tabanovci, the first pump, working nonstop, was at the "Koka" 
enterprise in the village of Pukovsko. There, the automatic 
dispensers worked without interruption, and the fuel was flowing 
into little kegs, canisters, and the reservoirs in tractors, 
trucks, animal-drawn vehicles, and motorized cultivators. The 
price was known: one German mark per liter. A kilometer away, 
the pump at Rajkovo house did not operate yesterday; the tanks 
were full and right next to the pump were three underground 
cisterns, awaiting "sales." There were also some pumps near 
Recica village, but the most often used one was at the Banjka 
enterprise, next to which, waiting to be unloaded, were seven or 
so tanks. 
  At a farm near Recica village, the pump, which was located 
in 
the middle of a field, was operating beautifully; the fuel was 
pumped from four automatic dispensers for gasoline and one for 
diesel. And let us not even mention the roads connecting these 
locations, because they are not in conformity with any "planning 
or town ordinances." What is important is that the marks roll 
in as if on a conveyer belt. At each vehicle we stopped, the 
drivers with whom we talked said the transportation was being 
carried out successfully. But, of course, along the auxiliary 
roadways. This means that the border is being crossed illegally 
through the fields and that only a minority, those with 
explosive cargoes, go directly to the ramps [legal border 
crossing] at Tabanovci. 
  Yet another place where fuel was sold yesterday is the 
"Keramika 2" pump in Agino village, where, in one truck with 
Kumanovo registration, there were as many as 15 little kegs, 
each containing 10 liters of fuel! Around both the temporary and 
the permanent locations for the sale of fuel, we found hundreds 
of vehicles whose owners diligently "organized" this dangerous 
cargo. They poured it into plastic Coca-Cola bottles, stowed it 
in the bodies of their cars, and some people skillfully lined 
the area under the chassis with metal containers. As an 
inhabitant of Gnjilane told us, the really artistic smugglers 
are from the other side of the border. There, the fuel is sold 
like hotcakes for three to four marks per liter, and the 
"smugglers" earn vast amounts of hard currency in cash for only 
three- to four-kilometer trips. 
  What is being done by the customs officials, police, and 
border stations in our country, as well as the inspectorate and 
those state insitutions that are charged with granting licenses 
to erect gasoline stations? 
<H5>  Every Other Person -- A Smuggler </H5>
  The chief of the customs post at the Tabanovce highway 
crossing, Traje Pesevski, explained to us that it was not 
possible to get rid of the fuel smugglers. Every second vehicle 
tries to carry fuel illegally, but the methods used to conceal 
the fuel border on science fiction. The containers, the big and 
small cans and the plastic bottles, are conventional, but it has 
reached the point that entire tanks are being built into car 
seats, which are then reupholstered; in place of spare tires, 
there are complete "tankers"; and other "clandestine" places are 
also found in spaces at the bottom of the doors and even in the 
engines. As a result, there have been three cases of cars 
catching on fire. 
  According to Customs Official Toni Nikolovski, up to two 
metric tons of fuel a day, which were given to Sileks, have been 
confiscated thanks to the efforts of customs. There was a case 
in which 460 liters of fuel were confiscated from a single "101" 
[as published], and up to a ton has been confiscated from buses. 
  The real problem is posed by the surrounding natural 
approaches to the fields and the country roads. As Mome 
Jovanovski says, such "black" communications lines are sought in 
order to provide complete security at the borders. As a result 
of expedient measures, sometimes up to 200 people a day end up 
in the opstina [township] court in Kumanovo, which is authorized 
to deal with illegal trade and the illegal transportation of 
dangerous materials. 
  According to the authorities from the border crossing, a 
resolution should be promulgated to give the responsible 
inspection bodies, which already have obligations in this area, 
the duty to track the sale of fuel, and even to check those who 
grant permission for the locations for the sale of gasoline. 
<H5>  Authorized "Incompetence" </H5>
  When rumors about illicit gasoline pumps developed, their 
removal fell within the purview of the Ministry of Urbanization, 
Construction, Communications, and Ecology. According to Ljupco 
Todorovski, a chief inspector at the ministry, this business in 
fuel is located in Tetovo and Kumanovo and on the border with 
the FRY. In Tetovo, there were 32 "wild" gasoline pumps, of 
which 15 were outside settled areas. All of these are now in the 
process of being removed. In fact, 18 such pumps were 
disassembled by their owners, and 14 were subjected to more 
forceful measures. In the Kumanovo region, 10 such "wild" pumps 
have been discovered; there are orders for six to be demolished, 
and measures are in progress with respect to the other four. 
  Meanwhile, the inspecting bodies are facing a number of 
problems, which are in large measure the result of the 
instability of the local administration and which mean that all 
these difficulties wind up in one place--at the ministry. 
Particularly surprising is the fact that inspectors' equipment 
is completely substandard. They did not have a car nor the 
special skill required for this work, because the fuel should be 
handled by trained people. 
  Another aspect of this is that, along with last year's 
relaxation of regulations on gasoline pumps, little attention 
was paid to who was opening gas stations or where. The approvals 
were usually given without problems; in addition, the inspectors 
are not authorized to deal with these pumps. The permission for 
the location, administrative consent, and approval for the sites 
are issued only in the ministry with the signature of the 
minister. Furthermore, this process is not mindful of the safety 
of the citizens (in densely populated areas) with regard to 
transportation (without special access roads). Consider, for 
example, the construction of the gasoline pumps on the 
expressway and the highways (the western highway); there are 
specially designed plans for the location and for all the 
components of such a site. Thus, on the road to Tetovo, two 
pumps (belonging to Fersped) were to be erected, facing each 
other, and near the village of Zelino, another two private ones, 
side by side! Issuing the permits to the enterprises and 
individuals resulted in a situation in which instead of the 
flowing of fuel being a function of the traffic, the opposite 
effect was achieved; the pumps were exclusively for the interest 
of the individuals. At the same time, plans to widen the road 
linking Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar and Ohrid were not 
considered, so one day these gasoline pumps will be exactly in 
the middle of the road! They will have to be torn down, and with 
that, the 600,000-800,000 German marks invested (if they were 
built in accordance with regulations) will be gone for good.... 
  The apathy of the responsible market inspection service 
bears 
a good share of the guilt for the regular smuggling of fuel from 
Macedonia to the FRY. Evidently, they scarcely move from "the 
central office" and cannot take credit for any particular 
achievements. The previously mentioned road is a good 
example.... But whether they are worried or indifferent--that is 
a good question! 
  In any case, in view of the open smuggling and the incident 
on the border, which was obviously not authorized, the state 
should "pull" the reins that it is holding a little more 
forcefully. In the past, if nothing else, more concerted action 
should have been taken, and there is no doubt that even a slight 
effort would have prevented the situation from becoming as bad 
as it is now. Is it necessary for another incident like the one 
last year to occur, or even a more serious one to compel action 
-- this is, at the moment, uncertain. However, one thing is 
certain: fuel from Macedonia travels northward, earning millions 
for the "smugglers," who probably have their "fingers" 
everywhere, even in the government... and this is no 
exaggeration.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59422 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Macedonia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs in Macedonia Reject Ethnic Minority Status </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20187A Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 14 Dec 93 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20187A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Skopje (TANJUG) -- The new president of the Serbian 
Democratic Party (DPS) in Macedonia, Dragisa Miletic, has 
dismissed suggestions that his party might become radical and 
serve as a vehicle of Serbia's influence on the Serbian 
community in this former Yugoslav republic. 
  In an interview for Skopje "AI" Television Miletic pointed 
out that the government of the new state cannot offer any 
justification for excluding Serbs from the new constitution. 
  Miletic stressed that his party had submitted an amendment 
to 
the Macedonian Constitution demanding that Serbs be recognized 
in the Constitution and that the DPS be given two seats in the 
republic's council for interethnic relations because the same 
opportunity was given to other nationalities and religious 
communities. 
  Miletic noted there is only one way for Serbs to perceive 
their exclusion from the Constitution: as a "negation of their 
centuries-long existence in these territories" and an attempt to 
subject this community to the process of assimilation. 
  The DPS president explicitly pointed out that his party will 
not get involved in church issues the way the previous party 
leadership did. In his opinion the current church issues should 
be resolved by the Serbian Orthodox Church and Macedonian 
church. 
  Miletic stated that the DPS will refer to the new state as 
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia until it is recognized 
by the international community and by the FRY [Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia] and until it is given a permanent name. 
  After each answer given by the DPS president, "AI" 
Television 
introduced comments by his predecessor Ristic, who noted, among 
other things, that a part of the new leadership consists of the 
supporters of Vojislav Sesel's Serbian Radical Party [SRS]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59423 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Macedonia </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Description, Demarcation of Borders </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20162A Skopje PULS in Macedonian 26 Nov 93 pp 18-19 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20162A </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje PULS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Aleksandar Stojmilov, professor at the Pure </F>
Mathematics Department: "Relatively Few Disputable Points"] 
  [Text] With the exception of the northern border, which is 
also "the newest one," and about which there are disputes over 
some places, the demarcation of the borders of the Republic of 
Macedonia has rarely been a subject for dispute. 
  The total length of the four state borders of the Republic 
of 
Macedonia adds up to 849 kilometers; the longest segment--262 
kilometers--is next to Greece, and the shortest one--165 
kilometers--is next to Buglaria. 
  The western border, that with Albania, extends in a 
north-south direction for 191 kilometers. The border was marked 
and delineated mainly in 1913, and since then it has not changed 
much. Since the time of the initial demarcation of the 
boundaries, there have been disputes over some places. First and 
foremost, the disputes concern the surroundings of Mala Prespa, 
specifically the region of Golo Brdo, the village of Lin on the 
western shore of Lake Ohrid, and most importantly, the monastery 
of St. Naum. In 1913, at the time of the demarcation of the 
border, the conclusion of the commission was that the western 
and southern shores of Lake Ohrid, from Lin to the St. Naum 
monastery, should be a part of Albania, but, at the same time, 
it was not explicitly determined under whose jurisdiction the 
monastery should be. 
  Later, the government of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and 
Slovenes interpreted the conclusion of the commission to 
demarcate the border in such a way that the St. Naum monastery 
would be considered part of its own territory, but Albania 
expressed its disagreement with that position and considered 
that the monastery had been awarded to Albania. The dispute over 
the monastery reached the League of Nations and remained there 
until 1921 when a special conference was established. The 
ambassadors of Italy, France, Great Britain, and Japan 
participated in this conference. Their decision was that the 
road connecting Debar and Struga should be in Yugoslavia, the 
region of Golo Brdo should go to Albania in its entirety, and 
the village of Lin, together with the St. Naum monastery, should 
belong to Albania. The Yugoslav Government objected to that 
solution, and the entire problem was referred to the 
International Court at The Hague, but that institution did not 
reach a definite decision. The border dispute was finally 
resolved in Florence in 1926 with the signing of a protocol 
according to which the St. Naum monastery would belong to 
Yugoslavia and the region of Golo Brdo, which included 27 
villages with Macedonian inhabitants, would belong to Albania. 
  Otherwise, for the greater part of its length, the 
Macedonian-Albanian border is a natural boundary since it is 
covered by a chain of mountains and is difficult to cross. The 
border, by the way, is not drawn on an ethnic basis, in view of 
the fact that, within our territory, a large number of Albanians 
who had previously been in Albania settled in the 18th century 
in the disputed area of Golo Brdo, southwest of Debar; in Mala 
Prespa, west of Lake Prespa; and in the region of Zapadna 
[western] Gora of Sar Planina where Macedonians were living. 
From a natural geographic aspect, this border and the 
immediatedly surrounding area should be divided into three 
natural units: the mountainous border and the portions below the 
Korab, Desat, Krcin, Jablonica, and Galicica mountains; then the 
lake regions and the parts which lie between the Prespa and 
Ohrid lakes; and the 12-kilometer stretch along the valley of 
the Cri Drim river and the lower border area with sections 
through the Debar basin. Today on this border, there are four 
open and functioning border crossing points: Blato near Debar, 
Tjafasan near Struga, St. Naum on the southern shore of Lake 
Ohrid, and Stenje on the western shore of Lake Prespa. 
Considering the length of the border and the number of border 
crossings, it appears that for each crossing point, there is an 
average distance of 48 kilometers; this is unsatisfactory in 
comparison with world standards. 
  The southern border, that with Greece, follows a laborious 
course and extends for a length of 262 kilometers. The border 
consists mostly of straight lines, and, in the literature, 
borders of this type are known as "geometric borders." Like the 
western border, this one runs through mountains, plains, and 
water regions. The length of the border is 238 kilometers over 
land, 20 kilometers through lakes, and 4 kilometers along 
rivers. This border is not a natural one throughout its length, 
since it cuts through the Prespa and Dorjan lakes, as well as 
the Pelagonia and Gevgelija basins. Moreover, it is not an 
ethnic boundary since it divides half of the ethnic territory of 
Macedonia through the center. 
  This border was demarcated and confirmed in 1913 by Serbia 
and Greece. About the demarcation of this border, one of the 
best-known Polish historians, Henrik Batovski, would later say 
that the day the agreement was signed in Belgrade--16 August 
1913--was one of the darkest days in the history of the 
Macedonian people. Since then, even until today, the border has 
not changed; the only correction was made in 1919 and that 
involved a section of Belasica mountain. At the time of the 
Peace Treaty of Nej [probably Neuilly], the Strumica district 
was detached from Bulgaria and joined to Yugoslavia, and that 
section, along the Belacica ridge was, in effect, added to the 
historical border. 
  Like the border between Macedonia and Albania, the southern 
border of Macedonia is divided into three parts: the 
mountainous--the areas which pass through the Baba, Nidze, 
Kozub, and Belacica mountains; the water regions, passing 
through the Prespa and Dorjan lakes, as well as the section 
through the Vardar river; and the lowland border with the 
stretches through the Pelagonia and Gevgelija basins. 
  When the Macedonian-Greek border is discussed, it should be 
remembered that, both in the past and today, this topic presents 
many vital "windows" for the development of the economy. Among 
other things, along with that same demarcation, an agreement 
between Greece and Yugoslavia was concluded (and renewed in 
1923) to obtain a free trade zone in Thessalonika (34,000 square 
meters) for a period of 50 years. (The free trade zone was shut 
down in 1973.) 
  Now that Macedonia is a sovereign state, that zone would be 
of decisive importance for the formal functioning of the 
economy. Furthermore, the fact that Greece is a member of the 
European Union clearly indicates that our southern border is 
also the border of Macedonia with the European Community. 
Besides that, it is also a fact that Macedonia does not border 
the sea; this means that it belongs to the so-called 
"geographically handicapped countries." The southern border is 
of great significance for Macedonia's economic development since 
through it lies the shortest path to the sea. 
  The border with Bulgaria follows a meridional direction 
through its entire course with a slight angle bending eastward. 
From Belasica in the north to the Kopriva summit (1,315 meters), 
the border encompasses 165 kilometers. It follows a natural line 
almost entirely. However, it is not an ethnic boundary since 
Pirin Macedonia is separated from the rest of Macedonia. This 
border is, for the most part, the same as the one between Serbia 
and Bulgaria, which was determined by the Bucharest Peace 
[treaty] of 1913. As I have already said, the only change was 
the correction in the sector of the Strumica basin, which was 
originally awarded to Bulgaria, but awarded to the Kingdom of 
Yugoslavia in 1919. 
  The northern border, the one with the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia extends in an east-west direction and encompasses 231 
kilometers. In the east, it begins at the Kopriva summit, at the 
point where the three borders (of Macedonia, Bulgaria, and the 
FRY) meet, and ends in the west north of the Kopan entry to the 
Korab mountain where it forms a triangular intersection with 
Macedonia, Yugoslavia, and Albania. 
  The border is primarily a natural one and is drawn along the 
ridges of the bordering mountains. The border was demarcated 
immediately after World War II. It does not correspond with the 
earlier border with Serbia, but for the most part it is an 
ethnic boundary. Neither the initial line nor this border was 
clearly defined. From the meeting of the Antifascist Assembly of 
the People's Liberation of Macedonia in 1944 until the enactment 
of the first constitution of the Federal People's Republic of 
Yugoslavia in 1946, the cities of Kacanik, Presevo, Bujanovac, 
and Trgoviste were under the administrative jurisdiction of the 
presidium of the federal body. They are now in the territory of 
Serbia. Later, all these districts, along with the Prohor 
Pcinski monastery, were joined to Serbia. Here, we should also 
keep in mind the question about the Gora district in Sar Planina 
in which an Islamicized population which speaks Macedonian is 
living, but generally speaking, this question has not been 
examined up to now. 
  Along these four borders many curves and other linear 
irregularities exist; thus the variation in the state border is 
quite large. Each of the four borders has its own peculiarities 
and specific traits, and this factor contributes to the fact 
that there are significant differences. At the same time, our 
state borders are also very complicated, primarily from the 
defensive and strategic points of view. Because of this, it is 
necessary to have a detailed acquaintance with the borders. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59424 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer001__s94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-001-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Macedonia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Demarcation of Border With Serbia Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20165A Skopje PULS in Macedonian 26 Nov 93 p 20 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20165A </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje PULS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S.G. and N.C.: "Macedonia-Serbia: How We </F>
Demarcate Borders"] 
  [Text] In contrast to the borders with Albania, Greece, and 
Bulgaria (which were ratified by international treaties to which 
Macedonia was not a party), the determination of the border 
between Macedonia and Serbia took place in the postwar years, 
under conditions of "building socialism," when territorial 
problems between brotherly republics were of secondary 
importance, when all of us lived in an atmosphere of "the bright 
future," when "the United States and England would become 
proletarian countries," and all borders would be erased. 
  In contrast to "high-level policy," the demarcation of the 
boundaries on the ground had very practical consequences. The 
border between Serbia and Macedonia was contested in almost 
every segment on the basis of the usual criteria for determining 
a border (geographic proximitity of a region to the center, 
national affiliation of the inhabitants, the desire of 
inhabitants to belong to a particular district, the economic 
ties of a village to a particular center). The freshest issue 
in the memory of the Macedonian reader concerns the polemics 
over the Sveti Prohor Pcinjski monastery, which was on the 
territory of the People's Republic of Macedonia [NRM] according 
to maps made immediately after World War II but was later 
attached to Serbia (although the government of the NRM had a 
contrary view and on several instances sought reasons for the 
monastery to belong to Macedonia). 
  In 1946, on the initiative of the prime minister of the 
government of the People's Republic of Serbia, Blagoja Neskovic, 
the federal government directed an official note to the 
government of the People's Republic of Macedonia in which it 
offered its view of disputed territory in the Kumanovo-Skopje 
sector, the Kozjak-German sector, General Jankovic, the Sar 
cement plant in General Jankovic, the Sveti Prohor Pcinjski 
monastery, and other places. In response to this note, the 
government of the NRM requested the views of the district 
people's council in Skopje. The opinion of this council (dated 6 
September 1946) was that the local council in General Jankovic 
(together with an additional 11 villages) should be separated 
from Kosmet (Kacanik srez [district]) and should be attached to 
the NRM (the Djorce Petrov okolija [district], the Sveti Prohor 
Pcinjski monastery (just the monastery) should be separated from 
the NRS [People's Republic of Serbia] (Presev srez) and should 
be attached to the NRM (Kosjak okolija), and the village of 
Nerav and half of the village of German (Krivo Palanka okolija) 
should be separated from the NRM and should be joined to the 
NRS. In the explanation, it was said that the local council in 
General Jankovic (with the villages of General Jankovic, 
Seliste, Palivodenica, Rezanci, Goranci, Pustenik, Krvenik, 
Divci, Strinjak, Djurdjev Dol, and Mekjovci) was tied 
administratively to the Kocanik srez, but "such an 
administrative connection with Kocanik was a condition based on 
an established belief among the Shiptars [Albanians] from these 
villages (immediately after the Liberation) if they were 
attached to the NRM, that it would be more `difficult' for them, 
or that they might be `mistreated' by the Macedonians, and so 
forth. And now that they realize that there is nothing to fear, 
they have changed their minds about it and want to belong to the 
NRM." Apart from the psychological motives, the okrug 
[district] council, in its deposition, tried to find objective 
reasons as well: the economic proximity of the area to Skopje, 
the geographic gravitation to the NRM, the origins and residence 
of the workers in the mine and the Sar cement factory.... As far 
as the monastery of Sv. Prohor Pcinjski is concerned, among the 
reasons for it to belong to the NRM, it was mentioned that 
almost the entire property formerly belonging to the monastery 
was within the territory of the NRM, but the most important 
reason was its significance in the history of the Macedonian 
people. 
  The report of the presidium of the People's Government of 
Macedonia was almost identical. It was sent to the presidium of 
the government of the FNR [Federal People's Republic] of 
Yugoslavia, and was dated 12 September 1946 and signed by Vice 
President Ljupco Arsov. 
  Much has also been said about the statement of 19 November 
1952 by Boro Pekevski, the then director of the Institute for 
Statistics and Records, which was subordinate to the government 
of the NRM, concerning the manner in which the border between 
Macedonia and Serbia came into existence. According to Pekevski, 
Blagoja Neskovic insisted several times that the case of the Sar 
cement plant in General Jankovic should be re-examined (that 
plant was under the administrative jurisdiction of the 
government of the NRM). Accordingly, in December 1947, the 
secretary of the federal control commission, Lepa Perovic; Boro 
Pekevski; and the secretary of the Oblast [district] People's 
Council for Kosovo-Metohija, Djoko Pejakovic, visited the region 
and held discussions with the chairman and members of the MNO 
[Macedonian People's Council] in General Jankovic; with the 
director and members of the board of directors of the Sar cement 
plant, and with some of the workers and local inhabitants. The 
joint report to the federal control commission suggested that 
the territory of General Jankovic, with several additional 
villages, be part of the NRM and that the plant and so forth 
remain under the jurisdiction of Macedonia. The extent to which 
these suggestions were honored can be seen in the fact that, 
soon thereafter, the federal government decided that the plant 
should be removed [from the NRM's jurisdiction] and belong 
territorily to the Autonomous Kosovo-Metohija Oblast, that is, 
to Serbia. 
  The most typical case of demarcating the border, however, 
arose with the demand of the villages of Germna, Neeav, Ogut, 
Metezevo, and Podrikonj in the Kriva Palanka okolija to belong 
to Serbia. The initiative for this rearrangement came from the 
famous Stamenko Stosic, a prewar representative (who was elected 
in 1931, 1935, and 1938) and a representative in the people's 
assembly of the People's Republic of Serbia after the war. 
Probably because of his origins in these villages, Stosic 
divided the local population, convincing some people that the 
neighboring villages were Bulgarian, but that they were Serbian. 
The villagers were persuaded that if they opted for adhesion to 
the Pcinje srez (with its center in Trgoviste), they would be 
able to purchase leather sandals on the free market (and not by 
using ration coupons), that they would not pay excise taxes or 
fees for pastures, and so on. And one day, a free market for 
rubber sandals was organized in Trgoviste just for the 
inhabitants of German and Nerav, using their connections and 
funds. The results of this propaganda could be seen in the first 
postwar census in which the older members of a family identified 
themselves as Macedonians, while the younger ones declared 
themselves Serbs. 
  In January 1948, Stosic officially requested the adhesion of 
these villages to Serbia with the explanation that the local 
population spoke Serbian, wore Serbian clothes, and followed 
Serbian customs. Commissions were formed to examine this 
question, and the highest of these was the federal commission 
whose members included Lepa Perovic, Radovan Stijacic, Milovan 
Butanovic, and Boro Pekevski. According to the commission's 
report dated 16 March 1948, only the village of Nerav and part 
of the village of German gravitated more toward Trgoviste 
(before the war, Trgoviste was also within the Krivo Palanka 
okolija), but the language, customs, and dress in these villages 
were identical with those of other villages in the Krivo Palanka 
area. 
  Such examples, of course, are numerous, and even witnesses 
from that time acknowledge that the determination of the border 
was conducted mainly through psychological prescriptions, 
propaganda, and persuasion in some villages that the inhabitants 
would profit economically if their area were tied to the market 
in another region. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59425 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer002__s94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-002-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> INTER-EUROPEAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ambassador on Russian Interest in Central Europe </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20214A Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 5 Jan 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20214A </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CESKY DENIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Alexandr Lebedyev, Russian ambassador to the </F>
Czech Republic, by Libor C. Cerny; place and date not given: 
"Central and East Europe Is Not To Become a Sphere of Influence 
for Russia or Any Other Power"] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] 
  [Cerny] What do you think of the statement by Andrey 
Kozyrev, 
Russian minister of foreign affairs, who said that the countries 
of Central and East Europe may not become members of NATO 
without Russia? 
  [Lebedyev] Statements by Kozyrev, and not just by him, are 
being interpreted very loosely by the Czech press. This is not 
criticism--just a simple statement of fact. Two or three 
sentences taken out of context are used to create a simplified 
picture. In all of his statements, Kozyrev had emphasized that 
the Czech Republic and all the countries of East Europe have a 
right to enter any international structures they consider 
suitable for themselves. Moscow merely desires that, while 
making these decisions, those countries should bear in mind 
Moscow's viewpoint and its security interests. 
  [Cerny] Why does Moscow have this interest? 
  [Lebedyev] The Warsaw Pact has been dismantled, while NATO 
continues to exist and is preparing itself for a transformation. 
I have heard from my colleagues, ambassadors of other countries, 
that intensive work is in progress on this transformation. Yet, 
while one system has been dismantled and the other still exists, 
the concepts upon which NATO was founded were not abolished. 
  [Cerny] NATO is not an enemy. 
  [Lebedyev] The principal concept that postulated that the 
Soviet Union, whose successor state Russia is, was the principal 
enemy has not been called off by anyone, except in the political 
sense. True, on the political level, NATO has already stated 
that Russia is not the enemy. For our part, we have done the 
same; Russian leaders have stated that we do not view NATO as an 
enemy. However, all of this must be anchored in some kind of a 
system of new relations between NATO, Russia, and the countries 
of Central and East Europe. If that does not happen, the 
membership of the countries of Central and East Europe in NATO 
will cause Russia to feel threatened. Today it can be the Czech 
Republic and Slovakia, tomorrow perhaps Ukraine and the Baltic 
states. This perception of danger and instability, stemming 
primarily from our historical experiences, unfortunately has an 
impact on our internal situation. That is a very delicate aspect 
that must be kept in mind, and that is exactly what Kozyrev was 
talking about. 
  [Cerny] When will Russia make an effort to become a member 
of 
NATO? 
  [Lebedyev] As regards Russia's NATO membership, it is not 
being contemplated at the moment, but it is very important to 
establish guidelines suitably reflecting the partnership 
relations between NATO and Russia. Some kind of structuring is 
needed for this. 
  [Cerny] Partnership for Peace? 
  [Lebedyev] Russia is a member of the Council for North 
Atlantic Cooperation (NACC), as is the Czech Republic and other 
countries. Perhaps it would be possible through this 
organization to widen the concept of "Partnership for Peace," 
which will be concretized at the NATO summit in Brussels. Tn any 
case, Partnership for Peace provides an opportunity to give the 
relations between the individual countries a concrete shape. 
That would neutralize the growth of an incipient danger--namely, 
a security structure that includes the greater part of Europe 
and casts Russia off somewhere to the outskirts. Such an 
arrangement would even mean danger for the countries of Central 
and East Europe. During the past 200 years, Russia took part in 
almost all of the wars on the European Continent and also in all 
of the security structures that were formed at the end of those 
wars--for example, the Vienna Congress of 1815 comes to mind. It 
is necessary to emulate these structures also in the present, to 
make room for Russia in them, so that a feeling of isolation is 
not created inside Russia, so that Russia can take its place as 
a dependable participant and guarantor of the new security 
systems that are being formulated. 
  [Cerny] What are the main spheres of Russian interest inside 
the Czech Republic? 
  [Lebedyev] First, I would like to differentiate between the 
expression "sphere of influence" and "sphere of interest." I 
resolutely reject the assertion that Central and East Europe is 
to be the sphere of influence of Russia or any other world 
power. By the expression "sphere of influence," I understand a 
seizure of certain strong positions by one country inside 
another country. These positions then make it possible for the 
first country to directly influence matters of internal policy, 
foreign policy and other areas, inside the target country. For 
example, the fact that the Czech press devotes a lot of 
attention to events inside Russia shows that Russia is within 
the Czech Republic's sphere of interest. This is logical because 
events inside Russia may have a substantive impact on the 
development of the situation in your country. By the same token, 
the countries of Central and East Europe are within Russia's 
natural sphere of interest because Moscow is interested in 
maintaining a commercial partnership with these countries and, 
also important, in keeping the region stable. A threat to Russia 
could develop there. In such a context, we cannot view, for 
example, Honduras to be within a similar Russia's sphere of 
interest, while Germany and Austria, as well as the Czech 
Republic, are; this is caused by their geographical position in 
the center of Europe. 
  [Cerny] To keep stability in the region? 
  [Lebedyev] Central Europe also belongs to the sphere of 
interest of the United States, as stated by Washington. 
Stability of the region has great political and military 
importance also for the United States, and, in this sense, 
strategic interests of world powers are similar in respect to 
Central Europe and the entire European Continent. This fact must 
be the cornerstone of the partnership. 
  The principal Russian interest in the Czech Republic, in my 
view, is the establishment and development of economic 
cooperation. This will help, among other things, to solve the 
question of Russian indebtedness to the Czech Republic, which is 
very important. In the political field, it is very important for 
us to maintain normal relations of European standard with the 
Czech Republic. We also regard it as desirable to have 
cooperation between political parties of the democratic type. I 
see this as an important factor in maintaining an atmosphere of 
confidence. Such understanding of the situation and approach to 
it will, over time, weaken that certain "allergy" of some of our 
politicians toward NATO. 
  [Cerny] Do you mean to say that, in the vocabulary of 
Russian 
Government leaders and diplomats, there is no room for the 
expression "sphere of influence"? 
  [Lebedyev] I think that our politicians must first precisely 
formulate the concept. What I have stated here is merely my 
personal opinion. But I do know that the official Russian 
foreign-policy line does not contain this concept. Perhaps there 
are politicians, such as Zhirinovskiy, who do want to attempt to 
define the Russian "sphere of influence." But I would be the 
first to oppose such efforts." [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59426 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer002__s94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-002-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   General Mladic Says End of War Not in Sight </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20222C Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 4 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20222C </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "End of War Not in Sight"] </F>
  [Text] Bileca (TANJUG) -- In his Christmas and New Year's 
message, Major General Ratko Mladic, chief of staff of the army 
of the republic of Srpska, stated that the Srpska army and its 
personnel had achieved significant results defending the Serbian 
population and territories in this war which was imposed on them 
and threatened their well being and freedom. However, despite 
all the efforts made by the Serbian side to establish peace, the 
end of this war is not yet in sight. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59427 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer002__s94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-002-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman Claims Nobody Expects Bosnia To Survive </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P20222A Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 4 Jan 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20222A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Nobody Counts on the Survival of </F>
Bosnia"] 
  [Text] Zagreb (TANJUG) -- Croatian President Franjo Tudjman 
stated on Friday, in a conversation with Croatian 
Radio-Television journalists, that "nobody any longer counts on 
Bosnia and Herzegovina to survive as one country." 
  "Those powers in international politics which have decisive 
influence on the formation of international order believe that 
order on the territory of the former Yugoslavia can presently be 
established in contact with Serbia and Croatia as well as the 
other countries which came into being there," added Tudjman. 
  Tudjman pointed out that "Europe and the world have finally 
realized that the Muslims are not just a `victim'" but that they 
have turned against the Croats, and now "they carry out 
aggressive raids and threaten the very physical survival of the 
Croats." 
  When he was asked to evaluate the criticism emerging from 
the 
conservative ranks of the Croatian opposition regarding his 
dialogues with Slobodan Milosevic, the Croatian president said 
that even all of European and the world authorities have spoken 
with him and that "he is the only politician with authority in 
today's Serbia and the only one with whom to talk." 
  On the subject of Krajina, the Croatian president stressed 
that he is definitely determined to find a peaceful solution, 
that Knin and Glina counties should be given territorial 
autonomy and guarantees of civil and ethnic rights along with 
the right to be "completely included in the total economic and 
legal systems of Croatia." However, Tudjman noted that if this 
should prove to be unacceptable, Croatia would find "other 
means" to resolve the issue. 
  He was asked whether he would offer anything else to the 
Serbs, i.e., "whether he would again include them in the 
Constitution of the Republic of Croatia." In response, the 
Croatian president expressed his opinion that the Croatian 
Constitution is "on the level of the most progressive 
constitutions in the world," since it states that Croatia is a 
nationalistic state, but also the state of its citizens. 
  The Serbs are entitled to both cultural and territorial 
autonomy in the regions where they are in majority, but, as 
Tudjman sees it, "there is no need for any constitutional 
changes." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59428 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer002__s94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-002-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Assembly To Discuss War Profiteering </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU1001164494 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1400 GMT 10 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1001164494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpt" from interview with Vladimir Lukic, prime </F>
minister of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, by Momir 
Brkic; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Brkic] You mentioned the rule of law. What 
problems are you encountering? I am also referring to the 
complaints that we are not effectively fighting against war 
profiteering, not only in this region but also elsewhere. 
  [Lukic] Those who have not experienced a war cannot easily 
understand all the byproducts of the war. We certainly have 
things that people could hardly imagine in peace, let alone plan 
them. Of course, in addition to the people's great patriotism, 
the readiness of a large number of people, young and old, to 
invest everything in their country and their people, there is 
also a number of people who want to get rich through the war, to 
make a profit, to avoid their patriotic obligations. Things 
like that do exist. 
  However, I personally think that these people do not deserve 
the attention that was given to them in the press, in the media. 
I am convinced that there are fewer of them than alleged. On 
the other hand, it is in fact them who are spreading the 
stories, often about those who have nothing to do with war 
profiteering, simply because they want to enlarge the circle of 
such people and in this way shift the blame onto someone else. 
  I am convinced that they will be dealt with as soon as 
society organizes itself a bit better, as soon as there is more 
stable peace, or when peace is established. I would not pay too 
much attention to those people. However, we must continue 
preventing them and not allow them to carry out legal or any 
other work. What is important in my view is that good 
businessmen and all those who are carrying out business 
activities in a correct way, and who are indeed helping our 
struggle, should not be implicated in this. Therefore, war 
profiteers must be put on the agenda, but they should not be the 
main point of the agenda of our work today. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59429 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer002__s94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-002-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb, Croat `Haggling' Over Bosnia Criticized </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU0801180694 Ljubljana OSLOBODJENJE (European Edition) in 
Serbo-Croatian 31 Dec 93-6 Jan 94 p 5 </F>

<F P=103> AU0801180694 </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana OSLOBODJENJE (European Edition) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Manojlo Tomic: "Karadjordjevo in Geneva"] </F>
  [Text] After the latest peace negotiations in Geneva and 
Brussels over Bosnia-Herzegovina, anybody could see that 
diplomacy is, among other things, the art of "productive talk 
and no action." And so, after those talks, everyone could say 
that was grist to their mill. Milosevic and Tudjman will be 
convincing their subjects that they made a "decisive" step 
toward peace, offering one-third of the Bosnian territory to the 
Muslims. It is so easy to offer something which does not belong 
to you! The official Bosnia-Herzegovina leadership, on the other 
hand, could try and convince their people that things are 
nevertheless going their (our?) way, for regardless of Boban's 
repeated rejection, Tudjman agreed that, in the transition 
period, Mostar and Neum be under the EC and UN administration. 
Or, as one can (not) guess from reports of the director of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Television that "the talks with the Serbian 
side aim toward the final and essentially righteous fulfillment 
of the territorial demands of the Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation." 
  However, how can we believe all that? The validity of the 
"pivotal" agreement, as West European diplomats call it -- on 
the Christmas cease-fire -- could best be attested to by the 
soldiers and citizens of Sarajevo, especially by those at Zuca 
and at the foot of Trebevic. But let us not be ironical, which 
is a common trait of every living inhabitant of Sarajevo and 
Bosnia, and even of yours truly. Let us also put aside all 
those stories about great strategies, interest zones, moral 
dilemmas.... We would all like to know the answer to the 
question whether the said agreements in Geneva and Brussels made 
any step toward peace. Using the language of the futile 
European diplomacy, the answer is in the affirmative. Greater 
Serbian and greater Croatian hegemonists are on the way to 
definitely grant the right to the Muslims-Bosnjaks to one-third 
of the territory (the right to the entire Bosnia-Herzegovina 
territory belongs to the Bosnians and not to the Bosnjaks). 
They were not forced to do that by the EC, as one might think, 
but by the Bosnia- Herzegovina Army. They would have signed for 
peace between the Serbs and the Croats a long time ago, perhaps 
in Geneva, and would be praised as peacemakers, had they 
succeeded in dividing Bosnia on the ground. The 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army would not let them do that, not the EC. 
  The mystery about whether Tudjman and Milosevic reached an 
agreement on dividing Bosnia in Karadjordjevo has been all 
cleared up. Thanks to SKY's cameras, we saw Karadjordjevo in 
Geneva. Leaning over the map, Milosevic, assisted by Karadzic, 
was arranging the division of Bosnia together with Tudjman, 
Boban, and their other blind followers. The mystery is 
unraveled: Serbian and Croatian national leaders, deeply 
convinced that they fulfilled thousand-year-old yearning of 
their peoples, like common peasants haggling at the market, 
publicly established the bazaar around Bosnia, its villages and 
towns, which they never even heard of or visited, let alone felt 
for in their souls. That scene must haunt every normal Serb and 
Croat until the end of their existence, as a proof of the depths 
to which their nations have sunk. There is no bottom any more. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
