
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43161 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000004794001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-010--CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      Symposium Discusses Goals for China's Foreign Economic Relations </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
According     to research papers presented at a symposium on China's 
economic and trade relations, China's priorities in foreign trade 
are upgrading its export mix and "internationalizing" production 
enterprises.  Symposium participants tended to see  prospects for 
trade relations with the United States and Western countries as only 
fair, with Asia viewed as likely to become the focus of China's 
external economic development. 

   The November issue of XIANDAI GUOJI GUANXI, an international 
affairs journal affiliated with the well-respected China Institute 
of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), a research think 
tank, is devoted to papers presented at an October symposium 
sponsored by that institution on "China's Economy Opening to the 
Outside World."  The papers present current thinking on the full 
spectrum of China's economic and trade relations with the world by 
participants from government, press, academic, and commercial 
circles.  (The appendix to this Foreign Media Note lists the 
reported articles, authors, and affiliations represented at the 
symposium.) 

   All symposium articles dealing with further opening up China's 
economy to the world give top priority to upgrading China's export 
mix by shifting away from low-profit, labor-intensive products. 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences researcher Zhang Shouyi argues 
that a low-cost, skilled labor pool gives China a comparative 
advantage in "knowledge-intensive, high-tech products."  Other ideas 
for expanding high-profit exports by other authors include improving 
product quality, before and after sales service, and packaging. 
JINGJI RIBAO journalist He Ming stresses the importance of in- 
country marketing agents and products responsive to consumer demand 
when targeting markets in advanced countries.  Others at this 
symposium call for implementation of international standards and 
foreign managers in China's export enterprises to expand exports. 

   In reforming the foreign trade regime by "internationalizing" 
Chinese enterprises, state-run enterprises are in the best position 
to upgrade their exports, gain overseas market share, and become 
multinational corporations.  According to Wang Zhile of the Ministry 
of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation International Economic 
Cooperation Research Center,  "Of all the regions of the world, 
Asia, and especially East Asia, should be the key region, the target 
of first choice for internationalizing Chinese enterprises." 

   The image of Asia as China's stepping stone to the world economy 
is a common theme in many of the articles, but there is some 
ambivalence in the respective arguments supporting that view:  Asia 
is seen both as the region of greatest potential for China's 
outward-oriented economic growth and as its stiffest competitor.  In 
many cases Chinese exports are in direct competition with exports 
from other developing Asian economies.  Moreover, low-quality 
exports and lack of experience in international business dealings 
put Chinese companies at a disadvantage in this competition.  China 
is also see as in direct competition with ASEAN countries and 
Indochina for foreign investment. 

   Nonetheless, there appears to be general agreement that China 
must concentrate on Asia and Asian markets, both for their high 
growth potential in the 9O's and to counterbalance the increasing 
protectionism of Western countries.  With Asia, as with the world, 
China's strategy for economic development is to begin with sub- 
regional and bilateral relations and then move to multilateral and 
regional fora.  Huang Fanzhang of the State Planning Commission 
Economic Research Center explains this dynamic in terms of three 
triangles.  Huang postulates a small triangle (Mainland China- 
Taiwan-Hong Kong), a medium triangle (China-South Korea-Singapore 
and other ASEAN countries), and a large triangle (China-Japan-United 
States).  The larger triangles have the potential for economic 
competition and even conflict.  Huang predicts the large triangle of 
the Asia-Pacific will be the "main battlefield" in the U.S.-Japanese 
struggle for economic leadership.  Huang sees areas of concern in 
China's economic relations with both countries.  Japan doesn't want 
to see China become a competitor, but rather wants China to always 
"fly in formation" following Japan's lead.  According to Huang, the 
United States, on the other hand, is intent on imposing its 
political agenda on China. 

   Criticism of the United States along these lines is a frequent 
theme in the articles.  CICIR analyst Ke Juhan asserts that the 
United States is "politicizing" the economic relationship between 
the two countries.  Ke says that conditionality on MFN, U.S. 
economic reprisals based on "unwarranted accusations" of China's 
violation of the MTCR, U.S. anti-dumping duties against Chinese 
exports, and U.S. unilateral reduction of China's textile quotas 
have all "harmed the bilateral relationship."  Yan Xuetong, also of 
CICIR, agrees with Ke's contentions and further states, "Hereafter 
the United States will continue to use every pretext, including 
constant use of quota limitations and anti-dumping duties, to limit 
China's exports to the United States."  Ke Juhan urges the United 
States to put the relationship on a more "practical" footing, 
stating that President Clinton's recent "intentions, statements, and 
actions" are beginning to improve the economic relationship with 
China and predicting that as more U.S. companies become involved 
with China economically, they will "play an active role" in 
improving the bilateral relationship. 

   Among the articles on bilateral and regional economic relations, 
three on Russia and Europe by CICIR analysts stand out.  Wang Lijiu 
asserts that now is the time for China to consolidate economic 
relations with Russia.  However, according to Wang, both countries 
must work to formulate a unified and coordinated trade policy.  Wang 
also proposes setting up a Sino-Russian joint venture bank to 
resolve outstanding trade payment issues and calls for increased 
technology trade between the two countries.  In an article on 
economic relations with Eastern Europe, Qi Degang advocates using 
barter trade with cash-poor Eastern European countries to edge out 
Western competition for those markets.  Finally, Guan Shufen 
characterizes prospects for economic relations with Western European 
countries as "cautiously optimistic."  Sino-German economic 
relations will drive overall Sino-European economic development.  On 
the down side, however, Guan sees increasing European trade 
protectionism, use of anti-dumping measures to protect domestic 
industries, and problems in Sino-French and Sino-British bilateral 
relations. 

   APPENDIX 

   I. The Status Quo and Prospects of China's Economy Opening to the 
Outside World:  How To Meet Challenges and Open Up Ways Forward by 
Taking Opportunities 

   "An Outline of China Economy Going Out Overseas" by Yan Xuetong 
(CICIR) 

   "Briefing on the Strategy of China's Economy Opening to the 
Outside World" by Ji Chongwei (Deputy Director General, State 
Council Development Research Center) 

   "My Views on China's Economy Spreading to the World" by Zhang 
Shouyi (China Academy of Social Sciences Institute of Quantitative 
and Technical Economics) 

   "Some Major Turnarounds and Trends in China's Opening to the 
Outside World" by Tao Jian (CICIR) 

   "Some Thoughts on China's Economy Unfolding to the World" by Yu 
Xiaoqiu (CICIR) 

   "The Focus of the Internationalized Management of China's 
Enterprises Lies in the Asia-Pacific Region" by Wang Zhile (Ministry 
of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation International Economic 
Cooperation Research Center) 

   "How To Move China's Enterprises and Their Products Into the 
World" by He Ming (Economic Daily) 

   "New Steps Toward Overseas Markets by Capital Iron and Steel 
Corporation" by Cai Cun (Capital Iron and Steel Company 
Headquarters) 

   "Some Views on China's Cultural Enterprises Advancing to the 
World" by Zhang Shouying (Dadi News, Culture, and S and T 
Development Company Headquarters) 

   "Some Suggestions on How to Expand China's Service Export" by Liu 
Wenhui (National Defense University) 

   II. The International Economic Environment Faced When Opening to 
the Outside World: How To Be Favored Instead of Being Harmed in 
Expanding China's Bilateral and Multilateral Foreign Economic and 
Trade Relations 

   "The Impact of the Development of International Economy on 
China's Economy" by Zhou Caiyu (State Planning Commission Economic 
Research Center) 

   "International Financial Situations and Their Impact on China's 
Economy" by Zong Liang (Bank of China International Monetary and 
Financial Institute) 

   "The Pattern of Asia-Pacific Economy and China's Strategy" by 
Huang Fanzhang (State Planning Commission Economic Research Center) 

   "Brief Comment on Asia-Pacific Economy at the Turn of This and 
the Next Century" by Du Houwen (Chinese People's University) 

   "The Development of the Economic Rims in Asia-Pacific Sub-regions 
and China" by Fu Mengzi (CICIR) 

   "An Exploration of the UN's Administrative Model in Tumen Jiang 
Development Zone" by Xia Youfu and Huang Xueqi (University of 
International Business and Economics) 

   "The Revival of the Silk Road and the Cooperation Between China 
and Central Asia" by Gu Guanfu (CICIR) 

   "Sino-Japanese Economic Relations in the New International 
Situation" by Chen Zhuang (CICIR) 

   "Sino-U.S. Economic and Trade Relations: Features and Prospects" 
by Ke Juhan (CICIR) 

   "Some Thoughts and Suggestions Concerning Further Promotion of 
Sino-Russian Economic Cooperation" by Wang Lijiu (CICIR) 

   "The Trend of the Economic and Trade Relations Between China and 
East European Countries" by Qi Degang (CICIR) 

   "Outlook for Economic and Trade Cooperation Between China and 
Western Europe" by Guan Shufen (CICIR) 

   "Economic and Trade Relations Between Western Europe and China 
and Some Suggestions Concerned" by Chen Caogao (CICIR) 

   "Economic and Trade Relations Between China and Mideast 
Countries" by Yuan Qin (CICIR) 

   "Sino-Latin America Economic Relations: Status Quo, Problems and 
Prospects" by Xu Shicheng (Chinese Academy of Social Sciences 
Institute of Latin American Studies) 

   (AUTHOR: FORNARO.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ECONOMIC BRANCH AT (703) 733-6404) 
EAG/ 26JAN94/ECONF/CD/SM 27/1458Z JAN 94 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43162 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000004894001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-011--SAUDI-PLO 
<H3> <TI>      SAUDI ARABIA: IMPROVING RELATIONS WITH THE PLO </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Summary:      The meeting between Saudi King Fahd and PLO Chairman 
Yasir 'Arafat on 24 January (reported by Saudi radio) marked the 
culmination of a steady improvement in Saudi-PLO relations in recent 
weeks.  Signs of impending rapprochement were visible as early as 
late December, when the expatriate publication AL-MAJALLAH 
prominently displayed a picture of PLO Chairman 'Arafat warmly 
greeting the Saudi Ambassador to London.  Other evidence of 
improving relations, including the recent exchanges of letters and 
PLO officials' visits to the kingdom, were chronicled in an early 
January article in the expatriate daily AL-HAYAH. 

   'Arafat Meets Saudi Ambassador in London 

   Initial evidence of Saudi-PLO rapprochement appeared in the 26 
December issue of AL-MAJALLAH, a London Arabic-language weekly 
magazine, which prominently displayed at the top of its Society page 
a picture of Yasir 'Arafat warmly greeting and shaking hands with 
Saudi Ambassador to London Gazzi al-Qusayby during the PLO 
chairman's state visit to Britain earlier that month. 

   AL-HAYAH Notes Improving Saudi-PLO Relations 

   The London-based and Saudi-owned daily AL-HAYAH published an 
article by Sulayman Nasr on 7 January that assessed improvements in 
Saudi-PLO relations in recent weeks.  Nasr emphasized several signs 
of increasingly cordial relations:  the first public exchange of 
letters since the onset of the Gulf War between Saudi King Fahd and 
PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, and recent visits by several Fatah 
Central Committee members and Faysal al-Husayni, chief Palestinian 
negotiator in the peace talks. 

   Exchange of Letters 

   According to the article, 'Arafat's letter to King Fahd expressed 
"congratulations on the opening of the Consultative Council," the 
Majlis al-Shura, and "deep gratitude for the continuous brotherly 
support (he) extended to the Palestinian people." 

   King Fahd reportedly replied in a cable published by the Saudi 
Press Agency on 6 January:  "With my appreciation for what you, your 
dear people, and your brothers expressed, I ask God Almighty for all 
to succeed in benefitting our Arab and Islamic nation and to attain 
its virtuous objectives, in the forefront of which are the hopes and 
the objectives of the Palestinian people at this important stage of 
its history, as it builds its institutions as a foundation for 
establishing an independent state with Jerusalem as its capital, God 
willing."  Nasr stressed that the publication of the exchange 
between King Fahd and 'Arafat was "the first time" that Saudi media 
had published a cable from the Saudi monarch to 'Arafat since the 
outbreak of the Gulf crisis and the ensuing deterioration of Saudi- 
PLO relations. 
   Nasr further noted that 'Arafat had previously sent King Fahd 
several cables and congratulatory letters which had elicited no 
published Saudi response.  Nasr speculated that the failure to 
respond had been due to Saudi "reservations about dealing with the 
Palestinian president since the outbreak of the Gulf crisis," noting 
specifically the repeated Saudi rejection of "rapprochement with 
'Arafat," despite his attempts to visit Saudi Arabia. 

   Fatah Members Visit the Kingdom 

   In addition to the exchange of messages, Nasr reported that a 
Palestinian delegation from the Fatah Central Committee visited 
Saudi Arabia to attend the funeral of the Palestinian ambassador to 
Riyadh, Subhi Abu-Karsh (Abu al-Mundhir), who was buried in al- 
Madinah on 5 January.  The delegation consisted of Salim Za'nun, 
vice president of the Palestine National Council, 'Abbas Zaki, Nasr 
Yusuf, and Intisar al-Wazir (Umm Jihad), as well as a number of 
other officials.  According to the author, the delegation visited 
the kingdom for "humanitarian reasons" and did not meet with any 
Saudi officials.  However, Nasr observed that "this is the first 
time this many Fatah officials have visited Saudi Arabia" since the 
Gulf crisis. 

   Visit by Faysal al-Husayni 

   Nasr also underscored the importance of the month-long visit of 
Palestinian leader Faysal al-Husayni, "one of the most prominent 
officials from inside Palestine."  According to Nasr, al-Husayni's 
visit was limited "to bringing the Saudis up-to-date" on 
developments in the occupied territories, in particular those 
concerning Jerusalem, "which holds special value for Saudi Arabia." 
While there, however, al-Husayni held a private meeting with "a 
high-ranking Saudi official," in addition to his "official meeting" 
with Foreign Minister Prince Sa'ud al-Faysal on 26 December.  The 
journalist speculated that al-Husayni "no doubt" discussed with the 
Saudis political matters related to the Palestinians, including the 
roadblocks facing the implementation of the PLO-Israel Declaration 
of Principles.  The article concluded by stating that al-Husayni 
conveyed his "strong satisfaction" with his informal meetings with 
Saudi officials and with their views regarding "the Palestinian 
issue, its latest developments, the Saudi approach to this issue, 
and the continuous Saudi support for the Palestinian people, 
especially those who are under occupation." 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, PERSIAN GULF/ 
SOUTH ASIA BRANCH AT (703)  733-6518) 
ENEAG/27 Jan/POLCHF/NEASA Division/SM 27/1510Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43163 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000005094001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--WEST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 94-04--WEST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 4, 27 
January 1994 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group featuring brief summaries of 
foreign media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most 
recent sources available to FBIS. 

   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Lat in America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 

   Europe Economic Review 

   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

   FEATURE:  Italy--Unemployment Benefits Package Passed 

   CANADA 

   New Central Bank Governor Takes Over; Commentary on Trade 
Minister McLaren 

   FRANCE 

   USTR Kantor 'Threatens' EU Audiovisual Policy; China-U.S. Textile 
Accord Impact Discussed; Bull Plan 'Irritates' EU Commission; INSEE 
on Privatization Impact on Employment; Private Yard To Build Navy 
Ships 

   GERMANY 

   Commentator Sees Recovery Producing Crisis; Telekom Starts Fiber 
Optic Link With East Europe; Hesse Creates Technology Innovation 
Foundation 

   ITALY 

   3 Million New jobs Needed by 2000 

   SWEDEN 

   Institute Says Future Looking Brighter 

   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   France 

   FEATURE 

   Italy: Unemployment Benefits Package Passed 

   An article in IL MESSAGGERO reports that on 7 January the Council 
of Ministers approved the 4.2-trillion-lire unemployment bill 
sponsored by Labor Minister Gino Giugni, which is designed to bring 
temporary relief to the growing ranks of the  unemployed.  Although 
the package calls for government expenditures of 1.6 trillion lire 
for 1994 and 1.3 trillion lire each for 1995 and 1996, Giugni said 
that for the present, he can only guarantee the funds for 1994. 
However, according to an article in LA REPUBBLICA, the labor unions 
are "lukewarm" to the government's measures.  Natale Forlani, 
secretary of the Italian Confederation of Trade Unions (CISL), said 
that although they contribute to solving some of the unemployment 
problems, the measures are far from meeting the need to increase 
investment and provide adequate income to workers affected by the 
industrial crisis.  The LA REPUBBLICA article details the following 
provisions of the bill: 

   * "Mobility status" Aid--Supplemental unemployment benefits that 
kick in after the regular, 36-month unemployment benefits run out 
and which are intended to assist unemployed workers in the interim 
between receiving unemployment benefits and pensions, will be 
extended to seven years.  Participation in this "mobility" program 
will be broadened to include the clothing, textile, and building 
industries.  It will also be extended to Fiat's Alfa plant in Arese, 
previously excluded because it was not classed as a company in 
industrial decline. 

   * Unemployment Compensation--The benefit will be raised from 25 
to 30 percent of the salary of the last year of employment and will 
be gradually raised to 40 percent.  The 5 percent raise will be 
accomplished in 1994 in two installments. 

   The IL MESSAGERO article adds details of the following 
provisions: 

   * Unemployment Insurance (Cassa Integrazione)--This benefit will 
be extended to small companies with 15 to 50 employees.  Benefits 
will be increased to 1.5 million lire monthly for employees with 
salaries over 32 million lire per year.  Companies such as Fiat will 
be allowed to use both the unemployment insurance program and 
private company benefits, called "solidarity contracts," which had 
been prohibited by law. 

   * Research and Development--Some 40-50 billion lire have been 
allocated for R&amp;D to boost hiring in technical fields and to improve 

products in order to become more competitive. 

   * Reduced Work Week--Contributions to the unemployment fund will 
be reduced from 0.45 percent to 0.20 percent for those companies 
that adopt flexible or reduced work weeks. (AB)  (Rome IL MESSAGGERO 
in Italian 8 Jan 94 p 12; Rome LA REPUBBLICA in Italian 8 Jan 94 p 
37) 

   CANADA 

   NEW CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR TAKES OVER--On 1 February, Gordon 
Thiessen, currently holding the second position at the Bank of 
Canada, will replace Bank Governor John Crow.  Commenting on this 
appointment, which was made by new Finance Minister Paul Martin in 
December, LE DEVOIR deputy editor Jean-Robert Sansfacon writes that 
monetary policy may change in the long term but not in the short 
term.  The new Liberal government believes it is possible to 
navigate between price stability and job creation.  Sansfacon argues 
that Martin "is perfectly right" to maintain the goal of keeping 
inflation under 3 percent for the next five years.  At the same 
time, however, "he must not forget another objective, more 
fundamental than price stability: employment."  Sansfacon concludes 
by cautioning Martin that if maintaining inflation below 3 percent 
forces him to raise interest rates to the point of harming 
employment, he should remember that the Conservatives lost the 
October 1993 election over this issue. 

   Commenting on the Thiessen appointment in LE SOLEIL, editor 
Raymond Giroux points out that Martin "had no real choice" but to 
replace Crow "if he wanted to give Canadians the image of a really 
new and credible government."  Although Martin claims "the Bank of 
Canada will not change its monetary policy," Giroux "is willing to 
wager" that the new governor will allow inflation to rise a few 
tenths of a percent during the next several months.  After all, he 
adds, "no economy can really expand without an inflationary push." 
(SK)  (Montreal LE DEVOIR in French 23 Dec 93 p A1) (Quebec LE 
SOLEIL in French 23 Dec 93 p A-8) 

   COMMENTARY ON TRADE MINISTER MCLAREN--In his 11 January column, 
Giles Gherson, national political columnist for GLOBE AND MAIL, 
notes the "hyperactive internationalism" of Trade Minister Roy 
McLaren since assuming office two months ago.  During this time he 
concluded the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 
participated in the completion of the Uruguay Round, traveled to 
Chile to assess the chances for enlarging NAFTA, and prepared for 
next month's visit by his South Korean counterpart with whom McLaren 
wants to negotiate a bilateral Canada-South Korea trade agreement. 
In Gherson's view, the reason behind this "frenetic activism" is the 
"ambitious" minister's desire to prevent Canada from losing trade 
opportunities before a new "super dynamic" World Trade Organization 
(WTO) is in place.  McLaren is quoted as saying that the WTO 
"embodies the realization that trade and investment are global 
activities--and that's new and important."  Furthermore, McLaren 
speculated that as the WTO "is built up and finds its feet," it may 
overtake existing regional trading arrangements.  (SK)  (Toronto THE 
GLOBE AND MAIL in English 11 Jan 94 p A16) 

   FRANCE 

   USTR KANTOR 'THREATENS' EU AUDIOVISUAL POLICY--According to a 
commentary in LE FIGARO, the "threats" by U.S.Trade Representative 
Mickey Kantor to apply trade sanctions against the EU in order to 
open the EU audiovisual market to U.S. products is "proof" that the 
United States wants to stop the EU from revising its audiovisual 
legislation.  A further sign of U.S. intentions was the 11 January 
meeting which brought together two European deputies with Frank 
Tonini--a representative of U.S. film producers' chief Jack Valenti- 
-and John Newbeggin.  Newbeggin is an assistant to David Putnam, 
British film producer and a member of the EU's taskforce on its 
planned audiovisual "green book."  The article contends that this 
"sudden interest" by the United States in European politics is 
taking place at the same time the French Government is lobbying its 
European Union (EU) partners to extend the EU broadcast quota system 
and industry subsidies, and to transfer the legal responsibility for 
TV broadcasting decisions from the broadcasting country to the 
receiving country.  The commentary notes that in shifting legal 
responsibility to the receiving country, such stations as Ted 
Turner's TNT would be inhibited from "inundating" Europe with U.S. 
broadcasts from Britain and U.S. broadcast freedom would be 
affected.  (DiI)  (Paris LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement in French 
15-16 Jan 94 p VIII) 

   CHINA-U.S. TEXTILE ACCORD IMPACT DISCUSSED--The textile accord 
signed in Beijing between the United States and China limiting the 
growth of Chinese exports to the United States may adversely affect 
the European Union (EU), according to an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES.  The ability of the United States--China's largest 
textile market--to stem the "flood" of Chinese textiles entering 
that country is a "small tour de force" for President Bill Clinton's 
administration which used to advantage the "sensitive" issue of 
China's diverting textile trade through third countries to conclude 
the accord.  The bilateral agreement will allow the United States to 
"impose a new balance" with the Chinese but may also allow it to 
"play the NAFTA card," argues Weil Besancon President Denis Weil. 
"Limiting Chinese textile export growth will allow the United States 
to favor trade relations with Mexico, where wage costs are 
competitive in textile production," Weil adds. 

   While the United States will profit from this agreement, Europe 
may not.  The EU is China's second largest textile market and EU 
industrialists fear the flow of Chinese textiles into the EU will 
accelerate as it diminishes toward the United States.  Such an 
increase would aggravate the trade balance between China and the EU. 
In 1992, the EU had a 29 billion franc (Fr) trade deficit in 
textiles with China; France alone had a deficit of Fr3.2 billion. 
The article also claims the difference in tariffs between the EU and 
China is "flagrant," with the EU tariff at 12 percent on imports 
from China and Chinese tariffs 100 percent on imports from the EU. 
The EU does not yet have the technical means to control its borders 
nor viable statistics to measure the impact of any increase in 
textile imports, according to Thierry Noblot of the Textile 
Industries Union.   (DiI) (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 20 
Jan 94 p 7) 

   BULL PLAN 'IRRITATES' EU COMMISSION--The French Government's 
delay in communicating its plans to restructure the government- 
controlled Bull computer company "greatly irritates" the EU 
Commission, according to an article in LES ECHOS.  Furthermore, a 
report in LE FIGARO claims the Commission could block the 
government's planned Fr2.5-billion capital increase for Bull because 
of insufficient information about the deal.  The LES ECHOS article 
cites EU Competition Commissioner Karl Van Miert in an interview 
given to the Paris daily LE MONDE as stating that French plans are 
"completely illegal."  Van Miert added, "The French Government 
promised us a restructuring plan for months but nothing has come of 
it.  Meanwhile, competitors in other member states complain.  It has 
put the Commission in an impossible situation.  It can not condone 
more (French Government capital increase) payments (to Bull) and if 
this happens, there should be a hearing at the European Court of 
Justice." 

   Additionally, LES ECHOS reports that the Commission, which claims 
it has only received an "overview" of French Government plans, is 
still reviewing the Fr4 billion that the government paid to Bull in 
1992 as a capital increase and the Fr2.5 billion more supplied by 
the government and co-shareholder France Telecom in February 1993. 
In December 1993, the government supplied Bull with a new tranche of 
Fr4 billion.  "With the new payments forecast for this year, the 
total aid package could reach Fr15 billion," Van Miert claimed, 
noting the case of Air France, which the French Government tried to 
supply with Fr7 billion after having previously given the airline 
Fr1.5 billion.  (DiI)  (Paris LES ECHOS in French 10 Jan 94 p 10; 
Paris LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement 21 Jan 94 p I) 

   INSEE ON PRIVATIZATION IMPACT ON EMPLOYMENT--If the French 
Government completes its plans to sell off 21 state-owned companies, 
as envisaged in a law passed in 1992, it would affect 668,000 
employees whose jobs would be transferred to the private sector, 
according to the National Institute for Statistics and Economic 
Research (INSEE).  If foreign subsidiaries of these 21 companies are 
taken into consideration, 1,760 companies would be involved in the 
privatization effort which would bring the total number of employees 
affected to 1 million.  If the program is completed, France's public 
sector will be reduced by a third. 

   INSEE reports that at the end of 1992, the government controlled 
1,750 companies and 1.74 million workers--the largest public sector 
in Europe.  In the manufacturing industries, 9 percent of the work 
force would be involved if the privatizations are completed.  In the 
financial industry, the share of government employees will go from 
32 percent to less than 5 percent.  In the future, three quarters of 
government employees will be concentrated in seven large companies 
with a monopolistic character: electricity, gas, and coal companies 
EDF, GDF, and CDF respectively; railroad company SNCF; metro company 
RATP; the Post; and telecommunications company France Telecom. 
INSEE notes that aside from privatizations, layoffs in the public 
sector have affected 43,000 workers in 1992, or 2.4 percent of the 
work force. (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 11 Jan 94 p 16) 

   PRIVATE YARD TO BUILD NAVY SHIPS--The French Navy will soon ask 
the French Government to order two "assault" ships--new models 
called Nimis (interarmy ships for support missions)--from a civilian 
shipyard an article in LIBERATION claims.  This choice is 
revolutionary because using the private company, the Chantiers de 
l'Atlantique in Saint Nazaire, defies the tradition of constructing 
Navy ships at the government's Department of Naval Construction 
(DCN) facility in Brest.  The DCN's naval yard belongs to the 
Defense Ministry and specializes in research and construction of the 
country's most "important" military ships, employing more than 6,500 
engineers, technicians, and workers.  It had proposed a new type of 
ship for the Navy's needs, the BIP, which was to cost around Fr1.5 
billion.   However, the head of Chantiers de l'Atlantique, Alain 
Grill, offered to build two Nimis for the same price. 

   It will be some time before the government confirms the Navy's 
choice.  It is clear, the article notes, that a "serious naval 
battle" will erupt in the months ahead between these two shipyards. 
The stakes are big since, in addition to a 9-percent subsidy from 
the Ministry of Industry and advanced payments for the equipment, 
they entail in large part the future of the DCN naval yard, which 
will soon run out of new construction orders and if none are 
forthcoming will have to rely on its maintenance contracts to 
survive.  According to the article, the cost of the Nimis was not 
the only factor in the Navy's choice, however.  Military studies 
have all come to the same conclusion that the Nimis, which are not 
built to withstand heavy attack, are what the Navy needs to perform 
"showing the flag" duties rather than the BIP's, more suited for 
warfare.  While the DCN has stated that it is open to adopting new 
forms of manufacturing, it concluded, "if the most complex system 
needed on a ship is air conditioning, this is not our line of work." 
(DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 22, 23 Jan 94 pp 5-6) 

   GERMANY 

   COMMENTATOR SEES RECOVERY PRODUCING CRISIS--Commentator Helmut 
Maier-Mannhart believes that ongoing cost-cutting efforts may enable 
German industry to recover international markets but worries that 
this same development may increase unemployment, leading to a social 
and financial crisis.  Writing in the 14 January Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE 
ZEITUNG, Maier-Mannhart concurs with Baden-Wuerttemberg Economics 
Minister Dieter Spoeri's thesis that German industry's recent 
restructuring efforts will yield a great increase in productivity, 
ultimately yielding substantial improvements in Germany's global 
competitiveness.  As an example of this development, Maier-Mannhart 
points to Volkswagen, where Chairman Ferdinand Piech has managed to 
make his company operate profitably at just 90 percent of capacity, 
rather than the 100 percent previously required.  Maier-Mannhart 
points out, however, that this trend toward "lean production" also 
has a downside:  increased productivity means it takes fewer people 
to turn out the same quantity of a particular product.  On a large 
scale, this means a higher unemployment rate and greater demands on 
public resources to support those thrown out of work.  The expected 
"Renaissance of industry," the author concludes, may thus coincide 
with "a social crisis" and a "state of emergency" in public 
finances.  Maier-Mannhart sees few efforts to come to terms with 
this threat and notes that, in any case, Germany is incapable of 
undertaking the necessary fundamental structural change in a year 
punctuated by so many elections. (RH)  (Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG 
in German 14 Jan 93 p 23) 

   TELEKOM STARTS FIBER OPTIC LINK WITH EAST EUROPE--On 13 January, 
Deutsche Telekom began operating the first section of the Trans 
Europe Line (TEL), a fiber optic network linking Germany and East 
Europe.   According to a Telekom spokesperson, plans call for TEL 
eventually to grow to 14,000 kilometers, a goal which will require 
participating utility companies to invest about 700 million German 
marks (DM).  The initial section, which is about 3,700 kilometers 
long, runs from Frankfurt to Warsaw, Prague, Bratislava, and 
Budapest in the north, with a southern spur extending to Austria, 
Slovenia, and Croatia.  A subsequent phase of the project would 
expand the network to include Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Romania, 
Bulgaria, and Moldova.  Eventual connections to Moscow and Helsinki 
are also envisioned. (RH)  (Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 14 
Jan 94 p 24) 

   HESSE CREATES TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION FOUNDATION--The Land 
Government of Hesse has decided to create a Hessian Technology 
Foundation to promote industrial innovation.  According to Hessian 
Economics Minister Welteke, the foundation is a response to the 
"crisis of innovation" in the economy, the country's lagging 
international competitiveness, and the failure of industry to 
exploit new areas of technology.  According to its constitution, 
which was coordinated with representatives of business, labor, and 
academia, the foundation will work primarily with small businesses. 
The Land of Hesse will provide the foundation with starter capital 
of DM10 million, which is expected to yield DM600,O00 to DM700,0O0 
annually for ongoing operations.  The Hessian Land Development and 
Trust Company, an agency of the Land Government, will manage the 
foundation, freeing up resources which would otherwise be absorbed 
by administrative costs. (RH)  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER 
ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG in German 12 Jan 94 p 5) 

   ITALY 

   3 MILLION NEW JOBS NEEDED BY 2000--On 12 January Labor Minister 
Gino Giugni presented a white paper on employment stating that 3 
million new jobs must be created by the year 2000 to meet current 
and future employment needs.  Giugni claimed that while such a 
statement can be considered "provocative" given that 550,000 jobs 
were lost in 1993 and the ranks of the unemployed grew by 350,000, 
it is "exactly what Italy needs."  This is the case, he added, 
because Italy has high labor costs compared with other 
industrialized countries.  Giugni admitted that creating that many 
new jobs is a "desperate undertaking" and although Italy's GDP is 
expected to increase 3 percent per year during this time, 
realistically only 600,000 jobs can be expected to be created. 
Giugni suggests attacking the problem by providing better education 
and increasing flexibility in the labor market.  He claims that the 
market needs an additional 250,000 high school graduates and 110,000 
university graduates yearly to increase the education level of 
future workers, which is currently among the lowest in Europe.  As 
for flexibility, he suggests that part time work should be 
encouraged, along with employment mobility within industries and 
geographic areas, and that measures be taken to expose the 
underground economy where "millions of the employed are hiding." 
(AB)  (Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 13 Jan p 19) 

   SWEDEN 

   INSTITUTE SAYS FUTURE LOOKING BRIGHTER--According to the latest 
report from the Konjunktur Institut, new industrial orders are 
picking up for the first time in four years, and Swedish industry 
seems to be coming out of the recession.  The 1993 results were 
particularly impressive in the saw mill industry, which has begun to 
reach full capacity.  The construction industry, still suffering 
from decreasing demand, is lagging behind.  Production is responding 
only slowly to increased orders but is expected to pick up in 1994. 
Some industries, especially lumber and electronics, will begin 
hiring additional workers in the first quarter of this year. (WS) 
(Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 12 Jan 94 p C1) 

   ECONOMIC BRIEF 

   France 

   -Telecommunications company Alcatel has announced two new joint 
ventures in China to produce electromagnetic, cable transmission 
equipment; respectively Alcatel of Beijing Transmission Systems, 
Alcatel of Chegdu Communication Systems. . .companies to be equally 
owned by China's Post and Telegraph Ministry, Alcatel China with 
targeted market estimated to be $1 billion over next five years. (LE 
FIGARO 21 Jan 94 p I) 

   Anilla B. (703-733-6285), Robert H. (703-733-6504), Dian I. (703- 
733-6286), Susanne K. (703-733-6285), and Wendy S. (703-733-6506) 
contributed to this Foreign Media Survey. 
ELAG/27 JAN/ECONF/WED/SM 27/1741Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43164 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000005194001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-012--CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      SPENDING SPREE OF "NEWLY RICH" REFLECTS INCOME DISPARITY, SOCIAL 
PROBLEMS </TI></H3>



</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Recent     Hong Kong and PRC media reporting have contrasted the 
excessive spending habits of newly wealthy individuals on food, 
clothing, entertainment, or expensive private schools, with the 
continuing struggle of people in the poor, remote areas to provide 
for their basic needs.  The lavish life style of the rich appears to 
have contributed to social uneasiness and discontent. 

   An article in the 15 November issue of the Hong Kong monthly TANG 
TAI (CONTEMPORARY) reports that some of the "upstarts" in Shanghai 
show off their wealth by purchasing expensive clothes and other 
things.  Examples cited include a boutique store owner who sold 60 
pieces of fur and leather clothing, ranging in cost from $138 to 
$1,150, in less than a month, a jewelry store which sold a diamond 
ring for over $3,448, and an entrepreneur who had made a fortune in 
the stock market who spent $11,500 on his wedding banquet.  Health 
clubs and golfing have reportedly become popular in the past few 
years with international golf club membership fees rising from 
$20,000 in 1989 to $59,000 in 1992.  Pets have also become a new 
status symbol with a pair of Pekinese recently being sold for 
$7,356, according to the article.  An article in the 18 September 
1993 issue of the Hong Kong monthly NAN PEI CHI (NORTH AND SOUTH 
POLES) reports that a "Dakuan" (nickname for the newly rich people) 
paid $5,747 to a singer for a one-song performance. 

   Luxurious private schools have emerged in the past year as part 
of the spending trend for the rich.  According to a 15 October TANG 
TAI article, nearly 100 "aristocratic schools" were established in 
the past year.  They have swanky offices, modern electronic 
classrooms, libraries with rich collections, indoor and outdoor 
gyms, swimming pools, tennis courts, and music halls.  Teachers' 
salaries reportedly range from $70 to $150 per month.  One example 
of such schools is Beijing Jinghua Elementary School which 
reportedly charges a tuition of over $115 per month per student, 
plus a one-time entrance fee of $3,450. 

   While a small number of teachers enjoy a comfortable income, most 
teachers in public schools have been struggling to make ends meet. 
According to an article in the 8 October issue of Hong Kong PAIHSING 
HSINWEN CHOUAAN (PAIHSING NEWSWEEK), a teacher's salary in the 
countryside averages only $11.50-23 per month.  Even that amount is 
not guaranteed, because many local governments are behind in paying 
their teachers, forcing them to take a second job to support 
themselves.  Beijing GONGREN RIBAO on 29 September cites a teacher 
in a remote mountain area who had to commute a long distance to 
teach two or three different grades of students, and work over 10 
hours a day just to earn 250 jin (=125 kilogram) of potatoes a 
semester which he later sold for $3. 

   The Chinese press notes that the gap between the rich and the 
poor has become so great that it may negatively affect social 
stability.  (Beijing JINGJI RIBAO of 23 September reports some 80 
million people in China are still below the poverty line.) 
According to an article in the 23 August issue of the Beijing 
monthly ZHONGGUO JINGJI TIZHI GAIGE (CHINA'S ECONOMIC STRUCTURE 
REFORM), published by the State Commission for Restructuring the 
Economy, the "wantonly extravagant" life style of a small number of 
people who have used legal or illegal means to gain a windfall has 
"polluted" society, causing strong public resentment.  The paper 
notes that some people have spent $40,230 for a table for 10 at a 
restaurant, or $46,000 for a rare breed of fish, while others go 
gambling, use drugs, or engage prostitutes.  The crime rate has 
reportedly increased and public order has steadily deteriorated. 
According to a 15 December TANG TAI article, from January to June, 
serious criminal cases in Shanghai increased 38.4 percent compared 
to the same period in 1992.  Embezzlement, murder, rape, robbery, 
drug peddling, and prostitution have increasingly been on the rise, 
the article said. 

   (AUTHOR: CHINN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
POL/MIL BRANCH AT (703) 733-6406 
EAG/27JAN/ECONF/CD/SM 27/1758Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43165 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000005294001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-27JAN94-ISRAEL 
<H3> <TI>      Rabin Still Skeptical of al-Asad's Geneva Statement </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
While     reiterating his desire for a negotiated settlement with 
Syria, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin continues to evince 
skepticism that Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad's statement 
following his meeting with President Clinton in Geneva on 16 
January signals an easing of Syria's position on a peace 
agreement with Israel.  In a statement broadcast by Israel's Qol 
Yisra'el radio on 24 January, Rabin said that 1994 "will decide 
which direction developments take in the longer run--especially 
with Syria," specifically, "whether there will be peace or 
deadlock and tension."  While the radio quoted Rabin as saying 
that "circumstances give peace a chance," it also reported that 
he told the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee that 
Syria's terms for an agreement with Israel had not changed "one 
iota." 

   In a speech in Tel Aviv on 19 January, Rabin similarly declared 
that Syria had not eased it conditions for peace enough to 
satisfy Israel.  While stressing that he believed his government 
has a mandate to negotiate a "territorial compromise" with Syria, 
Rabin added that he "will make absolutely every possible effort" 
to avoid "the price we paid for peace with Egypt," an allusion to 
Syria's demand for full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan 
Heights.  Moreover, he added that he has still "not received any 
definite sign that Syria accepts our definition of peace" and 
that Israel is "far from accepting the full and painful price 
[Syria] is demanding in exchange for peace" (IDF radio). 

   The Israeli Government's pledge on 17 January that an agreement 
with Syria involving significant territorial concessions would be 
submitted to a national referendum (IDF radio) also appeared 
intended in part to signal that Israel has not yet received 
sufficient assurances of Syrian good intentions.  In a statement 
broadcast by Qol Yisra'el on the 18th, Rabin acknowledged that a 
settlement with Syria will require "a painful price from us, 
perhaps even more painful than the Israeli public expects," and 
reportedly added that in such an event it would be necessary to 
"ask the public whether it is willing to pay the price."  He was 
noticeably reserved in commenting on al-Asad's statement in 
Geneva, saying that he "expected more" but is "willing to settle 
for what was publicly said and with what we were briefed on [by 
U.S. officials]" for the sake of "continuing the negotiations." 

(AUTHOR:  MORTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/CL 28/0031Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43166 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000004994001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   28 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSP 94-02--EAST ASIA 
<H3> <TI>      PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC REVIEW -- 26 JANUARY 1994 </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
JAPAN:     Economic Trends -- FEATURE: Report Assesses Consumer 
Impact of Government Regulations;  MOF Makes It Easier for Consumers 
To Monitor Prices of Imported Goods 

   Environmental Issues: STA To Begin Underwater Cable Project To 
Track Seismic Activity; KEPCO, TEPCO To Provide Environmental Know- 
how To India 

   Financial Issues: FEATURE: Japanese Banks Have 'Asia Fever'; 
FEATURE: Housing Lenders' Delinquencies Threaten Financial System 

   Foreign Trade and Investment:  CHINA:  Secom Forms Security 
Services Joint Venture in Dalian 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Police Raid Firms Suspected of Illegal 
Exports 

   Machine Tools/Robotics:  MT Association Committee To Study 
Industry Reorganization; Yamazaki Mazak To Quadruple Its MT Product 
Line; Mori Seiki Strengthening Presence in Europe; Toyoda Machine 
Works Halts MT Production in U.S.; Tsugami To Shift MT Parts 
Production to Subsidiaries; Dijet Industrial Downgrades 43 Executive 
Positions; November MT Sales Fell 27.2 Percent, Remain at Low Level 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics:  NEC To Mass Produce Logic 
Semiconductors With 0.35 Micron Geometries; Fujitsu Attempting To 
Seize Lead in Logic Chip Production; Imports of South Korean 
Semiconductors Surge 

   Telecommunications/Satellites: NEC To Shift Production of SONET 
System Equipment to U.S.; NEC, Fujitsu Target U.S. Market For ATM 
Switching Equipment; Sanyo, Northern Telecom To Market Multimedia 
Products in Canada 

   CHINA: Domestic Developments -- Twenty State Enterprises To List 
on Hong Kong Bourse in 1994; Shanghai's Private Economy Outstrips 
Overall Economy; Registered Company Start-Ups in Shanghai Increase 
153 Percent; CElTIC To Move Gold, Foreign Currency Focus to 
Shanghai; Hunan Launches 23 High-Tech Projects in 1993; Growth in 
Individual, Private Economic Sectors in Yunnan Reported 

   Foreign Trade and Investment:  Japanese Rank First Among Foreign 
Investors in Hong Kong; Capital Steel Seeks Hong Kong Funding for 
Shandong Plant; Hong Kong-Based Firm Invests in Guangzhou Steel 
Mill; Burmah Castrol, Shenzhen Jinke To Establish Joint Venture; UK 
Firm To Establish Video-Conferencing Facilities in Hubei; Swiss 
Pharmaceutical Firm Plans $30 Million Factory in Shanghai; Shandong 
Approval of Taiwan-Invested Projects Up 180 Percent in 1993 
   Taiwan:  Lowest Trade Surplus in 10 Years Reported; Procedures 
for Foreign Investment To Be Simplified; Survey Shows Over 30 
Countries Impose Trade Barriers on Taiwan; Labor Productivity Growth 
Expected To Show Decline for 1993; Minister on World Economic Blocs, 
Future Trade Focus; Cross-Strait Trade Expected To Total $20 Billion 
in 1994; Company To Examine Tenders for Nuclear Power Plant No. 4; 
Relief Measures Drafted To Help Industries Hit by Imported Goods; 
Export Growth, Industrial Output Projections Reported; Export 
Exchange Earnings for December Reach Record High 

   NORTH KOREA:  Light Industry To Focus on Production, Quality 
Control Goals 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Business Plans of Major Conglomerates for 
1994 Highlighted; FEATURE:  S and T 1994 Budget, S and T 
Accomplishments for 1993 Reported; FEATURE:  Record Sales, Profits 
Reported for Electronics in 1993; FEATURE:  Intelligence Agency 
Emphasizing Industrial Espionage; FEATURE: Press View Developments 
in ROK-Vietnam Trade; Research Institutes Raise 1994 Growth Rate 
Estimates; Rail Car Orders Expected To Drop 34.5 Percent in 1994; 
ROK To Switch to Metric System for Measuring Rice, Barley; New 
Center To Promote Design, Manufacture of ASIC's; Ministries Funding 
Development of 256M DRAM; Daewoo To Establish Aviation Technology 
Research Center in Russia; Euro-Asia Business Center To Be 
Established in Amsterdam; Daewoo To Invest in Auto Joint Venture in 
Romania; Kia To Assemble Cars in Pakistan; Hyundai Motors To 
Manufacture Cars in Egypt; Samsung To Build TV Parts Plant in 
Mexico; HalIa Group To Export Cement Plant to Papua New Guinea 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  INDONESIA -- Minister Comments on Unemployment 
Rate; Economist Estimates 5.7-Percent Growth for 1994; Habibie 
Seeking Consortium To Produce 'People's Car'; Companies Interested 
in Setting Up Telecommunication Network; ADB Approves Loan for 
Eastern Islands 

   MALAYSIA: High-Technology Cooperation With Indonesia Planned 

   PHILIPPINES:  Brownouts in Manila To Continue in 1994 

   THAILAND: Government Approves Financial Liberalization for 
Offshore Banking; New Measures To Promote Greater Capital Outflow; 
Lower Tariffs Approved for Nonferrous Metal Products, Devices 

   VIETNAM:  Foreign Investment Projects Licensed in 1993 Listed; 
Investor Countries in 1993 Reported; Auto Assembly Venture With 
Daewoo Licensed; Workers at Foreign-Invested Firms Reportedly 
Underpaid; Foreign Firms Plan To Manufacture, Assemble Cars in 
Vietnam; Increase in 1993 Foreign Investments Reported; Ship Repair 
Joint Venture Established; Foreign Investment in Dong Nai Province 
Reported; Taiwanese, French Firms To Help Build Refinery; Increase 
in Ho Chi Minh City Private Sector Output Reported; Hanoi Industrial 
Sector Marks 22.7-Percent Increase; Bank of Commerce and Industry 
Begins New Service; Shipping Firm Signs Contracts With Japan, ROK; 
Construction Begins on Joint Venture Hotel; 'Cost-and- Freight' 
Crude Oil Export Noted; Power Supply for Southern Provinces 
Increases; Three Foreign Investment Projects Approved 

   Pacific Rim Economic Review FBPSP 94-02) 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends -- FEATURE:  Report Assesses Consumer 
Impact of Government Regulations -- SUMMARY:  According to a report 
written by the Daiwa Research Institute (DRI), prices in Japan for 
public utilities, transportation, food, and gasoline--all industries 
protected by government regulations--are much higher than prices in 
the United States, while the prices of automobiles and electrical 
machinery--industries which are not regulated--are roughly 
comparable or lower.  The report urges deregulation to eliminate 
price differences and to realize Japan's full growth potential. 
Also, in an article published on 24 December, Seiji Shimpo, a 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) economist, urges deregulation so that 
Japan can harmonize its economy with the world economy "if it is to 
survive." 

   To analyze the difference between Japanese and U.S. consumer 
prices, the DRI surveyed the prices of 23 items in various 
industrial categories in both countries between August and November 
1993, according to a DRI report published in the 18 December issue 
of SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI, a leading business weekly.  At an exchange 
rate of 107 yen to the dollar, Japanese prices are from 1.1 to 2.0 
times higher than U.S. prices.  Even using the 1992 OECD purchasing 
power rate of 190 yen to the dollar, Japanese prices are 0.6 to 1.5 
times higher than U.S  prices. 

   Based on the survey, the DRI calculated "parity exchange rates" 
for each of the 23 items.  They range from 1,180 yen to $1 for 
wheat, 700 yen per $1 for gasoline, 540 yen for butter, 290 yen for 
long-distance telephone calls and electricity, 135 yen for 
automobiles, 120 yen for audio-visual equipment, and 50 yen for 
pharmaceutical products sold to hospitals. 

   Big Price Disparities Due to Productivity Differences -- The DRI 
report points out that price differences among Japanese goods and 
services caused by differences in productivity are "far greater" 
than differences between foreign and domestic prices, which are 
mainly caused by a "strong yen that does not reflect actual 
purchasing power."  Those items whose Japanese prices are higher 
than U.S. prices, based on either the current yen to dollar rate 
(107:1) or the OECD's 190:1 rate, or the purchasing power rate 
are foodstuffs, petroleum products, public utilities, housing, 
apparel, and polyethylene, products which are for the most part are 
regulated by the government and "whose productivity is low." 

   In the case of automobiles, audio-visual equipment, ethylene, 
steel, copper, high-quality paper, and oil tankers, whose production 
is not regulated by the government and which are manufactured in 
highly productive processes, Japanese prices are still slightly 
higher based on the current exchange rate, but would be lower based 
on a purchasing power rate. 

   According to the report, pharmaceutical products sold to 
hospitals are the only items whose prices are "remarkably" lower 
based on either the current or purchasing power rate.  The report 
notes, however, that since Japanese doctors and hospitals tend to 
prescribe "excessive quantities" of drugs, consumers end up paying 
much money for drugs. 

   Prices Remain High Even Though Yen Has Appreciated -- Concerning 
manufactured and processed goods other than dairy products, 
textiles, color television sets, and semiconductors, domestic prices 
have not come down even though the yen started appreciating in 1985. 
The primary reason, according to the DRI report, is that Japanese 
imports have not increased sufficiently to cause domestic prices to 
drop.  The report explains that government regulations, standards 
and certification systems, and a variety of Japanese business 
practices work to prevent foreign products, whose prices have 
dropped due to the strong yen, "from gaining market share in Japan." 
The report argues that because of such barriers, the "commonly 
understood logic" that yen appreciation will lead to increased 
imports, which in turn will promote competition in the Japanese 
market, increase Japanese productivity, and lower prices, "does not 
work in Japan." 

   Concerning services, such as public utilities, distribution, and 
personal services, the report adds that Japanese prices have 
remained basically the same regardless of the exchange rate, because 
the exchange rate does not affect "competitive conditions" in these 
industries. 

   Deregulation Urged To Realize Full Growth Potential -- The report 
urges deregulation measures be adopted by the government to raise 
productivity in protected industries and eliminate price 
differences.  The report claims that the automobile and electronics 
industries, which have led Japan's exports and contributed to its 
economic growth, are not regulated and therefore have achieved high 
productivity and international competitiveness in the face of 
"severe competition."  In the public utilities, communications, 
food, and petroleum industries, on the other hand, protection by 
government regulations has kept both productivity and 
competitiveness low. 

   The DRI concludes that when the government deregulates the 
protected industries to raise their productivity to U.S. levels, 
Japan's gross domestic product (GDP) would be 10 percent, or 45 
trillion yen ($421 billion), higher than if no deregulation occurs 
in the next 10 years.  It also notes that when productivity is 
raised by deregulation, approximately 6.4 million workers, or about 
10 percent of the total labor force, will become "surplus." 

   MOF Economist Urges Deregulation To Help Japan's Economic 
Recovery -- In an article published in the 24 December NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN (NIKKEI), Seiji Shimpo, deputy director of Ministry of 
Finance's (MOF) Institute of Fiscal and Monetary Policy, argues that 
Japan should implement deregulation for two basic reasons: 1) 
Japan's system must be "compatible" with those of other 
industrialized countries; and 2) Japan needs to expand opportunities 
for new businesses "to escape the current recession."  Shimpo notes 
that contrary to the international trend toward deregulation 
following the collapse of the planned economies, "the number of 
regulations has been increasing in Japan."  In 1987, for example, 
40.1 percent of Japan's gross domestic product (GDP) was produced by 
industries that are "regulated to some extent," and 21.8 percent of 
GDP was produced by industries that are "tightly regulated."  In 
1989, these percentages increased to 40.8 percent and 24.1 percent 
respectively. 

   In addition to intense lobbying by interest groups, Shimpo points 
out that the value Japanese place on "coexistence" and "harmony" is 
an obstacle to deregulation.  Shimpo rejects the Federation of 
Economic Organizations' (Keidanren) policy of "coexistence" (kyosei) 
by asking why consumers want "inefficient firms" and "incompetent 
managers" to coexist.  Shimpo notes that the government, Keidanren, 
and even the media have a perception that government guidance and 
the observance of guidance by industry are "ethical."  In the same 
vein, "order" and "mutual assistance" among companies in an industry 
are "virtues."  Shimpo asserts that all this contradicts the 
principle of competition upon which market capitalism is founded. 
The Japanese people should remember, he observes, that the basic 
factor generating economic development in Japan has been "market 
competition," not government regulation. 

   Shimpo is critical of Japan's media for tending to report 
economic issues in a manner that appeals to the "heart" rather than 
the "mind" of readers.  This helps "the so-called revisionists in 
the United States" justify their calls for discrimination against 
Japan in international trade by highlighting "alleged differences" 
between Japan and the other industrialized nations.  Shimpo asserts 
that it is Japan's responsibility "to prove that the revisionists 
are wrong" by reforming Japan's economic society. 
   In conclusion, Shimpo restates his view that deregulation is an 
"unavoidable step in harmonizing the Japanese economy with the world 
economy, from which Japan cannot be isolated if it is to survive." 
He urges politicians to "institutionalize the economic logic and 
analyses of deregulation" that have been recommended by economists. 

   MOF Makes It Easier for Consumers To Monitor Prices of Imported 
Goods -- As part of the Hosokawa cabinet's policy of sharing the 
benefits of the current strong yen with consumers, the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF) published in the November issue of FINANCE, the 
ministry's monthly journal, a report on the custom clearance prices 
of "30 consumer products" imported in September 1993.  The MOF 
selected 30 consumer goods which it considers of "the highest 
interest" to consumers and, for the first time, published their 
prices separately from the detailed custom clearance data appearing 
in its monthly trade statistics. 

   According to the report, the import prices for 25 of the 30 
products dropped compared to September 1992, ranging from a 43- 
percent drop in the price of bananas, a 38.7-percent decline in the 
price of Italian dress shirts, a 5.6-percent drop for U.S. 
cigarettes, and a 4.5-percent drop for Scotch whisky.  The weighted 
average of the 30 custom clearance prices dropped 14.8 percent 
compared to September 1992.  The report concludes that the primary 
cause for the drop in import prices is the appreciation of the yen, 
which has appreciated by 16.1 percent, from 124 yen per dollar in 
September 1992 to 104 in September 1993.  The report notes that some 
of the goods were paid for in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. 
For example, English tea was priced in British pounds, which 
depreciated about 30 percent against the yen, and Italian dress 
shirts were priced in Italian lira, which depreciated about 42 
percent against the yen.  Some goods were contracted for in yen, 
such as frozen tuna, American beer and cigarettes, and German 
automobiles, and their import prices "were not affected by the 
foreign exchange rate." 

   The MOF report also contains Tokyo retail prices compiled by the 
Economic Planning Agency (EPA) as of October 1993 for 20 of the 30 
imported consumer goods.  The MOF claims that by comparing retail 
prices continuously, everyone will see the extent to which the 
benefits of a strong yen are distributed.  The MOF urges consumers 
to "strictly monitor" trends in import and retail prices. 

   According to the EPA data contained in the MOF report, the Tokyo 
retail prices of the 20 imported products "rarely reflect" the 
decreases in import prices.  For example, the custom clearance price 
of Italian spaghetti dropped 35.7 percent, while the retail price 
dropped only 4.1 percent, and the custom clearance price of U.S. 
golf balls dropped 10.3 percent, but the retail price rose 1.0 
percent.  Of 16 imported consumer goods whose custom clearance 
prices had fallen, the retail prices of 13 goods dropped; two (U.S. 
beer and U.S. cigarettes) remained the same; and one (U.S. golf 
balls) rose.  Of the four products whose custom clearance prices had 
risen, the retail prices of two (oranges and tennis rackets) 
dropped, while two (EC-made electric shavers and lemons) rose. 

   Environmental Issues:  STA To Begin Underwater Cable Project To 
Track Seismic Activity -- The Science and Technology Agency (STA) 
this year will begin a 10-year project to lay an underwater fiber 
optic cable, fitted with seismometers, around the Japanese 
archipelago as part of a comprehensive marine environmental 
observation network to track and monitor undersea seismic activity. 
Basically the STA will use the fiber optic network in place of 
observation vessels and submarines to detect earthquakes and tidal 
waves and to provide timely, detailed information on their scale and 
potential impact.  The STA also hopes to attach other sensors to the 
fiber optic cable to measure underwater temperatures, ocean 
currents, and earth plate and volcanic activity, as well as to 
collect data on the levels of carbon dioxide in sea water for 
research on global warming.  The research results gained from the 
project will also be used to develop technology for using the 
optical fiber itself as a type of thermometer. 

   Twenty public and private enterprises will participate in the STA 
project, including research organizations of the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Transport, 
Tokyo University, NEC, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, and Oki Electric 
Industry.  The STA will spend the first five years of the project 
developing the basic technology related to the seismometers and 
developing methods to transmit the data.  Then the agency will begin 
laying the fiber optic cable off the Japanese islands and later at 
deeper levels, closer to submarine trenches.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 4 Jan 94 p 1) 

   KEPCO, TEPCO To Provide Environmental Know-how To India -- Kansai 
Electric Power Co. (KEPCO) and Tokyo Electric Power Co. (TEPCO) will 
provide environmental technology and know-how to the nine thermal 
power plants in India with a total generating capacity of 18.2 
million kilowatts. The two companies will work with the public 
thermal power companies which manage the plants as part of an 
agreement reached at a 1992 meeting of power company executives from 
throughout the world. 

   KEPCO will transfer its environmental technology and plant 
management know-how to control sulfur oxide and nitrogen oxide 
emissions.  TEPCO will provide guidance on improving the fuel 
efficiency of boilers to reduce the amount of coal consumed, and 
also will instruct the companies on reducing and controlling the 
volume of gas emissions from their thermal power plants.  (Tokyo 
NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 4 Jan 94 p 11) 

   Financial Issues:  FEATURE:  Japanese Banks Have 'Asia Fever' -- 
SUMMARY:  According to the Japanese press, Japanese banks are making 
a special effort to penetrate financial markets in Thailand, 
Malaysia, and China. 

   The 7 December MAINICHI SHIMBUN reports that presently there are 
18 Japanese banks in Thailand, including six that opened branches in 
Bangkok in 1993--Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ), Long-Term Credit 
Bank of Japan (LTCB), Sumitomo Bank, Mitsubishi Bank, Dai-Ichi 
Kangyo Bank (DKB), and Sanwa Bank--and two that established 
representative offices there in 1993, Bank of Fukuoka and Sumitomo 
Trust Bank.  The banks are reportedly responding to the Thai 
government's financial liberalization policy and promotion of 
offshore markets.  According to one Japanese branch manager in 
Thailand, "the rate of profit at Thai branches is first or second 
among our branches worldwide."  The banks say that their objective 
in going into Thailand is to supply Japanese companies with funds to 
expand their operations there. 

   Meanwhile in Malaysia, according to the MAINICHI, Japanese banks 
are participating in creating an international financial center 
(kokusai kinyu center) on Labuan Island, an offshore market located 
in the north of Borneo.  DKB and Sanwa opened branches there in 
November 1993 while IBJ and Sakura were scheduled to follow suit in 
December. 

   In addition, the 17 January NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN reports that the 
Singapore branches of DKB, Sumitomo, Tokai Bank, and IBJ have 
formally agreed to provide $250 million to the Malaysia Highway 
Authority (Malaysia Kosokudorocho) in cooperation with two Malaysian 
commercial banks.  The loan will be registered in an account in the 
Labuan market.  The Malaysian government has been promoting the 
Labuan market for the past few years, but by year-end 1992 its 
outstanding transaction balance was only $1 billion. The recent loan 
by the Japanese banks is the largest since they began entering that 
market in the spring of 1993.  Malaysia expects the Japanese banks 
to be the driving force behind the growth of the Labuan market. 

   Banks Financing Hong Kong Real Estate Development -- Major 
commercial and long-term credit banks are stepping up real-estate- 
related financing in Hong Kong, according to the 3 January NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  In September 1993, the Bank of Tokyo, 
Fuji, Sanwa, Sumitomo and LTCB syndicated a loan amounting to 
HK$2.65 billion (roughly $343.3 million) to Cheung Kong (Holdings) 
Ltd., a large Hong Kong real estate developer.  In addition, 
Mitsubishi Bank and Sumitomo, among others,  provided funding to Sun 
Hung Kai Properties, another major real estate developer, when it 
raised HK$900 million (roughly $116.8 million) to renovate office 
buildings. 

   According to NIKKEI, in Hong Kong, which is considered the 
gateway to investment in China, the demand for office buildings and 
housing continues to grow while prices continue to rise.  Hong 
Kong's large corporations rely largely on Japanese banks for 
financing in the competitive real-estate development market. 

   MOF Appeals to Chinese Government on Behalf of Japanese Banks -- 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is reportedly asking the Chinese 
government to allow Japanese banks to deal in the Chinese yuan. 
According to the 15 January NIKKEI, currently, it does not allow 
foreign banks to deal in yuan. Thus, Japanese banks can only make 
loans and conduct foreign exchange in dollars or yen, while Japanese 
companies in China, as a result of a revision in the foreign 
exchange system on 1 January, are prohibited from holding or using 
anything but the yuan.  Consequently, Japanese banks cannot satisfy 
the need of Japanese companies for interim operational funds. 

   NIKKEI reports, by the end of 1993, 10 Japanese banks had opened 
17 branches and 54 representative offices in China in response to 
the government's reform and liberalization policy begun in the late 
l97Os.  But foreign banks are concerned that the recent revision of 
China's foreign exchange system will be a major hindrance to their 
business there.  Upon appeals from the banks, MOP has "unofficially" 
started working on getting authorization from the Chinese government 
for the banks to deal in yuan. MOF's goal is not only to promote 
penetration by Japanese banks into the Chinese market but also 
indirectly to assist Japanese companies to invest there. 

   FEATURE:  Housing Lenders' Delinquencies Threaten Financial 
System -- SUMMARY:  Japan's housing loan corporations continue to 
pose a major threat to the stability of the financial system, 
according to press reports. Although virtually all of these 
corporations implemented restructuring plans in the spring of 1993, 
because of the sluggish real estate market and the erosion of their 
traditional lending market by other banks and the government-run 
Housing Loan Corporation (HLC), the housing lenders are reportedly 
straining the major financial institutions that founded them. 

   A total of eight housing loan corporations were established 
jointly by banks, securities firms, and insurance companies between 
1971 and 1979 in conjunction with the government's policy to improve 
housing opportunities, according to the 15 March KINYU ZAISEI JIJO, 
a financial weekly.  There is also a government-run housing lender, 
the HLC, which is under the joint jurisdiction of the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF) and the Ministry of Construction (MOC).  The eight 
corporations and their parent companies are as follows: 


Housing Lender        Founded  Founding Parent Institutions 
Nippon Housing Loan    1971  Nine commercial, trust, and regional 
   Co.                          banks, including Sanwa, Sakura, and 
                                Daiwa 
Juso Inc.              1971  Seven trust banks 
Housing Loan Service   1971  Seven commercial banks 
   Co. 
Sogo Jukin Co.         1972  Second-tier regional banks 
Dai-Ichi Housing       1975  LTCB and Nomura Securities, among 
others 
   Loan Co. 
Chigin-Seiho Housing   1976  First-tier regional banks, insurance 
   Loan Co.                     firms 
Japan Housing Loan     1976  IBJ, Nippon Credit Bank 
   Inc. 
Kyodo-Jutaku Loan      1979  Central Bank for Agriculture and 
                                Forestry 



   During the 1970s, the private housing lenders experienced double- 
digit growth, both in terms of the number and total amount of loans 
extended.  In the l98Os however, their position gave way to the 
banks and the HLC, which gradually assumed larger portions of their 
traditional home mortgage market, according to the 5 July 1993 
NIKKEI BUSINESS.  Subsidized by the national treasury, the HLC can 
lend at rates nearly 3 percent lower than those charged by the 
private housing lenders.  In addition, its requirements ensure that 
it makes only "relatively good loans," prompting charges from the 
private lenders that the HLC "grabs only the best."  As of FY92, the 
HLC's share of new housing loans was 32.9 percent.  The 29 December 
NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN reports that new lending by the HLC in the 
second quarter of FY93 increased 13.8 percent over the previous 
quarter. 

   To compensate for their diminished market share, NIKKEI BUSINESS 
observes, the housing lenders began to finance commercial real 
estate deals.  A Bank of Japan executive reportedly states that "one 
reason the private housing lenders rushed into high-risk real estate 
lending is that choice properties were taken by the HLC."  But the 
number of bankrupt commercial borrowers is increasing, along with 
the amount of nonperforming loans. 

   Housing Lenders Are 'Dead,' Despite Restructuring -- According to 
the 28 December MAINICHI SHIMBUN, seven of the eight housing lenders 
(Kyodo Jutaku did not participate) conferred with the MOF and the 
financial community in the spring of 1993 over a 10-year 
restructuring plan led by their parent banks.  As of the end of 
March 1993, three of the eight companies--Chigin-Seiho, Sogo Jukin, 
and Juso--were insolvent.  According to the restructuring plan, the 
parent banks stopped charging interest on existing loans to the 
housing lenders, other financial institutions reduced their interest 
rates to 2.5 percent annually, and financial institutions affiliated 
with the Central Bank for Agriculture and Forestry (CBAF) reduced 
their loan interest rate to 4.5 percent annually. 

   In addition, MAINICHI reports, financial institutions extended 
about 150 billion yen ($1.364 billion) in new funding to the seven 
housing lenders during the first half of FY93 as part of this "life- 
support policy."  The outstanding balance of loans payable by the 
housing lenders totaled 12.86 trillion yen ($116.9 billion) as of 
the end of September 1993, broken down as follows (figures are in 
billions of yen--I billion yen equals $9.09 million--except the 
"Total" column, where the yen figures are in trillions and the 
dollar equivalents are in billions; LTCB denotes long-term credit 
banks): 


   Loans Owed by Housing Lenders as of September 1993 by Lending 
Sector --       Commercial LTCB  Trust CBAF-      Other     Totals 
               Banks            Banks  Affiliated Instit.(tr Y/$bil) 

Nippon 
Housing         694      281    167    892        304      2.34  $21 
Juso Inc.       70       121    903    777        148      2.02  $18 
Housing Loan 
 Service        391       89    151    861        193      1.69  $15 
Sogo Jukin Co.  31       176    126    735        338      1.41  $13 
Dai-Ichi 
 Housing        80       220    369    877        250      1.80  $16 
Chigin-Seiho    73        32     54    460        573      1.20  $11 
Japan Housing   113      543    336    993        422      2.41  $22 

Totals          1,454     1,463        2,107 5,597        2,236 
12.86 
$117 



   As part of the restructuring plan, it was agreed that the new 
loans to the housing lenders would not be classified as 
"nonperforming assets" in the banks' financial statements, according 
to MAINICHI SHIMBUN.    "Officially" the nonperforming assets of 
Japan's 21 major commercial, long-term credit, and trust banks 
totaled 13.75 trillion yen ($125 billion) as of the end of September 
1993, but if the roughly 5 trillion yen ($45.45 billion) in loans 
extended to the housing lenders are included in the banks' 
nonperforming loan total, the figure comes to almost 19 trillion yen 
($172 billion). 

   In addition, the 21 January 1994 CHUNICHI SHIMBUN reports that 
the September 1993 balance of nonperforming assets held by the seven 
housing lenders increased by about 630 billion yen ($5.727 billion), 
or 13 percent, during the first half of FY93.  Totaling 5.21 
trillion yen ($47.3 billion), the nonperforming loans constitute 46 
percent of the seven lenders' total loans receivable.  Nippon 
Housing holds the largest amount of nonperforming assets, about 1.1 
trillion yen ($10 billion), while another private lender, the 
Housing Loan Service, holds the greatest proportion of nonperforming 
assets to total loans receivable, at 65 percent. 

   Commenting on the restructuring plan, an executive of a major 
commercial bank states that "essentially the seven housing lenders 
are dead," despite the plan, according to the MAINICHI article. 

   Ultimately, the MOF envisions that the housing loan sector will 
shrink from the current eight housing loan corporations to two or 
three, according to the 8 January SANKEI SHIMBUN.  The paper points 
out that many in the financial community view the original 
restructuring plan simply as a means to "postpone the issue" of 
dealing with the housing lenders.  The 12 December NIKKEI KINYU 
SHIMBUN reports that some sources in the financial community predict 
that the whole system of assistance to the housing lenders "will 
fall apart by March 1994, or at the latest, by September 1994." 

   Foreign Trade and Investment:  CHINA -- Secom Forms Security 
Services Joint Venture in Dalian -- Secom Co., a major Japanese 
security services company, will begin a security-services business 
in Dalian in May.  Secom's holding company, Secom (China) Company 
Ltd., headquartered in Beijing, and the Dalian Huaxing Import-Export 
Company, a general trading company owned by the city of Dalian, have 
formed a joint venture (JV) company to provide online electronic 
security services to banks, factories, and office buildings in 
Dalian.  The JV will be capitalized at $2 million, with Secom 
(China) investing 80 percent and Dalian Huaxing 20 percent. 
The joint venture will connect customers with online sensors, 
which can detect and report intruders and equipment malfunctions, 
whereupon security personnel or engineers, on duty 24-hours a day, 
will be dispatched to check out the problem.  Secom expects the 
demand for this kind of service, which costs less than having 
security guards stationed at each site, to increase greatly in 
China.  Later it will extend this type of service to other cities 
with adequate telecommunications infrastructures, such as Beijing 
and Shanghai.  So far Secom and the general trading company Itochu 
are the only Japanese firms to have holding companies in China. 
(Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 6 Jan 94 p 10) 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Police Raid Firms Suspected of Illegal 
Exports -- SUMMARY:  According to the Japanese press, the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Police (TMP) raided the offices of several Japanese 
companies and the homes of company executives for suspected illegal 
exports of high-performance spectrum analyzers to North Korea in 
1989.  Export of these instruments is restricted under Coordinating 
Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM) rules and 
Japanese law.  Several papers speculate that the analyzers might 
have been used by North Korea to develop its "Nodong I" missile. 

   According to the 14 January evening editions of several Japanese 
newspapers, the TMP Public Security Department on 14 January raided 
several firms and their executives' homes concerning sale of the 
spectrum analyzers, whose export would be a violation of Japan's 
Foreign Exchange and Trade Control Law.  The TMP suspects that three 
high-performance spectrum analyzers manufactured by Anritsu 
Corporation, and which were on the COCOM restricted list, were 
exported to North Korea by Yokohama Machinery Trading Company via 
China in January and March 1989.  The firms searched by the TMP 
included Anritsu in Tokyo, and Yokohama Machinery Trading and Fuji 
Trading in Yokohama. 

   The 15 January NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN, YOMIURI SHIMBUN, and NHK TV 
NEWS (which is in the Nikkei Telecom database) all report that the 
TMP suspects the three analyzers were exported to North Korea after 
being passed through various trading companies in Japan and via 
China to conceal the illegality of the transaction.  According to 
the papers, the three analyzers were sold for 3 million yen 
($27,300) each by Anritsu to a trading company in Tokyo specializing 
in trade with China, resold to another unidentified trading company, 
and then sold to Yokohama Machinery Trading.  Yokohama Machinery 
Trading is suspected of having exported the analyzers first to China 
and then to North Korea without proper documentation.  According to 
the papers, Anritsu claims that it warned the trading company in 
Tokyo that the analyzers were on the COCOM restricted list.  Anritsu 
has denied knowing they were diverted to North Korea. 

   Two Yokohama Firms Implicated in Diversion -- The 14 January 
YOMIURI SHIMBUN reports that Yokohama Machinery Trading and Fuji 
Trading are small companies in Yokohama with capital of 1 million 
yen ($9,090) each, with three or four employees.  Both companies are 
managed by the same president, Masahiko Kondo, and are located in 
the same building.  They export plastic molding machinery, used 
cars, and electrical machines exclusively to China, Vietnam, and 
North Korea.  YOMIURI reports that Yokohama Machinery Trading once 
had representative offices in North Korea and Beijing.  According to 
the 15 January SANKEI SHIMBUN, the TMP obtained documents revealing 
that employees of Yokohama Machinery Trading and Fuji Trading had 
traveled to North Korea via China several times in the past for 
"business negotiations." 

   Anritsu, the manufacturer of the spectrum analyzers, is a major 
testing and measurement equipment manufacturer headquartered in 
Tokyo.  According to the 14 January YOMIURI, Anritsu sells cable and 
radio communications equipment and measurement equipment to the 
Japan Defense Agency (JDA). 

   MITI Surprised, MOFA Not Concerned About U.S. Reaction -- 
According to the 14 January evening editions of SANKEI SHIMBUN and 
other Tokyo papers, the Export Division of the International Trade 
Bureau of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), 
which administers COCOM-related issues, does not appear to have 
known about the case.  MITI officials were surprised by the news and 
were "busy in emergency meetings all day," SANKEI SHIMBUN reports. 
MITI Minister Hiroshi Kumagai said in a press conference on 14 
January that he had not been briefed, but instructed MITI officials 
to investigate the case and to come up with countermeasures as soon 
as possible. 

   According to the 15 January NHK TV NEWS, a source in the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) commented that "unlike the Toshiba Machine 
Case of 1987, where Toshiba Machine exported advanced milling 
machines to the then Soviet Union and allegedly helped the Soviets 
improve their submarines," this case would "not directly threaten 
U.S. national security," and therefore "the United States had not 
reacted so much to the case." 

   JDA Concerned Over Suspected Use to Develop Missile -- The 14 
January evening edition of YOMIURI SHIMBUN and other papers comment 
that the spectrum analyzers illegally exported to North Korea in 
1989 "may have been used by North Korea to develop Nodong I 
missiles."  According to YOMIURI, defense sources are "gravely 
concerned" about the case, stating that Nodong I missiles would be a 
considerable threat to Japan, since all of Japan's territory would 
be within the range of Nodong missiles if they are deployed.  A JDA 
source commented to YOMIURI that "if the spectrum analyzers were 
used to develop the Nodong I, they must have been used to analyze 
engine vibrations and flight patterns." 

   Also according to the 14 January YOMIURI, the TMP Public Security 
Department commented that the analyzers would be effective devices 
to help develop "electrical parts of a control system for nuclear 
reactors." 

   Machine Tools/Robotics:  MT Association Committee To Study 
Industry Reorganization -- The Japan Machine Tool Builders' 
Association (JMTBA) has established an ad hoc committee to study the 
supply and demand situation in the machine tool (MT) industry.  Some 
industry observers believe the formation of the committee could 
initiate negotiations on "cooperation" within the industry.  The 
committee is expected to calculate an appropriate workforce size for 
the industry based on the supply and demand projections and 
production capacities of all companies.  Goro Tejima, chairman of 
the committee, who is also JMTBA chairman and president of Hitachi 
Seiki, observes:  "The MT industry is facing its biggest crisis 
since the end of the war.  Even now we are planning for orderly 
competition and cooperation."  Others in the industry believe that 
for a debate on reorganizing the industry to begin, "talks on 
cooperation by all industry colleagues must emerge through this 
committee." 

   The committee is to issue "guidelines" for the industry's medium- 
term prospects to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
(MITI) by the end of February 1994.  The MITI bureau responsible for 
the MT industry has stated that "we will accept the report from the 
committee, and we hope that the companies are unanimous in their 
understanding." 

   Vice chairman of the committee is Toyo Kato, president of Toyoda 
Machine Works.  Members of the committee include Taizo Hosoda, 
president of Okamoto Machine Tool Works, and Jiro Makino, president 
of Makino Milling Machine. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 6 Jan 94 p 
11) 

   Yamazaki Mazak To Quadruple Its MT Product Line -- In 1994 
Yamazaki Mazak, a major manufacturer of machine tools (MT), will 
quadruple the number of product types it offers to about 20 and 
increase its product differentiation to more closely match the needs 
of its customers.  Yamazaki Mazak will make machining centers, 
laser-processing machine tools, and multifunctional numerically 
controlled lathes the core of its product line; the new products 
will emphasize ease of use and will combine the functions of two or 
three separate machine tools.  The first of the products will be 
introduced as early as February. 

   In addition to targeting the Japan International Machine Tool 
Fair, to be held Osaka in 1994, and the U.S. International Machine 
Tool Fair in Chicago, Yamazaki Mazak will hold "private showings" 
for customers.  (Tokyo NIKAAN K0GY0 3HIMBUN 6 Jan 94 p 12) 
Mori Seiki Strengthening Presence in Europe -- Mori Seiki, a 
major machine tools (MT) manufacturer, will strengthen its European 
presence this year by opening technical centers in Italy and 
Germany.  Mori Seiki is doing this to better position itself in the 
European market, which is "showing signs of bottoming out," and to 
compensate for the slump in domestic orders. 

   The Italian technical center will cost nearly 500 million yen 
($4.5 million) and will be built in Milan on land Mori Seiki already 
owns.  Sales by the technical center will replace Mori Seiki's MT 
exports to Italy, which have averaged about 5.6 units per month. 
The German technical center, to be built at a cost of 600 million 
yen ($5.5 million), will be located in Stuttgart in a building owned 
by Mori Seiki.  It will absorb the functions of the company's 
existing business office.  Mori Seiki had been exporting 10 MT units 
per month to Germany.  (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 4 Jan 94 p 14) 

   Toyoda Machine Works Halts MT Production in U.S. -- Toyoda 
Machine Works, a machine tool (MT) and auto-parts manufacturer 
belonging to the Toyota Motor Group, will halt its MT manufacturing 
operations in the United States, according to the 17 January ASAHI 
SHIMBUN.  Currently Toyoda Machine Works makes MT equipment at its 
Arlington Heights, Illinois subsidiary, Toyoda Machinery USA. 
Toyoda decided that with the abolition of the MT voluntary restraint 
agreement (VPA) with the United States at the end of 1993, it could 
meet U.S. demand for its products by exports from Japan.  Toyoda 
Machinery USA will continue to operate its service, repair, and 
business departments. 

   The 25 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN reported that the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry (MITI) formally announced on 24 
December that at the end of 1993 it would abolish its MT VRA with 
the United States and its "lowest export price restraint" agreement 
with 16 European countries. 

   The 16 January CHUNICHI SHIMBUN adds that workers at Toyoda 
Machinery USA's Arlington Heights plant will be cut by about half, 
from 200 at the end of 1993 to about 100.  MC production at the 
plant had been about 3 units per month, down from peak output of 15 
per month.  Toyoda Machine USA has incurred cumulative losses of 
about 20 billion yen ($181.8 million). CHUNICHI SHIMBUN adds that 
Toyoda Machinery USA closed its Howell, Michigan plant in 1992, 
leaving Toyoda Koki Brazil (TKB) as Toyoda Machine Works' last 
overseas production base.  The Brazilian plant's current production 
of lathes "is in the single digit range." 

   Tsugami To Shift MT Parts Production to Subsidiaries -- Tsugami, 
a major machine tools (MT) manufacturer, will shift production of MT 
precision parts to two subsidiary companies, Tsugami Tool and 
Chikuma Engineer, to reduce fixed costs.  Tsugami Tool's Nagaoka 
plant, located in Nagaoka City, Niigata Prefecture, which now makes 
collet chucks, will assume responsibility for producing small 
precision automated lathes.  Chikuma Engineer's Shinshu plant in 
Saku City, Nagano Prefecture, which currently makes parts and 
overhauls machinery, will assume responsibility for manufacturing 
industrial machinery.  In addition, Tsugami was to have temporarily 
transferred ten workers to each subsidiary by the end of 1993. 
(Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jan 94 p 12) 

   Dijet Industrial Downgrades 43 Executive Positions -- Dijet 
Industrial Co., a major manufacturer of cutting tools used in the 
machine tools (MT) industry, will downgrade the positions of three 
managing directors and 40 division chiefs due to the prolonged 
recession in the industry.  Dijet's sales for FY93 are expected to 
total 8.5 billion yen ($77.3 million), down about 10 percent from 
FY92, and its current losses will be about 1.6 billion yen ($14.5 
million). 

   Dijet will reorganize its production plant and streamline its 
organization.  This will result in the positions of managing 
directors in charge of the business, production, and technical 
departments being downgraded to the rank of director and their 
salaries cut.  Also, 40 of Dijet's 80 division chief positions will 
be downgraded to deputy division chiefs and the salaries of these 
officials will be reduced accordingly.  (Tokyo ASAHI SHIMBUN 12 Jan 
94 p 13) 

   November MT Sales Fell 27.2 Percent, Remain at Low Level -- A 
survey conducted by the Japan Machine Tool Builders' Association 
(JMTBA) and released on 10 January reports that November machine 
tool (MT) sales fell 27.2 percent from November 1992 to 37.816 
billion yen ($343.8 million).  This is the second consecutive month 
that overall sales have remained under the 40 billion yen ($363.6 
million) level.  Total domestic sales in November came to 20.907 
billion yen ($190.06 million), down 32.3 percent.  MT orders from 
the auto, general-purpose machinery, and electrical equipment 
industries increased, but orders from the machinery manufacturing 
industry fell 35.8 percent.  Export sales were down 19.7 percent 
year-on-year to 16.99 billion yen ($154.45 million). 

   Cumulative sales for the first 11 months of 1993 totaled 491.729 
billion yen ($4.47 billion), down 25.7 percent.  The JMTBA predicts 
that sales for the entire year will probably not exceed 530 billion 
yen ($4.82 billion).  (Tokyo NIH0N KEIZAI SHIMBUN 11 Jan 94 p 13) 
Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics -- NEC To Mass Produce Logic 
Semiconductors With 0.35 Micron Geometries  --  On 3 January NEC 
announced that it will begin the world's first mass production of 
logic semiconductors incorporating "leading edge" 0.35 micron design 
geometries.  In 1993, NEC used the 0.35 micron design in its 64- 
megabit (MB) dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips.  The new 
logic chips will have the ability to instantaneously control audio 
and video information, and will be used in next-generation 
multimedia workstations and personal computers.  NEC plans to 
produce the chips at its No. 8 plant in Kyushu, which will be 
completed in August 1994, and to have samples ready for shipment by 
yearend. 

   NEC's mass production of logic chips in Kyushu is expected to 
reinvigorate the semiconductor industry there.  Kyushu currently 
produces 40 percent of Japan's semiconductors by volume and 30 
percent by value, which came to 850 billion yen ($7.73 billion) in 
1992.  (Tokyo ASAHI SHIMBUN 4 Jan 94 p 7) 

   Fujitsu Attempting To Seize Lead in Logic Chip Production -- 
Fujitsu will build a "leading-edge" production line to manufacture 
logic chips with 0.35-micron design geometries.  The line will be 
built at Fujitsu's Aizuwakamatsu plant No. 2 in Fukushima, next to 
an existing 0.5-micron logic chip production line.  The investment 
for manufacturing equipment alone is estimated at 5 to 10 billion 
yen ($45-90 million).  Fujitsu expects to complete the line by the 
end of 1994 and, following test operations, will begin mass 
production in 1995.  The initial processing capacity will be on the 
scale of 5,000 6-inch wafers per month. 

   Until now, Japanese semiconductor manufacturers have always first 
introduced leading-edge technology in memory chips, where they have 
been strongest, and then have applied the technology in making logic 
chips.  However, Fujitsu has decided to change its strategy and 
attempt to seize the lead in microprocessors from U.S. semiconductor 
manufacturers by using the O.35-micron design on logic chips. 
Fujitsu is the first domestic manufacturer to adopt this strategy, 
but it will not necessarily be the last.  The change is seen as 
"essential" in competing with U.S. manufacturers and in improving 
Fujitsu's earnings, which have suffered because of competition from 
South Korean chip manufacturers.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jan 
94 p 1) 

   Imports of South Korean Semiconductors Surge -- Japanese imports 
of South Korean semiconductors are surging after a period of gradual 
expansion with demand for memory chips particularly strong.  Since 
May, South Korean memory chips have accounted for over 40 percent of 
monthly import totals, and in November the rate reached 56 percent, 
2.4-times greater than total memory device imports from the United 
States.  In addition, as regards the entire Japanese semiconductor 
market, South Korea has surpassed Europe and now holds more than 3 
percent of the market. 

   In November imports of memory devices from South Korea totaled 
9.4 billion yen ($86 million), of which the main component was the 4 
megabit (MB) dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips.  Japanese 
firms are also interested in importing South Korean mask read-only 
memory (ROM) chips.  According to an official of a Japanese 
subsidiary of a South Korean semiconductor company, Japanese firms 
"never before showed any interest" in South Korean chips, but now 
are approaching the subsidiary for discussions. 

   There are several reasons for the large increase in imports from 
South Korea.  First, the rapid expansion of the U.S. personal 
computer market has led to tight supplies of memory chips.  U.S. 
producers reportedly "have their hands full" supplying domestic 
demand and have "no extra" chips to export to Japan.  In fact, 
exports to the United States of Japanese-made memories are also 
increasing; domestic Japanese chip consumers, who have had 
difficulty securing adequate memory supplies, are turning to South 
Korean manufacturers.  Second, this trend has been facilitated by 
the appreciation of the yen and the depreciation of the won. 
Consequently, as South Korean semiconductor makers continue to 
expand production capacity, it is likely that semiconductor imports 
from South Korea will continue to increase.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN Evening Edition 27 Dec 93 p 3) 

   Telecommunications/Satellites -- NEC To Shift Production of SONET 
System Equipment to U.S. -- NEC will transfer all production related 
to its SONET (synchronous optical networks) systems to its NEC 
America subsidiary by March 1994 and begin manufacturing all SONET 
equipment targeted for the U.S. market at its NEC America plant in 
Oregon in an effort to improve production efficiency.  Currently NEC 
Miyagi, an NEC subsidiary, jointly coordinates business activities 
related to U.S.-bound SONET systems equipment with NEC America. The 
Miyagi plant supplies equipment with high-speed transmission 
capacities of 150 megabits per second, 600 megabits per second, and 
2.4 gigabits per second to several "Baby Bell" companies, including 
U.S. West. 

   NEC decided to shift production to the United States because of 
the yen's appreciation and because of an expected surge in demand 
for this type of equipment as a result of the Clinton 
administration's "information superhighway" initiative.  As a result 
of the shift, the Oregon plant will increase its current output of 
2,500 systems annually to 4,000.  NEC is targeting U.S. orders worth 
$120 million over the next two years.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 
10 Jan 94 p 6) 

   NEC, Fujitsu Target U.S. Market For ATM Switching Equipment -- 
NEC will produce ATM (asynchronous transfer mode) switching 
equipment--new systems that are considered the "heartbeat" of the 
Clinton administration's "information superhighway" plan--in the 
United States, according to the 13 January NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN. 
NEC has been manufacturing ATM switching equipment in Japan at its 
subsidiary, NEC Tohoku, located in Ichinoseki City, Iwate 
Prefecture, for export to the United States, but decided to shift 
production to the United States because of the yen's appreciation. 
NEC is also seeking to "nip in the bud" any potential U.S.-Japan 
friction in the communications industry, because communications 
technology is often linked with U.S. national security issues. 

   According to NIKKEI, NEC plans to launch a "marketing offensive" 
toward the U.S. "Baby Bell" companies in anticipation of a rapid 
increase in demand for ATM equipment.  It has already supplied the 
Williams Telecommunications Group, a U.S. long-distance 
communications company, with 19 sets of its "NEAX-61 ATM service 
node" and is currently negotiating a contract with Bell Atlantic. 

   Fujitsu, also a major manufacturer of communications equipment, 
is planning to make ATM switching equipment a new "pillar" of its 
operations, according to the 7 January SANKEI SHIMBUN.  Fujitsu 
focused its efforts on ATM technology in the early 1980's and is 
ahead of other manufacturers in developing ATM switching equipment. 
Currently two "Baby Bell" companies, BellSouth and Nynex, are using 
about 20 Fujitsu ATM switching systems, and two others are using 
Fujitsu equipment on a trial basis. 

   SANKEI notes that Fujitsu has "pushed aside" U.S. 
telecommunications giant AT and T to become the "sole leader" in the 
ATM switching equipment industry.  It anticipates a "trillion dollar 
market" in the future, when the use of ATM switching systems--valued 
at several billion yen each (1 billion yen equals $9 million)- 
-quickly expands as the "information superhighway" is completed 
throughout the United States.  AT and T and global communications 
manufacturers such as France's Alcatel Alsthom have launched ATM 
development projects in an attempt to compete with Fujitsu, SANKEI 
observes, so that the "communications battle" to be world leader of 
the "information revolution" has begun. 

   Sanyo, Northern Telecom To Market Multimedia Products in Canada 
-- Sanyo Electric has announced that it will cooperate with Canada's 
Northern Telecom to jointly develop and market communications and 
multimedia equipment in Canada.  Sanyo will market two cordless 
telephone models, the "NOMAD6500" and "N0MAD630O," which the two 
companies jointly developed.  Sanyo will supply its technology for 
cordless telephones, batteries, and liquid crystal displays, while 
Northern Telecom will contribute its digital technologies to jointly 
develop next-generation telephones, components, and semiconductors 
for the multimedia market. 

   In addition, the two companies will cooperate on developing 
markets for other communications products, including mobile 
telephones and facsimile machines.  The two firms will have a 
combined market share of 40 percent in Canada for telephones and 
related products, and hope that by joining together they can 
penetrate the consumer market even further.  After they are 
successful in Canada, they will expand their cooperative efforts to 
the United States and the rest of the world.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 6 Jan 94 p 3) 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments  --  Twenty State Enterprises To 
List on Hong Kong Bourse in 1994 - Professor Liu Hongru, chairman of 
China's Securities Supervision and Administration Committee, has 
said that 20 state-owned enterprises will list on the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange this year.  Some will also have secondary listings on 
the New York and London stock exchanges, with a small number having 
their primary listings in New York.  Professor Liu said that Hong 
Kong was a financial center in which international investors had 
great confidence, and that after 1997, the "one country, two 
systems" policy would enable Hong Kong to maintain its bridging 
role.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 19 Jan 94 p AS) Hong Kong Bureaus 

   Shanghai's Private Economy Outstrips Overall Economy -- The year 
1993 saw a 30 percent increase in Shanghai's private economy for the 
second consecutive year compared to a 15 percent rise in Shanghai's 
overall economy.  As of the end of the year, there were 126,600 
individually owned business households in the city, employing 
178,600 people.  There were also 7,610 privately owned enterprises 
employing 108,400 people, compared to none in the beginning of 1988. 

   Privately owned enterprises have begun operating on company 
lines, and the number of limited liability companies increased by 
1,715 last year.  Privately owned joint ventures, which were first 
seen in August 1992, numbered 22 at year's end.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO 
XINWEN SHE 0450 GMT 15 Jan 94) Hong Kong Bureaus 

   Registered Company Start-Ups in Shanghai Increase 153 Percent -- 
Almost 34,000 registered companies were established in the January 
to September period of 1993 in Shanghai, an increase of 153 percent 
over the figures for the same period of 1992.  Of the 33,824 
companies set up, 11,579 were state-owned companies, 17,357 were 
collectively owned companies, and 4,888 were companies of other 
types.  The number of companies involved in tertiary industry stood 
at 28,155, constituting 83.2 percent of the total.  (Hong Kong 
ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 0901 GMT 31 Dec 93)  Hong Kong Bureau 
CEITIC To Move Gold, Foreign Currency Focus to Shanghai -- The 
China Everbright International Trust and Investment Corporation 
(CElTIC) will start trading foreign currencies and gold in Shanghai 
early in 1994.  "Well-placed sources" revealed that Shanghai would 
lead the nation in foreign currency and gold business.  Ye Kequan, 
director of CEITIC's Shanghai branch, said they were preparing to 
set up a swap market in Pudong "which binds insurance and trading of 
securities, foreign currencies, gold, real estate, and futures 
together."  He also said CElTIC would move its business focus to 
Shanghai in anticipation of a new economic and financial boom. 
(Beijing CHINA DAILY 8 Jan 94 p 2)  Hong Kong Bureau/ 

   Hunan Launches 23 High-Tech Projects in 1993 -- On 31 December 
the casting and fireproofing material development project sponsored 
by the China Building Material Research Institute and 22 other high- 
tech projects were ready to be implemented in the high-tech 
development zones in Changsha, Zhuzhou, Xiangtang, and other cities 
of Hunan Province.  By the end of 1993, 478 high-tech enterprises 
had been established and 640 high-tech projects had been launched in 
the new high-tech corridor, turning in an annual output value of 
more than 700 million yuan.  The new high-tech corridor, which has 
drawn in 1.78 billion yuan worth of investment, comprises the five 
new and high-tech development zones of Changsha, Zhuzhou, Xiangtan, 
Yueyang, and Hengyang and covers more than 20 counties and cities. 
(Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network 2300 GMT 2 Jan 94)  Hong Kong 
Bureau- 

   Growth in Individual, Private Economic Sectors in Yunnan Reported 
- Individual and private economic sectors in Yunnan Province 
developed rapidly in 1993.  As of the end of December there were 
more than 442,200 individual industrial and commercial households in 
the province, involving more than 646,000 people, an increase of 
18.71 percent and 19.8 percent respectively over the previous year. 
There were also 1,563 private enterprises, an increase of 49.86 
percent over the previous year.  The proportion of people engaged in 
individual and private enterprises to the province's total 
population rose from 1.47 percent in 1992 to 1.78 percent.  (Kunming 
Yunnan Radio Network 1000 GMT 7 Jan 94)  Hong Kong Bureaus 

   Foreign Trade and Investment:  Japanese Rank First Among Foreign 
Investors in Hong Kong -- In recent years, Japanese companies have 
continued to increase their investments in Hong Kong, many of them 
attracted by the economic growth of mainland China.  In the last 10 
years, Japanese companies have replaced American and British firms 
as the largest foreign investor in Hong Kong.  In order to lower 
operational costs and compete for greater market share, Japanese 
manufacturing enterprises have been increasing their overseas 
investments, and Hong Kong is a key point for such investment 
because of its proximity to China.  According to Hong Kong 
Government statistics, by the end of 1992, cumulative investment 
from Japan amounted to HK$124.45 bilLion, and Japanese companies 
fixed assets in Hong Kong totaled HK$85.16 billion, exceeding that 
of American corporations, who ranked second.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO 
TONGXUN SHE 0812 GMT 11 Jan 94) Hong Kong Bureau/ 

   Capital Steel Seeks Hong Kong Funding for Shandong Plant -- The 
parent company of Hong Kong-listed Shougang International has 
announced its involvement in a project to build a HK$45 billion 
steel plant in Shandong.  Capital Iron and Steel Company Limited 
(Shougang) will raise more than HK$22.5 billion on overseas markets 
and through the introduction of foreign investors.  The plant, which 
will be situated in Quli, Shandong Province, will have an annual 
capacity of 10 million tonnes.  Sources said they expected Capital 
Iron and Steel's Hong Kong-listed subsidiary Shougang Concord 
Holdings to play a key role in raising overseas capital for the 
joint venture project with the Shandong provincial government.  The 
state would not provide funds for the project, but the new firm is 
expected to enjoy the same benefits and concessions as Sino-foreign 
joint ventures. (Hong Kong HONG KONG STANDARD (FINANCIAL REVIEW) 17 
Jan 94 p 1) Hong Kong Bureaus 

   Hong Kong-Based Firm Invests in Guangzhou Steel Mill -- The Hong 
Kong-based Guangzhou Enterprise (Group) Company Limited is one of 
five underwriters for the Guangzhou Zhujiang Steel Plant, the 
largest construction project in the Guangzhou Development Zone. The 
plant, recently approved by the State Council, requires HK$620 
million for its first phase of construction.  It will begin 
production in July 1996.  The other underwriters are Guangzhou 
Economic Construction and Development Company, Guangzhou Metallurgy 
Company, Guangzhou Development Zone State-Owned Asset Investment 
Company, and the Guangzhou International Trust and Investment 
Company.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1118 GMT 18 Jan 94) Hong 
Kong Bureau/ 

   Burmah Castrol, Shenzhen Jinke To Establish Joint Venture -- 
British lubricants and specialty chemicals manufacturer Burmah 
Castrol is to establish a HK$15 million joint venture in Shenzhen to 
manufacture and market products used in the aluminum industry. 
Linking up with Shenzhen Jinke, which supplies grain refining 
tablets and fluxes to Chinese primary and secondary users, the new 
firm is to be called Foresco Jinke.  The initial capital will be 
used to set up a new factory close to Jinke's existing production 
facilities.  Under the deal both companies will hold 50 percent 
stakes in the company, though the HK$15 million cash investment is 
being made in Castrol, with Jinke reciprocating through assets and 
their established market base.  (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST 
(BUSINESS POST) 12 Jan 94 p 2) Hong Kong Bureaus 

   UK Firm To Establish Video-Conferencing Facilities in Hubei -- 
GPT Video Systems, a subsidiary of GPT Limited of Britain, has 
signed a $3 million deal with the Hubei Post and Telecommunications 
Administration for the provision of advanced video-conferencing 
facilities in Wuhan, Hubei Province.  A GPT official said this will 
be the largest video-conferencing network in China.  This contract 
represents GPT's first deal with a Chinese customer in 1994, 
following five contracts for similar equipment signed in 1993 with 
Hunan and Shaanxi Provinces and the Capital Iron and Steel 
Corporation in Beijing.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 12 Jan 94 p 2) Hong 
Kong Bureau/ 

   Swiss Pharmaceutical Firm Plans $30 Million Factory in Shanghai 
-- Swiss pharmaceutical company Hof fman-La Roche is to set up a $30 
million factory with Shanghai San Wei Pharmaceutical Corporation to 
make pharmaceuticals.  The joint venture, to be known as Shanghai 
Roche Pharmaceuticals Company, will be 70 percent owned by Roche and 
30 percent owned by San Wei, Shanghai's largest pharmaceutical 
factory.  The factory, to be located in the Zhangjiang High-Tech 
Zone in the Pudong Industrial Area, will begin full operations in 
late 1996, making products such as anticancer and cardiovascular 
drugs, antibiotics, and multivitamins.  Until the factory is 
completed Roche will help upgrade production facilities at San Wei's 
plant to process some products of the joint venture.  These will be 
sold under the joint venture trademark between 1994 and 1996.  (Hong 
Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) 8 Jan 94 p 2) Hong 
Kong Bureau/ 

   Shandong Approval of Taiwan-Invested Projects Up 180 Percent in 
1993 -- In 1993 Shandong Province witnessed noticeable achievements 
in developing economic and trade contacts with Taiwan.  According to 
statistics, the province approved 1,154 Taiwan-invested projects, up 
180 percent over 1992.  These projects involved a total investment 
of $1.875 billion, up 140 percent over 1992; and the contracts 
signed with Taiwan businessmen involved a total investment of $942 
million, up 150 percent over 1992.  (Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 GMT 
12 Jan 94) Seoul Bureaus 

   Taiwan:  Lowest Trade Surplus in 10 Years Reported -- Taiwan 
broke four foreign trade records in 1993.  The total volume of 
import-export trade reached a record $162.03 billion, up 5.6 percent 
over 1992.  The trade surplus with Hong Kong topped $16.72 billion, 
a record for a single region.  The trade deficit with Japan reached 
a record $14.22 billion.  The proportion of heavy-industry and 
chemical products exceeded half of exports for the first time. 
However, the Ministry of Finance's report released on 6 January 
shows the total trade surplus of $7.87 billion was the lowest since 
1984.  Taiwan's trade surplus with the United States was down to 
$6.76 billion, and its trade with Europe showed a deficit of $670 
million, the first in two decades.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 7 Jan 
p 2) Okinawa Bureau/ 

   Procedures for Foreign Investment To Be Simplified -- On 30 
December the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) decided that in the 
future overseas Chinese may continue to invest in Taiwan in the 
capacity of natural citizens, but the procedures for accepting 
investment from overseas Chinese and foreigners would be simplified 
from the current system of evaluation and approval to merely 
registration.  The MOEA, which held a meeting on 30 December to 
discuss amending regulations governing investment in Taiwan by 
overseas Chinese and foreigners, also proposed to abolish the 
stipulation restricting overseas Chinese and foreigners from 
converting foreign exchange in the first year of operation so they 
may directly invest with New Taiwan (NT) dollars.  According to the 
Investment Commission under the MOEA, the proposed amendments are 
designed to boost foreign investment, make the island an operational 
center in the Asia-Pacific region, and facilitate Taiwan's accession 
to the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade.  (Taipei CHING-CHI 
JIH-BAO 31 Dec p 2) Okinawa Bureaus/ 

   Survey Shows Over 30 Countries Impose Trade Barriers on Taiwan -- 
A recent survey conducted by the Chinese Federation of Industries 
showed that presently over 30 countries have imposed trade barriers, 
both tariff and otherwise, against Taiwan.  These include Japan, the 
United States, Australia, most European nations, and Southeast Asian 
nations such as Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. 
Industries affected include steel plating, foodstuff, computers, 
auto parts and accessories, and information.  Manufacturers strongly 
urged the government to fight for the rights and opportunities of 
fair competition.  Koo Chen-fu, chairman of the Chinese National 
Association of Industry and Commerce, said, "Since the government 
promotes trade liberalization, it should help manufacturers compete 
internationally on an equal footing with the same industries in 
every country."  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 1 Jan p 9) Okinawa 
Bureau/ 

   Labor Productivity Growth Expected To Show Decline for 1993 -- 
The Executive Yuan's Council for Economic Planning and Development 
pointed out that labor productivity growth in 1993 is not expected 
to exceed 3.5 percent, the lowest growth in nine years. The council 
cited as major reasons for the decline readjustments in the 
industrial structure, transfers of industries overseas, an increase 
in foreign laborers, and failure of enterprises to invest in 
automation and personnel training.  Therefore, the government should 
address these areas to promote labor productivity growth, and 
economic development.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO   3 Jan p 2) 
Okinawa Bureau/ 

   Minister on World Economic Blocs, Future Trade Focus -- With the 
world divided into three economic blocs following the establishment 
of the European Union and NAFTA on 1 January, Minister of Economics 
Chiang Ping-kun said the pivotal axis of Taiwan's future development 
will lie in Asia, though attention will still be given to its 
development in other economic regions.  He envisaged that Taiwan's 
exports to the Asian market in 1994 will proportionally account for 
over 50 percent of its total exports to world markets.  His ministry 
has decided to substantially readjust the focus of Taiwan's 
investments and exports; the Asia region will feature prominently in 
this respect.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 2 Jan p 2) Okinawa Bureau/ 

   Cross-Strait Trade Expected To Total $20 Billion in 1994 -- The 
Ministry of Economic Affairs estimates cross-Strait trade will total 
$20 billion in 1994, and Taiwan's imports from the PRC will 
increase.  However, Taiwanese investors will reconsider their 
investment plans for the PRC in view of the uncertain factors caused 
by PRC macroeconomic regulation and control. According to the 
ministry's statistics, 9,470 enterprises invested in the PRC last 
year with a total capital of $3.52 billion.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH- 
BAO 4 Jan p 2) Okinawa Bureaus 

   Company To Examine Tenders for Nuclear Power Plant No. 4 -- The 
Taiwan Power Corporation will begin examining tenders for two U.S. 
firms and one French firm beginning 10 January for the construction 
of its fourth nuclear power plant, which is expected to be 
operational in January 2001 at the earliest.  The corporation's 
deputy general manager said the current tenders are for the 
construction of the nuclear reactor and for the supply of nuclear 
fuel, the project's most important components costing over $2 
billion.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 9 Jan p 2) Okinawa Bureaus 

   Relief Measures Drafted To Help Industries Hit by Imported Goods 
-- The Ministry of Economic Affairs has decided to provide temporary 
relief measures to Taiwan industries whose interests are seriously 
jeopardized by an influx of foreign goods.  These measures, which 
will be in effect for a period of three years, include increases in 
tariffs, introduction of tariffs and import quotas, entering into 
marketing agreements with exporting countries, and provisions for 
financial guarantees.  The draft "Measures for Handling Import 
Relief Cases" formulated by the ministry has been submitted to the 
Executive Yuan and is expected to be implemented as soon as a trade 
investigation commission has been established under the ministry. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 3 Jan p 1) Okinawa Bureau/ 

   Export Growth, Industrial Output Projections Reported -- Taiwan's 
export growth is expected to continue, but the real estate market 
will continue to slow down.  Minister of Economic Affairs Chiang 
Ping-kun said Taiwan's export growth and industrial output for 1994 
will total 8.2 percent and 4.52 percent respectively.  To conform 
with its plan to join GATT and fulfill its promise to the United 
States to lower customs tariffs, Taiwan will lower customs tariffs 
on several products, even though it may affect such relevant 
industries as the steel, automobile, and petrochemical industries. 
The progress of over 500 national construction projects is still 
slow, and nearly half of the projects have fallen behind schedule. 
In addition, to raise funds for the projects the Taiwan Government 
will appropriately cut the amount of normal spending.  (Taipei 
CHING-CHI JIH-BAO 3 Jan p 2) Okinawa Bureau/ 

   Export Exchange Earnings for December Reach Record High -- 
According to statistics by the Central Bank of China, Taiwan's 
export exchange earnings of $8.35 billion for December 1993 was a 
record for any single month.  It shows a notable backward flow of 
Taiwanese firms' foreign exchange funds at the end of the year.  The 
total exchange income and exchange expenditures in 1993 totaled $88 
billion and $74.1 billion respectively.  The surplus of $13.89 
billion was a growth of 9 percent over 1992.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH- 
BAO 11 Jan p 1) Okinawa Bureau/ 

   NORTH KOREA:  Light Industry To Focus on Production, Quality 
Control Goals -- Ri Ki-do, director of the Production Guidance 
Department under the Light Industry Committee, recently said that 
the committee is making comprehensive plans to sharply increase the 
production of textiles, daily necessities, and processed foods, as 
well as to improve the quality and variety of consumer goods in 
order to promote development of the light industry, which was 
designated as a top priority at the 21st Plenary Session of the 
Sixth Party Central Committee.  During its plenum in December, the 
party decided to focus on agriculture, light industry, and trade to 
meet the goals of the Third Seven-Year Plan (1987-1993) during the 
adjustment period in the next two to three years. 

   According to Ri, the General Bureau of Textile Industry under the 
Light Industry Committee is calling for modernization of textile 
factories and  increased production of high-quality cloth (made of 
vinylon) and knitwear. Ri also said that the General Bureau of the 
shoemaking industry is working on improving the quality of 
domestically made shoes. 

   Ri noted that since the 16th Plenary Session of the Sixth Party 
Central Committee, the clothing sector's production capacity has 
"improved significantly" thanks to the new equipment that has been 
installed and to the modernization of the Pyongyang United Textile 
Factory and other factories in Kusong, Sariwon, and Kaesong.  Ri 
added that shoe manufacturing has also improved and that a greater 
variety of shoes is now available to consumers.  He also remarked on 
general improvements in the processing of staple and non-staple food 
items and the production of daily necessities.  (Pyongyang MINJU 
CHOSON 16 Dec 93 p 3) 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Business Plans of Major Conglomerates for 
1994 Highlighted -- SUMMARY:  Recent press articles highlight some 
of the main business projects and investment targets in 1994 for 
major conglomerates.  The 30 largest groups plan to increase their 
investment in facilities and R and D by 45.8 percent over 1993 
levels.  They also intend to expand actively abroad, and may use 
their overseas R and D centers to obtain foreign technology and take 
it back to South Korea. 

   According to the 4 January MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS), the 30 
largest ROK conglomerates will invest 23.3 trillion won ($29.125 
billion) in facilities and 680 trillion won ($850 billion) in R and 
D in 1994.  Their total overall investment will be 45.8 percent 
higher than in 1993.  The groups plan to increase their R and D 
investment by 34 percent in order to expand existing technologies 
and respond to other countries' IPR (intellectual property rights) 
"protectionist barriers."  MKS reports that the groups also intend 
to invest actively abroad to expand their overseas production base. 
In a separate article in the same 4 January issue, MKS states that 
the need for "aggressive technology transfers" is growing, even in 
the area of patents, as advanced countries "avoid" transferring 
advanced technologies.  MKS explains that ROK firms will be able to 
use R and D centers established in the United States, Japan, and the 
EC as windows through which they can "grab" the global flow of 
technology and import foreign technology back home. 

   MKS also offers details of conglomerates' major investment goals 
and projects.  They include infrastructure projects and production- 
related projects located both domestically and overseas.  Some of 
the projects of the 10 largest conglomerates include: 

   Samsung:  domestically--six semiconductor production lines, an 
automobile plant, the new international airport at Yongjong Island, 
a canal between Seoul and Inchon, development of Nanji Island, the 
electric rail between Pundang-Yongin-Suwon, a new composite city at 
Yongin, developing space under Yoido Plaza;  overseas--a 
refrigerator factory in the Kazakh Republic, a joint-venture 
semiconductor factory in Portugal in cooperation with Texas 
Instruments, an electronics and VCR factory in China. 
Hyundai:  domestically--a production line exclusively for 16M 
DRAM (dynamic random access memory) chips, an automobile plant, an 
oil refinery, development of the Yongjong Island airport, power 
plant construction, container terminal projects for Pusan and 
Kwangyang, development of the Yulchon industrial complex;  overseas- 
-establishment of construction companies in China and Indonesia, an 
$8.6-million automobile plant in Malaysia, investments worth $27 
million in Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, and India, expansion of a 
refrigerated storage facility in Tijuana, Mexico. 
   Lucky-Goldstar:  domestically--plastic fuel tanks, mass 
production of thin film technology liquid crystal displays (TFT 
LCD's), mass production of 16M DRAM's, nuclear power generation, 
power plant construction;  overseas--a plastics factory in Pakistan, 
a cosmetics factory and a VCR factory in China, a color television 
factory in Vietnam, a pump factory in Indonesia, marketing companies 
in Australia and Spain. 

   Daewoo:  domestically--the Kunsan automobile plant, a high-tech 
research institute, light-rail business;  overseas--automobile 
assembly plants in Libya and Iran, R and D centers in the United 
States, Japan, and Europe, cotton mills in Uzbekistan and Sudan. 

   Sunkyong:  domestically--a fluid catalytic cracking facility, 
renovation of production facilities, investment in ships and new 
shipbuilding, stage two of the Polmosang Tunnel, an open-air storage 
yard for containers in Yangsan;  overseas--developing oil fields 
overseas. 

   Ssangyong:  domestically--a shipping and distribution base, 
middle-grade oil cracking, crude oil refining, developing small-size 
commercial vehicles and passenger cars;  overseas--a joint-venture 
cement factory in Vietnam in cooperation with Korea Heavy Industries 
and Vietnam, developing overseas resources. 

   Kia:  domestically--Kia's second automobile plant at Asan Bay, an 
Asia Motors plant for large trucks and buses;  overseas--an 
automobile assembly plant in Indonesia. 

   Hanjin:  domestically--aircraft purchases, shipbuilding, high- 
speed rail, light rail, land reclamation in Yongdo;  overseas--a 
terminal in Tokyo for Hanjin Shipping's exclusive use. 

   Hanhwa:  domestically--facilities for middle-grade oil cracking 
and desulfurization, enlargement of PVC (polyvinyl chloride) 
facilities. 

   Lotte:  domestically--a Lotte Samkang factory in Chonan, the 
Pusan World Hotel;  overseas--expansion of the Lotteria in Shanghai. 
With regard to sales targets, the 5 January CHUGAN MAEGYONG 
reports that in 1994 most groups want to increase total sales 
between 10 and 20 percent, with seven groups aiming for increases of 
more than 30 percent.  The automobile sector wants to increase sales 
by 30 percent, while the electronics sector is looking for a 20- 
percent increase.  CHUGAN comments that the five main car makers 
have a combined sales target of 19.7 trillion won ($24.675 billion). 
This includes targets of 8.5 trillion won for Hyundai ($10.625 
billion), a 16.5-percent increase; 5.6 trillion won ($7 billion) for 
Kia, a 33-percent increase; 3.2 trillion won ($4 billion) for 
Daewoo, a 45-percent increase; 1.6 trillion won ($2 billion) for 
Asia Motors, a 50-percent increase; and 860 billion won ($1.075 
billion) for Ssangyong, an increase of more than 100 percent. 

   There are also plans to greatly increase investments in the 
electronics (semiconductors), heavy industry, and oil refining 
sectors, CHUGAN reports.  However, groups doing business in textiles 
plan to reduce their shares of investment in and sales from 
synthetic textiles.  CHUGAN breaks down some of each company's 
investments by business line:  Samsung will invest 500 billion won 
($625 million) to build a semiconductor production line, 150 billion 
won ($187.5 million) to expand a passenger car plant, and 65 billion 
won ($81.25 million) in its aircraft (fighter) business.  Hyundai 
will invest 1.12 trillion won ($1.4 billion) in its automobile 
business, and 1.1 trillion won ($1.375 billion) in its semiconductor 
business.  Lucky-Goldstar will invest 450 billion won ($562.5 
million) in its Goldstar company, 250 billion won ($312.5 million) 
in its Lucky company, and 100 billion won ($125 million) in its 
technical research institute.  Daewoo will concentrate most of its 
domestic investment in its Kunsan automobile plant.  Sunkyong Group 
will invest 800 billion won ($1 billion) in its Yukong subsidiary. 
Ssangyong Group plans to invest 600 billion won ($750 million) in 
oil refining, 500 billion won ($625 million) in automobile 
manufacturing, and 300 billion won ($375 million) in cement 
production.  Finally, CHUGAN notes that Hanjin Group will invest 550 
billion won ($687.5 million) to import a new type of aircraft. 

   The following table lists the sales and investment targets for 
the 10 biggest conglomerates, along with the increase (in percent) 
over 1993 levels.  The figures were compiled from articles in the 4 
January MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN and the 5 January CHUGAN MAEGYONG. 

BOT 
                           Investment in    Investment in 
              Sales        --Facilities---         R and D 

Name    1994    Change*    1994   Change*    1994   Change* 

Samsung N/A*    -          3,300  22.2       1,300  18.1 

Hyundai N/A*    -          3,300  141        1,200  76.5 

Lucky- 
Goldstar        N/A*              2,200      37.5   1,000       33.3 

Daewoo  35,500  31.3      1,730   49.7       1,122  36 

Sunkyong        20,430     15.6   1,530      31.8   170         21.4 

Ssangyong       13,700     16.1   1,500      150    100         42.8 

Kia      9,000  34.3       1,040  22.3       300    36.3 

Hanjin   7,300  10.6       1,280  8          70     7.6 

Lotte    6,800  17.2       650    62.5       80     33 

Hanhwa   6,800  17.2       N/A*   -          N/A 

Note*: N/A denotes data not available.  Change denotes percent 
increase over 1993 level.  Unit for sales and investment amounts is 
1 billion won. 

EOT 

   FEATURE:  S and T 1994 Budget, S and T Accomplishments for 1993 
Reported -- SUMMARY:  The ROK Government's 1994 S and T budget of 
nearly 2 trillion won ($2.5 billion) is the country's largest to 
date, representing 2.2 percent of the national budget and a 32.7- 
percent increase over last year, according to press reports. 
Figures on the distribution of funds among the ministries, and 
within the Ministry of Science and Techhnology (MOST), are provided 
along with one magazine's view of MOST's chief successes. 

   South Korea's 1994 science and technology budget--defined as 
"direct support" for S and T activities to agencies of the central 
government, including an R and D budget, S and T promotion budget, 
and administrative budget-- has been set at 1.9596 trillion won 
($2.45 billion), according to the 5 January CHUGAN MAEGYONG.  The 
amount is 32.7 percent higher than 1993's reported S and T budget of 
1.4767 trillion won ($1.846 billion), and compares to an increase of 
20 percent in the national budget overall.  Government S and T 
expenditures, which make up 20 percent of the total funds spent by 
South Korea on science and technology, account for 2.2 percent of 
the 1994 national budget, compared to 4.7 percent in the United 
States and 2.9 percent in Japan, the magazine reports. 

   The largest share of the new S and T budget, some 1.5132 trillion 
won ($1.892 billion), is allotted to R and D, representing a 30- 
percent increase over 1993.  Specific R and D categories reportedly 
will be funded as follows:  working expenses 305.6 billion won ($382 
million), up 53 percent from 1993; state-funded research expenses 
712.2 billion won ($890 million), up 20 percent; R and D subsidies 
252.1 billion won ($315 million), up 54 percent; and "testing and 
research expenses for national testing and research agencies" 243.3 
billion won ($304 million), up 17 percent.  According to the 5 
January CHUGAN MAEGYONG, the largest overall increase of 240 percent 
will go to the Ministry of Education, followed by the Environmental 
Agency with a 65.8-percent increase, and the Ministry of Trade, 
Industry, and Energy whose budget will grow by 49 percent.  The 
reported S and T budget for each ministry is as follows. 


     Ministry                     S and T Budget 
                                (billion won)  (million $) 

     Home Affairs                 5.656             7.03 
     Finance                      80.000            100.00 
     Defense                      352.332           440.42 
     Education                    180.705           225.88 
     Agriculture and Fisheries    13.298            16.62 
     Trade, Industry, and Energy  338.913           423.64 
     Construction                 34.953            43.69 
     Health and Social Affairs    47.188            58.99 
     Transportation               7.641             9.55 
     Communications               23.876            29.85 
     Science and Technology       610.217           762.77 
     Environmental Agency         15.861            19.83 
     Tax Administration           1.028             1.29 
     Rural Development Admin.     139.388           174.24 
     Forestry Admin.              19.645            24.56 
     Fisheries Admin.             37.555            46.94 
     Industrial Promotion Admin.  44.082            55.10 
     Patents Admin.               0.901             1.13 
     Railroad Admin.              1.510             1.89 
     Meteorology Admin.            31.805           39.76 

      S and T budgets within the Ministry of Science and Technology 
(MOST), funded by public and private sources, were reported in the 1 
January MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS) as follows. 

   Institute                   Budget                  Personnel 
                            (billion won) (million $) (PhD's) 

Korea Institute of Science     67.075       83.84     787  (247) 
   and Technology (KIST) 
System Engineering Research    28.632       35.79     357   (22) 
   Institute (SERI) 
Genetic Engineering Research   16.462       20.58     225   (73) 
   Institute (GERI) 
Research and Development        4.555        5.69      54    (1) 
   Information Center 
S and T Policy Management       7.609        9.51     114   (22) 
  Research Institute 
Korea Advanced Institute of    78.215       97.77     852  (311) 
   S and T (KAIST) 
Korea Rsch Inst of Standards   28.771       35.96     472   (99) 
   and Science (KRISS) 
National Astronomical           9.920       12.40      89   (12) 
   Observatory 
Basic Science Support          10.865       13.58      75    (9) 
   Center 
Korea Institute of Machinery   52.723       65.90     574   (95) 
   and Metals (KIMM) 
Korea Aerospace Research       23.674       29.59     127   (33) 
   Institute (KARl) 
Korea Institute of Nuclear     21.278       26.60     272   (53) 
   Safety 
Korea Atomic Energy Research  171.200      214.00    1,625 (211) 
   Institute (KAERI) 
Hospital for Nuclear           38.938       48.67     842   (38) 
   Medicine 
Nuclear Environment            72.341       90.43     320   (61) 
   Management Center 
Korea Institute of Energy      19.396       24.25     347   (83) 
   Research (KIER) 
Resources Research             29.722       37.15     457  (112) 
   Institute 
Korea Ocean Research and       27.459       34.32     347   (76) 
   Development Inst (KORDI) 
Korea Electrotechnology        25.437       31.80     325   (45) 
   Research Institute 
Korea Research Institute of    27.379       34.22     405  (110) 
   Chemical Tech (KRICT) 
Korea Science Foundation      103.887      129.86     120    (1) 

Kwangju Science and            23.970       29.96      -      - 
   Technology Institute 

Total                         889.511     1,111.87     8,786 (1,714) 



   MKS further reports that MOST reached a decision late last year 
to have its institutes "specialize," beginning this March, in 
particular fields or specific technologies.  For example, KIST will 
focus on 3-D image media technology, "human robot systems," and 
advanced medical treatments during 1994. 

   Meanwhile, the 29 December CHUGAN MAEGYONG published a list of 
MOST's major technological successes of 1993 as follows. 

   1. A "robot sculptor" that can sculpt likenesses of individual 
human faces in 20 minutes, by KIST; potential applications are in 
factory automation. 

   2. Microscopic drug capsules that are absorbed by the body over a 
long period of time, by KRICT.  Has uses in manufacturing 
gastrointestinal drugs, antibiotics, and anti-cancer drugs (see 
PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC REVIEW Vol 2 No 26 29 Dec 93 pp 23-25). 

   3. A high-temperature superconducting quantum interference device 
(SQUID), by KRISS. 

   4. Technology for automated production of software, by SERI. 
Expected to save 20 billion won ($25 million) annually in imports by 
1996. 

   5. Non-polluting organic agricultural chemicals, by GERI.  Living 
microorganisms are enclosed in a biodegradable, high-polymer gel. 

   6. Exhaust valves for large diesel engines, by KIMM.  Will save 
10-15 billion won ($12.5-18.75 million) annually in imports. 

   7. Software codes for a comprehensive safety check of a nuclear 
power plant, by KAERI. 

   8. The "Our Star 2" satellite, by KAIST.  South Korea's first 
indigenous earth satellite. 

   9. A fused carbonate fuel cell, by KIST.  The 10cm x lOcm unit 
produces 100 watts of power. 

   10. A new substance (GERI-BP001) for reducing blood cholesterol 
made from aspergillus (a soil mold), by GERI. 

   11. Development of the chemical compound HFC-134a as a freon 
substitute, by KIST. 

   12. Precision laser welding equipment, by KAERI (see PACIFIC RIM 
ECONOMIC REVIEW Vol 2 No 24 1 Dec 93 p 31). 

   13. Manufacturing and control technology for an ion nitriding 
electric furnace, by KIMM.  Expected to save 600 million won 
($750,000) in imports annually. 

   14. A high-temperature (140 degrees K) superconductor formed in 
high pressure mercury vapor, developed jointly by the Research 
Institute of Industrial Science and Technology and Pohang Steel. 

   15. Livestock waste water processing equipment, by KIST. 

   16. Technology to separate, gasify, and burn combustible 
industrial wastes, by KIER. 

   17. Technology to produce EPA chemical compounds from marine 
micro-organisms, by KORDI. 

   18. Design and construction of an underwater robot that can 
operate at depths of 300 meters, by KIMM. 

   19. Development of "essential technology needed to manufacture a 
solid fuel rocket motor able to lift a scientific research payload 
weighing 50-70 kg to an altitude of 80-90 km," by KARl. 

   20. Rayon twice as strong as the existing material and 
manufactured without pollutants, by KIST. 

   21. Numerical-controlled gas cutting machinery, by KIMM. 
Expected to save 3 billion won ($3.75 million) annually in imports 
costs. 

   22. Technology to reduce chemical solvent wastes, by KRICT. 

   23. Manufacture of an ultra-high precision (nanometer scale) 
lathe, by KAIST. 

   24. New automotive steel that is stronger, more malleable, and 
easier to weld, by KIST. 

   FEATURE:  Record Sales, Profits Reported for Electronics in 1993 
-- SUMMARY:  South Korea's 1993 electronics sales, driven by 
semiconductor exports and domestic demand for appliances, brought 
record profits to the country's major producers, according to press 
reports.  Figures on 1994 investment and projected sales presume a 
continuation of the same rapid growth.  The high export volume was 
generated, in part, by the ROK's ability to reduce significantly 
dumping charges levied earlier by the U.S. Government. 

   South Korea's four top electronics manufacturers--Samsung 
Electronics, Goldstar Electron, Daewoo Electronics, and Hyundai 
Electronics--finished 1993 with record sales of 15.85 trillion won 
($198 billion) for a 25.2 percent increase over 1992, according to 
the 21 December MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS).  The amount constituted 
more than half of the country's total electronics-related sales, 
with semiconductor exports and domestic appliance sales accounting 
for most of the gain.  The following data was reported by MKS. 


                            1993 Electronics Sales 
                (in trillion won unless other indication given) 

         Sales (percent  Exports (percent  Net Profit (percent 
          increase)      increase)         increase) 

Samsung 8.1               ---             1.5 
         ($10.1 billion) ($6.7 billion)     ($1.875 billion) 
        (32.7)            (45.0)           (107) 
Goldstar                  4.4               ---                0.70 
        ($5.5  billion)   ($3.0 billion)   ($875  million) 
        (16.4)            (16.7)           (169) 
  Daewoo  2.05            ---              0.32 
        ($2.6  billion)   ($1.75 billion)  ($400  million) 
        (19.1)            (29.6)           (93) 
  Hyundai 1.3             ---              0.35 
        ($1.6  billion)   ($1.15 billion)  ($450  million) 
        (24.0)            (22.0)           (337) 

Total    15.85            ---             2.87 
         ($19.8 billion) ($12.6 billion)    ($3.6 billion) 
        (25.2)            (33.7)           (113) 

   Projected electronics sales by the same four manufacturers in 
1994 are reported in the 4 January MKS as follows. 

               1994 Electronics Sales (projected) 
         (in trillion won unless other indication given) 

          Total              Domestic 
Percent 
          Sales              Sales             Exports 
Increase 
                             3.3               6.7              23.0 
Samsung   10 
          ($12.5  billion)   ($4.125 billion)  ($8.375 billion) 
Goldstar  5                  2.2               2.8              13.6 
          ($6.25  billion)   ($2.75 billion)   ($3.5   billion) 
Daewoo    2.6                1.0               1.6              24.0 
          ($3.25  billion)   ($1.25 billion)   ($2.0   billion) 
Hyundai   2.05               0.57              1.48             58.0 
          ($2.5625 billion)  ($712.5 million)  ($1.85  billion) 

Total     19.65              7.07              12.58            23.9 
         ($24.5625 billion)($8.8375 billion) ($15.725 billion) 

   The 27 December MKS gives the following details on Samsung's 
projected 1994 electronics sales:  3.2 trillion won ($4 billion) in 
semiconductors; 4.2 trillion won ($5.25 billion) in household 
appliances, including $2.7 billion in exports; and 2.5 trillion won 
($3.125 billion) in information processing and communications 
equipment.  The same four companies' 1994 electronics-related 
investment plans are reported in the 4 January MKS as follows. 

                   1994 Electronics-Related Investment Plans 
                (in trillion won unless other indication given) 
          Plant and                          Total           Percent 
          Equipment         R and D          Investment 
Increase 

Samsung  1.5                0.60             2.1              40.0 
          ($1.875 billion)  ($750  million)  ($2.625 billion) 
Goldstar  0.45              0.40             0.85             49.1 
          ($562.5 million)  ($500  million)  ($1.0625 billion) 
Daewoo    0.17              0.18             0.35             34.6 
          ($212.5 million)  ($225  million)  ($437.5 million) 
Hyundai   0.70              0.38             1.08             46.0 
          ($875 million)    ($475  million)  ($1.35 billion) 


Total      2.82             1.56             4.38             41.2 
         ($3.525 billion)  ($1.95 billion)   ($5.475 billion) 



   The 4 January MKS reports that Samsung's major investments will 
be in DRAM's, "next-generation" semiconductors, and wireless 
communications.  Goldstar will invest in mass producing thin film 
transistor-liquid crystal displays (TFT-LCD's), expand its 
distribution facilities, and rationalize production; R and D will 
concentrate on multimedia and enviroiimentally friendly household 
appliances.  Hyundai will put 1 trillion won ($1.25 billion) in 16M 
DRAM production equipment, the paper states.  In its 22 December 
issue, MKS reports Daewoo has decided to move "full-scale" into 
semiconductors.  Unlike the three majors which have concentrated on 
DRAM's, Daewoo will focus on application-specific integrated 
circuits (ASIC's), particularly for use in automobiles and 
appliances. 

   The reported high increases in R and D and plant investment, 
largely semiconductor-related, coincide with a study by the Korea 
Semiconductor Industry Association (24 December MKS) which found 
that ROK chip makers are paying 14.2 percent of their sales in 
royalties, compared to 0.5 percent by rival manufacturers in Japan. 
The study attributes the difference to South Korea's "weak" 
technology base, and notes the gap is "acute" in non-memory 
products.  Only 20 percent of South Korea's semiconductor 
manufacturing equipment and 34.6 percent of the materials used to 
manufacture the chips are indigenous, the study reportedly found. 

   Figures for 1993 and 1994 semiconductor sales are reported in the 
16 December MKS as follows. 


                       1993 and 1994 Semiconductor Sales 
                (in trillion won unless other indication given) 
                    1993                              1994 
          Sales             Exports        Sales            Exports 

Samsung   2.5               ---           3.2 
          ($3.125 billion)  $2.7  billion  ($4 billion)     $3.2 
billion 
Goldstar  0.85              ---            1 trillion plus 
          ($1.06  billion)  $900  million  ($1.25 billion)  $1.2 
billion 
Hyundai   0.75              ---            1.24 
          ($936  million)   $860  million  ($1.55 billion)  $1.47 
billion 

-Total    4.1               ---           5.5 
       ($5.12 billion)     $4.46 billion ($6.87 billion)$5.87billion 


   South Korea's record semiconductor export figure of more than 
$4.46 billion, accounting for 87 percent of its total semiconductor 
sales, came 14 months after a Seoul newspaper had claimed that ROK 
"semiconductor exports are in danger of being completely suspended" 
(23 Oct 92 HANGUK ILBO) because of a provisional U.S. dumping 
charge.  Samsung Electronics, which the 16 December 1993 MKS reports 
made 500 billion won ($625 million) in profits on semiconductor 
sales in 1993--86 percent of which were exports --was alleged to be 
facing a loss in the U.S. market (23 Oct 92 HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN). 
While the ruling was being reconsidered in the United States, most 
Seoul papers ran news stories and editorials describing the 
"catastrophic" effects the dumping margin would have on the 
industry.  At the same time, various "strategies" to reverse the 
ruling were proposed by the newspapers or reported to be under 
consideration, such as "sending high-level officials" for 
discussions with U.S. State, Commerce, and USTR representatives; 
"requesting cooperation" from U.S. companies using South Korean 
semiconductors; and appealing directly to U.S. labor unions and 
consumer groups (23 Oct 92 TONGA ILBO).  A fourth recommendation, 
reported in the 27 October 1992 MKS, to shift resources out of 
semiconductor memory into ASIC's and other high value-added products 
where U.S. import concerns are "weaker" appears, based on recent 
press reports, to have been acted on (see PAFICIC RIM ECONOMIC 
REVIEW Vol 2 No 23 17 Nov 93 pp 26-27). 

   FEATURE:  Intelligence Agency Emphasizing Industrial Espionage -- 
SUMMARY:  South Korea's national intelligence agency is putting 
greater emphasis on the collection of foreign economic and 
technological intelligence, according to a report by its director 
cited in the ROK press.  The move, intended to strengthen South 
Korea's competitiveness in international markets and improve the 
agency's image domestically, reportedly involves hiring more 
specialists in industrial intelligence and increasing the number of 
such agents sent overseas. 

   South Korea's Agency for National Security Planning (NSP), the 
country's national intelligence agency, has made economic 
information gathering its "top priority" this year, the 19 January 
TONGA ILBO reports.  The newspaper cites an address by NSP chief Kim 
Tok to ROK President Kim Yong-sam reportedly stating the agency 
would emphasize collection of economic, industrial, and 
environmental data to help South Korean industries prepare for the 
"coming era of borderless competition." 

   Reporting the same address, YONHAP on 18 January quoted the 
director's statement that "information services for the private 
sector will be increased to make the NSP an intelligence agency in 
which the people have full trust."  President Kim reportedly 
responded by expressing his hope that the NSP would grow into a 
world-level information and intelligence agency." 

   Kim Tok's address follows an earlier report in the 6 May CHUNGANG 
ILBO that the NSP is putting more emphasis on collection of foreign 
technology.  The article noted that despite a hiring freeze, the 
agency intends to hire more S and T experts and "specialists in 
industrial intelligence."  Efforts reportedly were being made to 
attract "professionals" with advanced degrees able to collect and 
evaluate "economic and industrial intelligence."  The paper added 
the NSP also plans to "augment this portion of the personnel it 
sends overseas." 

   FEATURE:  Press View Developments in ROK-Vietnam Trade -- 
SUMMARY:  December marked the first-year anniversary of the 
establishment of diplomatic relations between South Korea and 
Vietnam.  Several articles published that month review recent 
developments in trade and investment between the two nations.  One 
article notes the signing of an arbitration agreement, which would 
help in resolving any trade disputes that may arise as ROK trade and 
investment in Vietnam continue to grow. 

   The 24 December HANGYORE SINMUN reports that South Korea became 
Vietnam's fourth largest trading partner and its third largest 
investor --based on total amount invested--in 1993.  As of 24 
December, ROK exports to Vietnam totaled $652 million, while imports 
totaled $81 million.  This placed Vietnam 11th among nations with 
which the ROK has a trade surplus.  HANGYORE lists the ROK's main 
exports to Vietnam as textile materials, non-metallic mineral 
products, steel, metallic products, chemical industrial goods, 
machinery, and electronics.  The main imports from Vietnam are raw 
materials, such as coal and natural gas, and primary goods, such as 
agricultural products. 

   With regard to investment, HANGYORE notes that the Overseas 
Investment Commercial Center of the Export-Import Bank of Korea 
handled 108 cases of investment in Vietnam over the past year.  This 
was equal to 10.4 percent of all the cases the center handled during 
that period.  While ROK investment in Vietnam has been concentrated 
mainly in light industry, HANGYORE says that there is a trend toward 
diversification into service industries.  As of June, 23 companies- 
-both conglomerates and small and medium businesses (SMB's)--had set 
up 30 branch offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.  According to 
HANGYORE, KOTRA (the Korea Trade Promotion Corporation) expects 
SMB's to move into export processing zones or set up industrial 
complexes in Vietnam.  It also believes that ROK enterprises will 
have a hand in developing Vietnam's natural resources, such as iron 
ore, natural gas, and copper.  Infrastructure projects may become 
good investment targets as well, according to the article.  Yet 
HANGYORE observes that not all ROK ventures in Vietnam fare well. 
There are cases of businesses failing because they invested without 
having enough advance information about local conditions, of 
friction because of cultural differences, and cases of labor- 
management disputes.  The paper passes along KOTRA's advice that 
firms secure their markets and resources for the long term, and 
increase the legal recognition of Korean products and technology. 

   According to the 22 December HANGUK ILBO (HI), Vietnamese 
authorities expect total trade between the ROK and Vietnam to reach 
$756 million in 1993.  This would be a 53-percent increase over 1992 
trade.  HI reports that as of 22 December, the ROK had received 
approval from Vietnam for 47 investment projects worth a total of 
$2.7 million.  About 40 ROK companies, including major conglomerates 
such as Daewoo, Samsung, Hyundai, and Lucky-Goldstar, have set up 
businesses in Vietnam. 

   In September 1993, KOTRA surveyed some ROK businesses that have 
been active in Vietnam, and HANGYORE SINMUN reports the results of 
the survey in its 24 December issue.  According to the newspaper, 
KOTRA sent surveys to 47 companies who had permission from Vietnam's 
State Committee for Cooperation and Investment (SCCI) to invest in 
Vietnam, and received 32 responses.  The responses showed that 25 of 
the firms had invested $5 million or less in their venture; set up 
business primarily in Ho Chi Minh City; and had concentrated on 
investing in textiles or daily necessities.  HANGYORE comments that 
this concentration of business interests could create problems--such 
as "excessive competition"--for ROK enterprises investing in 
Vietnam. 

   ROK firms have already encountered problems when doing business 
in Vietnam, reports the 3 December MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS). 
Although to date the Korean Commercial Arbitration Board (KCAB) has 
received only one formal complaint from a ROK firm concerning ROK- 
Vietnam trade, the number of business disputes in this area is 
actually higher.  MKS explains that this is because many cases where 
ROK firms have suffered losses in Vietnam are overlooked.  Moreover, 
MKS predicts that the chances of trade disputes will rise as ROK 
business involvement in that country increases.  Currently resolving 
disputes is difficult, particularly because Vietnam does not 
participate in a "New York agreement" --an international arbitration 
agreement.  However, resolving disputes may be easier in the future, 
thanks to an arbitration agreement signed between the Korean 
Commercial Arbitration Board (KCAB) and the Vietnam International 
Arbitration Center in December.  MKS notes that the agreement 
contains the following provisions:  the arbitration panel will be 
drawn from an impartial third country, ROK and Vietnamese 
arbitration bodies will cooperate in developing international 
arbitration, and parties will amicably share information useful to 
both sides. 

       Research Institutes Raise 1994 Growth Rate Estimates -- 
Following slight improvements in the economic climate recently, 
various research institutes have adjusted their estimates for 
economic growth in 1994.  The Korea Institute for Industrial 
Economics and Trade (KIET) raised its 1994 real growth rate estimate 
from 6.1 percent to 6.4 percent.  The Korea Development Institute 
(KDI), which had previously estimated the rate at between 6.5 and 
7.2 percent, has set a new estimate of 7.0 percent.  Other private 
institutes run by conglomerates have also adjusted their estimates 
upward.  The institutes explain that they view prospects for 1994 as 
brighter because much of the "uncertainty" over the real-name 
financial system has been eliminated, and because business 
confidence is being restored following President Kim's speech on 
internationalization.  They expect investment in facilities and 
infrastructure, in particular, to become "vigorous" as companies 
work to improve their competitivenesss.  However, the institutes 
point out that price increases may be a big stumbling block for the 
economy in 1994.  They expect price increases in 1994 to be between 
5 and 6 percent, which is higher than the New Economic Five-Year 
Plan's estimate of a 4.3-percent annual increase. 


          Real    Private     Fixed       Current           Consumer 
Source  Growth  Consumption Investment Account              Prices 
                                              Exports Imports 
Five-year 
plan       7.1      6.5       7.0        0       9.5    7.8    4.3 

Bank of 
Korea      6.3      5.6       6.2        5       7.9    7.8    6.1 

KDI*       7.0      5.7       6.6       14       9.1    7.7    5.6 

KIET*      6.4      6.0       6.8       10       9.1    7.8    5.8 

Samsung*   5.5      5.7       3.6        4       7.4    5.5    5.3 

Lucky- 
Goldstar*  6.8      5.4       6.6       23       8.5    6.6    5.8 

Daewoo*    6.3      5.5       4.9      3.8       7.0    6.0    6.0 

Notes:  Current account unit is $1 billion; all other units are 
percent.  An "*" indicates estimates were recently revised.  Private 
consumption--the five-year plan and Lucky-Goldstar figures indicate 
overall consumption. 

   (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 20 Dec 93 p 5) 



   Rail Car Orders Expected To Drop 34.5 Percent in 1994 -- Orders 
for electric rail cars manufactured in South Korea are expected to 
fall in 1994.  The three main ROK producers of these cars--Daewoo 
Heavy Industries, Ltd., Hyundai Precision and Industry Co., Ltd., 
and Hanjin Heavy Industries Co., Ltd.--are expected to receive 
domestic orders for 600 rail cars in 1994.  This is 34.5 percent 
less than the 916 cars ordered domestically in 1993.  This is also 
less than the production capacity of the three companies, which was 
raised following a significant increase in both domestic and 
overseas orders in 1993.  Both Daewoo and Hyundai can now produce 
300 cars annually, while Hanjin has a production capacity of 150 
cars.  The companies competed heatedly for domestic orders in 1993, 
often slashing prices to 50-70 percent of cost.  With fewer orders 
being placed, competition among the three is expected to increase, 
even for overseas orders.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 20 Dec 93 p 
9) 

   ROK To Switch to Metric System for Measuring Rice, Barley -- On 4 
January the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries 
announced that beginning in 1994, rice and polished barley will be 
measured using the metric weights of kilograms and tons rather than 
the traditional Korean units of sok and kama.  This will be in 
keeping with the era of internationalization and liberalization 
following the Uruguay Round.  According to the ministry, one sok of 
rice will be equivalent to 144 kg, and one kama to 72 kg, while one 
sok of barley will be equivalent to 138 kg, and one kama to 69 kg. 
Thus 1993's rice production--32.98 million sok--equals 4.75 million 
tons, and the government's 1993 rice purchase--lO million sok- 
-equals 1.44 million tons.  Ministry officials note that rice is 
already sold in 10- and 20-kg bags, and that the kama unit was "no 
longer really practical."  (Seoul CHUNGANG ILBO 5 Jan 94 p 3) 

   New Center To Promote Design, Manufacture of ASIC's -- South 
Korea's "Electronic Parts Combined Technology Research Institute" is 
opening a new design center for application-specific integrated 
circuits (ASIC's).  The center will cooperate with private firms to 
determine what ASIC's are in demand.  It will then design the chips, 
develop them, and have them manufactured on domestic production 
lines, including experimental lines operated by Samsung, Goldstar, 
and Hyundai.  The new center "will contribute to the development of 
the domestic electronics industry through core electronics design 
technology, product development, and technological support for small 
and medium businesses (SMB's)."  Its goal is to help SMB's build 
their own ASIC's by supplying technology, equipment, personnel, and 
funds.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 28 Dec 93 p 8) 

   Ministries Funding Development of 256M DRAM -- The Economic 
Planning Board, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Trade, Industry and Energy, and Ministry of Communications are 
jointly supporting an "R and D Group for Basic Technology 
Development of Next-Generation Semiconductors" aimed at "developing 
basic technology associated with high-density semiconductors" at the 
256M DRAM level "or higher" by October 1997.  Some 195.4 billion won 
($244 million) will be spent on the project, including 91.4 billion 
won ($114 million) in state funds.  Huang Ki-ung, director of Seoul 
National University's Semiconductor Research Institute, will lead 
the group, which is co-located with the Semiconductor Research 
Association in Seoul's Yangjae-dong.  (Seoul TONGA ILBO 27 Dec 93 p 
23) 

   An earlier report in the 28 August HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN stated 
that the group would be composed of elements from industry, 
academia, and research institutes, and be guided by a Research 
Control Committee which would coordinate views and "allocate support 
burdens."  The Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST) was to provide administrative support. 

   Daewoo To Establish Aviation Technology Research Center in Russia 
-- After a year of preparation, Daewoo Heavy Industry will establish 
an aviation technology research center near Moscow to activate 
cooperation in aviation.  The opening ceremony for the center will 
be held on 30 March.  This is the first time the aviation industry 
will establish a research center to carry out international 
cooperation in aviation technology.  Through the research center, 
Daewoo plans to improve the 28-passenger helicopters--the MI-8 and 
the MI-17--and work to develop the next-generation transport 
helicopter and five-ton class, multipurpose helicopter.  In 
particular, Daewoo plans to use Russia's aviation technology to 
obtain helicopter design technology, engine manufacturing 
technology, and maintenance technology.  The company plans to 
concentrate on working to produce finished helicopter-related 
products.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 8 Jan 94 p 15) Seoul Bureau/ 

   Euro-Asia Business Center To Be Established in Amsterdam -- In 
May the ROK will establish the Euro-Asia Business Center (EABC) in 
Amsterdam, in cooperation with the Dutch Government.  The EABC will 
serve as a bridgehead for the ROK to advance into the European 
market.  It is to consist of trading firms, companies investing in 
the Netherlands, public organizations, research centers, and travel 
agents.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 19 Jan 94 p 10) Seoul Bureau/ 

   Daewoo To Invest in Auto Joint Venture in Romania -- Daewoo Group 
plans to invest $156 million in a joint venture in Romania that will 
manufacture passenger cars for the European market.  Under the 
agreement with Oltcit SA, Daewoo will own 51 percent of the venture. 
The new production lines will manufacture up to 200,000 cars a year 
by 1998.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 7 Jan 94 p 11) Seoul Bureau/ 
   Kia To Assemble Cars in Pakistan -- Kia Motors recently signed a 
technical cooperation contract with Pakistan's Daur Motors to 
assemble Kia's Pride sub-compact and its one-ton truck models.  This 
will allow Kia to produce 20,000 cars a year in Pakistan through 
local assembly.  Kia will begin shipping parts for the vehicles in 
February.  The company also plans to build a new plant in the Kasim 
industrial complex.  When the plant is completed in 1997, Kia plans 
to increase production to 50,000 vehicles a year.  (Seoul MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN 7 Jan 94 p 11) Seoul Bureau/ 

   Hyundai Motors To Manufacture Cars in Egypt -- Hyundai Motors has 
contracted to provide technology and parts for Excel production to 
an Egyptian company.  This company is now building a production 
plant which will produce 10,000 cars a year for Hyundai beginning in 
1996.  Hyundai plans to increase the plant's annual production 
capacity to 50,000 vehicles by the end of 1998.  (Seoul MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN 13 Jan 94 p 11) Seoul Bureau/ 

   Samsung To Build TV Parts Plant in Mexico -- Samsung has decided 
to invest $40 million to build a television parts plant in Tijuana, 
Mexico by 1997.  Construction will start in April.  When completed, 
the plant will produce television tuners, speakers, and other major 
television components.  The plant will supply these parts to Samsung 
Electronics' plant in Mexico, and export them to television 
manufacturing plants in the NAFTA area.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 
20 Jan 94 p 11) Seoul Bureau/ 

   Halla Group To Export Cement Plant to Papua New Guinea -- HalIa 
Group has received a $142-million order for a cement plant from the 
Papua New Guinea HalIa Cement Company.  The plant will have an 
annual production capacity of 600,000 tons.  HalIa will begin 
construction of the plant in the first half of 1994, and is 
scheduled to complete it in 35 months.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 
19 Jan 94 p 11) Seoul Bureau/ 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  INDONESIA -- Minister Comments on Unemployment 
Rate - Manpower Minister Abdul Latief recently commented on 
Indonesia's 38-percent unemployment rate, quoting economists and 
labor experts who believe that the current situation will have 
"serious ramifications" on the future of the country.  These experts 
said that Indonesia runs the risk of having millions of unskilled 
workers, declining international competitiveness, and a rising crime 
rate.  They also stated that economic stagnation would ensue if the 
market for low-cost labor shifts to other countries. 

   Latief noted that the 38-percent figure includes the 29 million 
people who are underemployed.  Likewise, Mari Pangestu, chief 
economist of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
pointed out that the official unemployment figure of 2-3 percent is 
"meaningless" because the government derives its unemployment 
figures from the number of people registered as having no jobs and 
seeking employment.  However, few register because Indonesia has no 
social security system.  Pangestu noted that the estimated 2.3-2.5 
million people who enter the job market each year only add to the 
current problems.  (Jakarta SUARA KARYA 13 Dec 93 p 3) 

   Economist Estimates 5.7-Percent Growth for 1994 -- At a recent 
business and financial seminar, Riyanto Sastroatmodjo, an economist 
at the Indonesian Institute of Economic Research, estimated 
Indonesia's 1994 macro-economic growth at about 5.7 percent, down 
from 1993's 6.3-percent figure.  He attributed the decline to a 
downward trend in investments and non-oil/gas exports.  He also said 
that the country's non-oil/gas exports, which reached 26.6 percent 
in 1992 and 10.4 percent in 1993, will most likely reach only 9.3 
percent in 1994-95.  He added that stiff competition from NAFTA, the 
single European market, and overall slow growth will further 
aggravate the situation.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 17 Dec 93 p 4) 

   Habibie Seeking Consortium To Produce 'People's Car' -- The 
Agency for Strategic Industries (BPIS), headed by Research and 
Technology Minister B.J. Habibie, is asking national automobile 
companies to form a consortium to produce a "people's car."  Habibie 
said the idea of producing a "people's car" was approved by 
President Suharto following an agreement last November between BPIS 
and the British Rover Group, a division of British Aerospace.  The 
Rover Group will not only provide technical assistance and 
technology transfer, it will also ship its 1-liter, K- series, 
Rover-I automobile engines to BPIS, according to Habibie.  The 
minister said that all other components for the car will be produced 
locally.  He added that once a "satisfactory" production level has 
been reached, Rover will extend its license to BPIS, thus allowing 
Indonesia to produce automobile engines and to achieve 100-percent 
local content. 

   BPIS is currently designing the "people's car" and expects 
production to start in 1997 or 1998.  The car is to be competitively 
priced, not only for domestic consumption, but also for export in 
the future.  BPIS will probably hold a 30-percent share in the 
consortium, with the remainder going to the national private 
companies.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 7 Dec 93 p 1) 

   Companies Interested in Setting Up Telecommunication Network -- 
Minister of Tourism, Post, and Telecommunication Joop Ave stated 
recently that his ministry has received a request from the Salim 
Group, Prayogo Pangestu, Bimantara, and Timmy Habibie to establish a 
20-million line telecommunication network between 1994 and 1999, 
with a total investment of $10 billion.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 
11 Dec 93 p 1) 

   ADB Approves Loan for Eastern Islands -- The Manila-based Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) has approved a $85-million loan to develop 
urban areas in the eastern part of the country.  The 25-year loan, 
with a grace period of five years, will support urban infrastructure 
development in West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, East Timor, 
Maluku, and Irian Jaya, which account for nearly one-third of the 
country's land area.  (Jakarta KOMPAS 23 Dec 93 p 5) 

   MALAYSIA:  High-Technology Cooperation With Indonesia Planned -- 
Malaysia is working on a high-technology cooperation program with 
Indonesia involving the aerospace and car industries of both 
countries.  Prime Minister Mahathir envisions a bilateral 
cooperation program which would lead Malaysia into manufacturing 
light aircraft, and Indonesia into specializing in larger aircraft 
manufacturing and producing auto components for Malaysia's Proton 
Saga. 

   Mahathir pointed out that there would be a sufficiently large 
market among the ASEAN countries for the aircraft produced by the 
two countries.  He also said that he will discuss in detail the 
manufacturing of Proton Saga components in Indonesia to meet 
Indonesian contents requirements and to reduce import duties. 

   Mahathir had previously announced that Malaysia will start 
producing  three light aircraft in 1994--the Eagle XTS, the basic 
trainer MD3-160, and the Dornier Seas tar CD2.  The Indonesian 
aerospace industry, on the other hand, has had 20 years of 
experience in designing and manufacturing light aircraft.  At a 
recent news conference, Malaysia's Defense Minister Najib Tun Razak 
said Indonesia had agreed in principle to buy 20 MD3-160s and to 
import 1,500 Proton Sagas.  In return, Malaysia would buy an 
undisclosed number of Indonesia's CN-235, a medium-range transport 
carrier with military application capability.  (Kuala Lumpur UTUSAN 
MALAYSIA 23 Dec 93 p 2) 

   PHILIPPINES:  Brownouts in Manila To Continue in 1994 -- 
Brownouts in Manila and other parts of the nation may still occur 
during the coming hot season, according to Representative Dante 
Tinga, chairman of the House Committee on energy.  He said the 
National Power Corporation (Napocor) only has a small supply to take 
care of the needs of industrial and residential areas.  Tinga noted 
that the nation has reserves of approximately 200 mw, while the need 
for electric power may be as high as 500 mw.  At present, brownouts 
in Manila are rare because of the two power barges Napocor recently 
installed in Batangas and Rizal.  However, the mounting operation 
costs of these power barges and the high price of electricity make 
foreign investors "less than eager" to do business in the 
Philippines.  (Manila BALITA 29 Dec 93 p 5) 

   THAILAND:  Government Approves Fijiancial Liberalization for 
Offshore Banking -- The Council of Economic Ministers recently 
approved several measures allowing offshore banking institutions 
under the Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF) to establish 
two upcountry branches and to conduct a broader scope of operations, 
including baht lending, foreign exchange transactions, and 
investment banking. 

   Each BIBF bank branch will be permitted to offer baht loans of up 
to 1 billion baht ($40 million) during the early stage, giving local 
Thai financial institutions time to adjust to the growing 
competition. 

   Last year, the Finance Ministry awarded 33 foreign banks and 15 
Thai commercial banks licences to conduct offshore banking as a way 
to liberalize the financial sector and to bolster Thailand as a 
regional financial center, but it restricted BIBF banks to 
Eurodollar transactions only.  The new measure enables BIBF banks to 
take deposits in foreign currencies, and borrow in baht and foreign 
currencies from local and foreign institutions.  BIBF banks will 
also be allowed to deposit baht and foreign currencies at local and 
foreign financial institutions, but their baht deposits must be 
equivalent to their baht lending, not to exceed 1 billion baht per 
branch.  (Bangkok THE NATION 11 Jan 94 p B1) Bangkok Bureaus 

   New Measures To Promote Greater Capital Outflow -- The Council of 
Economic Ministers has approved new measures to promote greater 
capital outflow by allowing each traveller to take out of the 
country up to $20,000 in cash, compared to $10,000 in the past.  The 
$20,000 ceiling on travellers' checks or drafts has been abolished. 

   The relaxation of foreign exchange controls will also allow 
businesses to transfer up to $10 million overseas for investment 
without prior approval, up from $5 million.  In addition, Thai 
companies can now make loans up to $10 million to their overseas 
subsidiaries.  (Bangkok THE NATION 11 Jan 94 pp Al, A2) Bangkok 
Bureau/ 

   Lower Tariffs Approved for Nonferrous Metal Products, Devices -- 
The Council of Economic Ministers has approved lower tariffs for 220 
non-ferrous metal products, measuring devices, and research 
equipment.  The Finance Ministry said the rates would come under the 
standard structure of six tariffs:  0, 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 percent. 
The tariffs on 220 non-ferrous metal products that are not locally 
produced will be immediately cut to 5 percent for primary products, 
10 percent for intermediate products, and 20-30 percent for finished 
products. 

   For 55 other products promoted by the Board of Investment or 
those that are locally produced and still need protection, the rates 
will be reduced to the mid-point between the existing levels and 
rates to apply in 1995.  They will be further reduced in 1997.  In 
addition, tariffs on 22 research equipment items and 44 measuring 
devices that cannot be produced locally are immediately reduced. 
The ministry said the changes would cause the government to lose $92 
million in tariff revenue.  (Bangkok BANGKOK POST 11 Jan 93 p 17) 
Bangkok Bureau/ 

   VIETNAM:  Foreign Investment Projects Licensed in 1993 Listed -- 


Sector                 Projects                Investment Capital 
                                               (in million $) 

Industries             129                     885.4 

Oil, gas               3                       147 

Agriculture, forestry  24                      60.6 

Fishery                2                       0.4 

Post, telegraph, 
transportation         4                       253.2 

Tourism, hotels        31                      577.7 

Services               24                      148 

Banking, finance       4                       45.1 

Construction           3                        22.5 
(residential) 

Others                 8                        28.5 

   (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE VIETNAM 9-15 Dec p 2) 

Investor Countries in 1993 Reported 

Country                Projects                Investment Capital 
                                               (in million $) 
Hong Kong              27                      562.6 

Taiwan                 38                      355.8 

South Korea            33                      323.7 

Singapore              25                      196.4 

France                 14                      172.4 

Australia              12                      134.6 

Malaysia               10                      121.2 

Thailand               13                      67.8 

Japan                  14                      38.3 

CIS                     5                      11.6 

   The list above does not include 41 projects of unnamed countries, 
with a total investment capital of $184 million.  (Hanoi THOI BAO 
KINH TE VIETNAM 9-15 Dec 93 p 2) 



   Auto Assembly Venture With Daewoo Licensed -- South Korea's 
Daewoo and the Union of Machinery Enterprise 7983 (under the Defense 
Ministry's Economic, Technological General Department) have formed a 
30-year joint venture to assemble vans, trucks, and buses.  The 
project was licensed by the State Committee for Cooperation and 
Investment (SCCI) in December and is the fourth auto assembly joint 
venture in the country. 

   Total investment capital in the new venture amounts to $32.2 
million and prescribed capital is $10 million, of which the 
Vietnamese side is  contributing 35 percent.  Future profits will be 
split 65:35 between the two partners.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE 
VIETNAM 23-29 Dec 93 p 3) 

   Workers at Foreign-Invested Firms Reportedly Underpaid -- Seventy 
percent of workers at foreign-invested firms in Ho Chi Minh City 
reportedly recive wages lower than the minimum required by the 
Vietnamese Government.  Some 638 enterprises nationwide currently 
take direct investment from foreign countries, and although they 
provide "stable employment" for about 45,000 workers, they "do not 
strictly follow" official labor regulations.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH 
TE VIETNAM 9-15 Dec p 5) 

   Foreign Firms Plan To Manufacture, Assemble Cars in Vietnam -- 
Volkswagen and the Thyssen Steel Company have submitted to the SRV 
Heavy Industry Ministry a plan to manufacture automobiles and auto 
parts in Vietnam.  Once the project is approved, Volkswagen will 
produce 2,000 cars per year on an SKD (semi knock-down) basis and 
eventually switch to a CKD (complete knock-down) basis.  Other 
companies such as Renault and BMW have also expressed interest in 
building assembly plants in Vietnam.  A Mitsubishi project was 
recently approved by the Vietnamese authorities.  Mitsubishi will be 
the second foreign company, after Mekong, to assemble automobiles in 
Vietnam.  (Hanoi LAO DONG 7 Dec 93 p 2) 

   Nguyen Trung Truc, general director of Mercedes-Benz in Vietnam, 
has announced that his company will build a maintenance facility to 
service its cars.  Whenever the Vietnamese market is able to absorb 
500-1,000 vehicles a year, Mercedes will build an assembly plant in 
Vietnam.  Truc said that the Mercedes models produced in Vietnam 
would cost less than elsewhere because of lower expenses for labor 
and service.  The vehicles will be made "to suit the country's 
environment and climate," but the quality will be the "same as in 
Germany."  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM  9-15 Dec 93 p 13) 

   Increase in 1993 Foreign Investments Reported -- In 1993, the 
State Committee for Cooperation and Investment (SCCI) licensed 282 
investment projects with a total prescribed capital of $2.863 
billion, up 40 percent over the previous year.  Since the 
introduction of the Law on Foreign Investment in 1987, Vietnam has 
granted licenses to 836 projects with a total investment of $7.5 
billion.  The biggest investors are: Taiwan with 117 projects and a 
total capital of $1.53 billion; Hong Kong, 172 projects and $1.30 
billion; and France, 50 projects and nearly $614 million.  (Hanoi 
VNA 1425 GMT 11 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau 

   Ship Repair Joint Venture Established -- Ba Son Shipyard and 
Singapore's Keppel Group formed a ship repair, building, and 
technological services joint venture on 13 January.  The new 
venture, called Bason-Keppel Company Ltd., has an investment capital 
of $6.6 million and a legal capital of $4 million, of which Vietnam 
is contributing 40 percent.  (Hanoi VNA 1436 GMT 14 Jan 94) Bangkok 
Bureau/ 

   Foreign Investment in Dong Nai Province Reported -- Dong Nai 
Province currently has 53 licensed projects worth $520 million.  The 
province's foreign partners are mainly from France, Australia, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and South Korea.  Dong Nai granted 35 licenses in 
1993 with a total investment capital of $378 million.  It ranks 
fourth in terms of joint ventures with foreign companies, trailing 
Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi, and Haiphong.  (Hanoi vNA 0609 GMT 18 Jan 
94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Taiwanese, French Firms To Help Build Refinery -- Taiwan Oil 
Company, together with France's Total Company, will help Vietnam 
build a $1.2-billion oil refinery.  Vietnam, Total, and Taiwan Oil 
will each contribute 30 percent, and the Taiwanese China Investment 
Development Corporation will contribute 10 percent.  (Hanoi Voice of 
Vietnam 2300 GMT 13 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Increase in Ho Chi Minh City Private Sector Output Reported -- 
Private sector industrial establishments in Ho Chi Minh City had a 
gross output value of $607 million in 1993, up 20.4 percent over 
1992, and accounting for 31.3 percent of the city's total industrial 
output.  Last year, about 1,435 private enterprises were licensed to 
operate in the city, raising the number of private businesses and 
companies to 2,208, with a prescribed capital of $154 million.  Some 
989 trading and service companies were in operation in 1993, up from 
34 in 1991, and outnumbering industrial production enterprises. 
(Hanoi VNA 1431 GMT 16 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Hanoi Industrial Sector Marks 22.7-Percent Increase -- In 1993, 
Hanoi's industrial sector registered a turnover of $144 million, a 
22.7-percent increase over the previous year, with city-owned 
industries alone generating a turnover of $51 million or a 31- 
percent increase.  Among those that reported a "high increase" are 
manufacturers  of leather shoes and electrical appliances, and 
producers of rubber, plastic, textile, and garments.  (Hanoi 
Television Network 1215 GMT 9 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Bank of Commerce and Industry Begins New Service -- As of 1 
January, savings account holders in the Bank of Commerce and 
Industry can withdraw money from any branch of the bank.  In 
addition to a credit slip, depositors will receive a bank statement, 
and they will be able to make withdrawals from any branch of the 
bank in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.  The minimum amount required for 
opening a savings account is $100, and the maximum one-time 
withdrawal is $1,000.  (Hanoi VNA 0647 GMT 7 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Shipping Firm Signs Contracts With Japan, ROK -- The Hanoi 
Maritime Transport Company (Hamatco), under the Hanoi Transport and 
-Public Works Service, signed several sea transport contracts with 
Japan and South Korea in 1993, totaling $1.85 million.  In order to 
become more competitive, the company plans to purchase new ships in 
the in the future.  (Hanoi VNA 0549 GMT 12 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Construction Begins on Joint Venture Hotel -- Construction of a 
450-room, $74-million five-star hotel in Ho Chi Minh City has 
recently begun.  France's Peal International Company will have a 70- 
percent share in the joint venture and the Tourism Company of Ho Chi 
Minh City, the remainder.  (Hanoi VNA 1328 GMT 12 Jan 94) Bangkok 
Bureau/ 

   'Cost-and-Freight' Crude Oil Export Noted -- A Japanese tanker 
with about 58,000 tons of crude oil left the White Tiger Oil Field 
off of southern Vietnam for Japan recently, marking the start of 
Vietnamese crude oil export on a "cost-and-freight" basis.  The 
Vietnam Falcon Shipping Company has chartered the 61,000-ton 
Chizukawa for six months to transport about 500,000 tons of crude 
oil for export.  (Hanoi VNA 1333 GMT 12 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Power Supply for Southern Provinces Increases -- The Ministry of 
Energy recently announced that power supply for 20 southern 
provinces and cities will gradually increase in 1994.  The increased 
supply will come from the operation of a new gas turbine generator 
in Ba Ria-Vung Tau with a total capacity of 100 mw.  The supply will 
further increase with the operation of generators at the Thac Mo and 
Vinh Son hydroelectricity stations which are under construction. 
Bui Van Luu, director of Power Company No. 2, said the planned power 
supply for southern provinces and cities in 1994 is about 4.6 
billion kwh, a fourfold increase over 1976, with an average daily 
supply of 15 million kwh, up 20 percent over the 1992-93 dry season. 
The supply is expected to reach 7.2 billion kwh in 1995 and 12.5 
billion kwh in the year 2000.  The power networks of all the 
districts of the 20 southern provinces and cities will be hooked to 
the national power grid in 1994.  (Hanoi VNA 0631 GMT 8 Jan 94) 
Bangkok Bureau/ 

   Three Foreign Investment Projects Approved -- The State Committee 
for Cooperation and Investment (SCCI) has granted licenses to three 
foreign projects with a total prescribed capital of $300 million. 
The first project is an automatic textile complex in Dong Nai 
Province with a capital of $242 million invested by Malaysia's 
Hualon Corporation.  The second is a venture between Vietnam and 
Singapore to produce metal boxes in Ho Chi Minh City, capitalized at 
$54 million.  The third is a project with Switzerland's Sika Company 
to establish a 100-percent foreign-invested company in Ho Chi Minh 
CitY to produce construction material, with a capital of more than 
$3.5 million.  (Hanoi VNA 1444 GMT 4 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau/ 
EAG/26JAN94/ECONF/TECHTF/EAST ASIA GROUP./SM 27/1710Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43167 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000005394001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   30 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-013--JAPAN 
<H3> <TI>      JAPAN TO LAUNCH H-II ROCKET ON 1 FEBRUARY AS SCHEDULED </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Summary:      The Japanese press reports that the National Space 
Development Agency of Japan [NASDA] will keep its 1 February launch 
date for the H-II rocket despite difficulties experienced during a 
23 December fueling rehearsal.  The launch will be a major event 
attracting nearly 1,000 government and company representatives, and 
members of the press. 

   NASDA announced on 18 January that it will launch the H-II rocket 
on 1 February, according to the 19 January MINAMI NIHON SHIMBUN. 
NASDA held an unscheduled fueling rehearsal on 14 January after 
problems were discovered during the scheduled rehearsal on 23 
December.  During the December rehearsal problems arose in eight 
places, including a leak in the helium pressure valves on the LE-7 
main engine which resulted in insufficient pressure, according to 
the 18 January MINAMI NIHON SHIMBUN.  During the 14 January 
rehearsal the moveable nozzles on the the solid rocket boosters 
developed problems, but NASDA "determined that they were not major" 
and decided to keep the 1 February launch date. 

   NASDA may feel under pressure to proceed with the launch of the 
H-II, which cost 2.7 trillion yen ($2.45 billion) to develop.  The 
H-II launch has already been rescheduled twice, delaying the launch 
about two years because of problems in developing the LE-7 main 
engine.  In 1991 the LE-7 engine exploded during a pressure test and 
killed a technician.  In 1992 another LE-7 caught on fire during a 
combustion test, according to the 25 January NIKKEI SANGYO. 
Furthermore, the launch of "Japan's first indigenously developed 
large rocket" is being touted as "placing Japan on par with the 
United States and Europe in space technology," and, according to the 
23 January YOMIURI SHIMBUN, will attract "nearly 1,000 members of 
the press, and NASDA and company representatives to Tanegashima." 
The H-II rocket will be launched from the Yoshinobu launch pad at 
the Tanegashima Space Center at 7 am on 1 February, according to the 
19 January MINAMI NIHON SHIMBUN.  It will carry a 3.27-metric ton 
payload consisting of the 865 kg OREX vehicle, and the 2.4-ton VEP. 
The 24 January NIKKEI BUSINESS reports the objectives for the launch 
are to 1) launch the rocket, 2) place the VEP in a transfer orbit, 
and 3) have the OREX reenter. NASDA reportedly will consider the 
launch a success if objectives one and two are accomplished. 

   The VEP, which is a dummy of experimental technology satellite 6 
(ETS-6), is scheduled to separate 28 minutes after launch and enter 
an elliptical stationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,200 
kilometers and a perigee of about 450 kilometers.  Because its 
apogee-motor fuel tanks will be loaded with water rather than fuel 
it will remain in this transfer orbit.  The VEP's batteries will 
give it a life of 100 hours and it will transmit H-II vibration and 
orbit-positioning accuracy data to the ground during that time, 
according to the 5 January SANKEI SHIMBUN. 

   The OREX will separate 14 minutes after launch and orbit the 
earth once at 450 kilometers, according to the SANKEI SHIMBUN. 
About 1 hour and 40 minutes after launch the OREX will fire its 
retro rockets and reenter the atmosphere, according to the 27 
October 93 NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN.  Two hours after launch OREX will 
splash down in the Pacific near Christmas Island, according to the 5 
January SANKEI SHIMBUN.  The 5 November MINAMI NIHON SHIMBUN reports 
the OREX will not be recovered after splashdown because of the costs 
that would be involved. 

   (AUTHOR:COOK.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF JAPAN 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6534) 

EAG/28JAN94/TECHTF/ASIA DIVISION/SDJ 28/2102Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43168 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000005494001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   30 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-28Jan94-Russia 
<H3> <TI>      Kozyrev's Remarks on Russian "Military Presence" Spark Furor </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                              Reports that Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev called for 
maintaining Russia's military presence in the states of the 
former Soviet Union have sparked vehement protests from the 
Baltic states.  Although he and other foreign ministry officials 
later claimed that his remarks had been taken out of context and 
that Russia's policy on withdrawing troops from the Baltics 
remains unchanged, they nonetheless defended Russia's right to 
protect Russian interests and criticized negative Western 
reactions to the reports.  Boosted by strong support for Russia's 
"new" foreign policy course from domestic media and pressed by 
critics in the Duma, who have attacked him for neglecting Russian 
interests, Kozyrev will very likely continue his course of more 
aggressively championing those interests despite Western 
concerns. 
                        END SUMMARY 
   In a speech to a 18-19 January gathering of Russia's ambassadors 
to the CIS and Baltic states, Foreign Minister Kozyrev reportedly 
called for maintaining a Russian military presence in former 
Soviet republics and stressed that Russia must protect its 
interests and the rights of ethnic Russians in the near abroad. 
The text of Kozyrev's speech has not been observed to have been 
published, but ITAR-TASS reported that Kozyrev told the 
ambassadors that "Russia should not withdraw from those regions 
which have been the sphere of Russian interests for centuries." 
Kozyrev reportedly added, "We should not fear these words about a 
military presence" (18 January).  The ITAR-TASS report also 
indicated that Kozyrev labelled the CIS and Baltic states a 
region of "priority vital interests for Russia" where there are 
also "major threats to [these] interests."  Kozyrev was also 
quoted as contending that as soon as Russian troops leave the 
region, a "security vacuum" will emerge, and it will "inevitably" 
be filled by forces "often not friendly and, in many cases, 
directly hostile" to Russian interests. 
   Baltic Protests 
   The Baltic states immediately protested Kozyrev's remarks, 
charging that Moscow had departed from its previous official 
position supporting a complete withdrawal of troops.  The prime 
ministers of the three Baltic states signed a statement on 19 
January, stating that this "new" policy is "contrary" to Russia's 
international obligations and complicates the troop withdrawal 
talks (Riga radio, 19 January).  In a press release, the Estonian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) characterized Russia as a "big 
bully terrorizing smaller, weaker neighbors" and charged that 
from Kozyrev's statements it was "clear" that Russia views Baltic 
independence as a "temporary annoyance" ( Estonian MFA press 
release, 18 January).  Estonia's representative to the CSCE 
requested that the CSCE security forum make an official inquiry 
(Tallinn radio, 19 January). 
   Russian Clarifications 
   Apparently stung by what Kozyrev termed the "hysterics" and 
"panicky" reaction from abroad (Interfax, 19 January), he and 
other ministry officials responded with a series of 
recriminations, denials, and clarifications: 
   -- Kozyrev, appearing on Russian television on 19 January, 
charged that "Latvia... and some of the mass media in the other 
Baltic states" had launched a "completely artificial" campaign 
that "deliberately distorted" his words with the "obvious aim" of 
"yet again gaining the sympathy" of the West.  He said that 
rather than raising "this absolutely unfounded screaming," Latvia 
should concentrate on drawing up agreements on the conditions for 
a troop withdrawal, adding that Russia would then be ready to 
continue the withdrawals.  Clearly miffed at what he termed the 
"hurried," "inappropriate," and "unbalanced" reaction of the U.S. 
State Department, Kozyrev also complained that "our partnership 
merits having the State Department spokesman get [the facts] 
right" before criticizing Russia's foreign minister. 
   -- Kozyrev's foreign policy adviser Galina Sidorova claimed that 
ITAR-TASS had distorted Kozyrev's remarks.  She insisted that the 
foreign minister had not advocated the continued presence of 
Russian troops in the Baltics (Moscow radio, 19 January). 
   -- MFA press chief Grigoriy Karasin also claimed that the ruckus 
resulted from an "inaccurate choice of quotes" which "several 
politicians" had tried to use as "an argument of insinuations" 
(Interfax, 19 January).  Karasin stressed that there is "no 
question" of any change in Russia's approach toward the Baltic 
states.  He explained that although Kozyrev had started 
discussing the former Soviet republics, including both the CIS 
and the Baltics, when he stated that Russia should maintain a 
military presence, he was referring only to those states in the 
CIS that have bilateral agreements with Moscow.  In later 
remarks, Karasin said that the "hullabaloo" over Kozyrev's 
comments generated "incomprehension and indignation" in Moscow 
and he called for an evaluation of the full text of Kozyrev's 
speech.  Complaining that unnamed persons either still retain an 
"enemy image" of Russia or are trying to restore it, Karasin 
huffed that rather than criticizing a Russian minister the West 
"should concentrate its attention" on how to "properly safeguard" 
the rights of Russians in Latvia and Estonia (ITAR-TASS, 20 
January). 
   Baltic Anxieties Persist 
   Apparently unmollified despite Russian explanations, Latvian and 
Estonian officials continued to criticise Kozyrev's remarks: 
   -- Estonian MFA official Raul Malk said that the Russian view 
that it had "stragetic interests" in its "near abroad" should 
cause anxiety in the international community.  He added that such 
a stance contradicts the US.-Russian summit declaration that no 
dividing lines should be drawn in Europe, noting that calling 
some states the "near abroad" in itself draws dividing lines 
(Tallinn ETA news release, 20 January). 
   -- After receiving the full text of Kozyrev's comments that the 
Russian MFA apparently supplied him, Latvian Foreign Minister 
Georgs Andrejevs, stressing that Kozyrev's comments were 
"ambiguous" and allow for "various interpretations," said that 
Latvia stands by its negative assessment (Tallinn BNS, 20 
January). 
   -- Latvian President Guntis Ulmanis, who reportedly received a 
call from U.S. President Bill Clinton (ITAR-TASS, 21 January), 
said that the call had "dispell[ed]" many "suspicions" about the 
talks between the U.S. and Russia, adding that the U.S. 
President's words "allow Latvia to calm down somewhat."  He 
emphasized, however, that Latvia "should always be prepared" for 
an "agressive" Russian policy. 
   Russian Media Reaction 
   With the exception of the reformist and usually pro-Yeltsin 
Izvestiya, the Russian media's reaction to Kozyrev's remarks was 
largely supportive.  In some cases, the media applauded outright 
both his speech and his complaints about the international 
reaction. (See Note 1)  Despite some continued disagreement about 
what Kozyrev said--Rossiyskiye Vesti, for example, maintained 
that Kozyrev did include the Baltics in his statement about 
keeping a military presence in the near abroad, thus 
contradicting MFA denials--most commentators, using remarkably 
similar arguments, gave short shrift to what they viewed as a 
biased Western response to justified remarks about legitimate 
Russian interests. 
   (Note 1)  Sovetskaya Rossiya, whose commentators have criticized 
Kozyrev for a pro-Western orientation, was not observed to have 
commented on the foreign minister's remarks. 
   -- A 21 January article in the government-owned Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta alluded to double standards, asking why, after the "world 
community" regarded "with understanding" U.S. actions in Panama 
and Grenada and the "punishment" the United States meted out to 
Libya for terrorist acts against Americans in Berlin, Russia 
should be "forbidden" to be "firm and resolute if the life and 
safety of its compatriots are at stake?"  The article stressed 
that the MFA's "new course," focused on the countries of the 
former Soviet Union and on "its own compatriots," reflects the 
interests of Russians "first and foremost," adding that "whether 
some people like it or not, a great power has to protect its own 
interests."  Charging that "some people are quite willing to play 
the tired old record of 'imperial pretensions,'" against Russia, 
the article warned that "if [Moscow and Washington] want our 
peoples to remain friendly and our states partners," it is 
"necessary to spike the propaganda guns" and for the West to 
adopt a "serious attitude" toward Russia. 
   -- A 21 Moscow radio commentary by Vladislav Kozyakov chided the 
U.S. spokesman for expressing his "displeasure" at Kozyrev's 
comments with "surprising" "haste."  Asking why there should be 
this "hasty desire" to "put in doubt" Russia's political course, 
Kozyakov stressed that such a critical response, "even at the 
high level of cooperation between Moscow and Washington," serves 
as a reminder that the American side still "sometimes displays 
signs of the past policy of double standards."  Echoing 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, the article noted that the United States had 
resorted to military intervention in Panama, Grenada, and other 
"zones of its national interests," and contended that for the 
United States and other countries to maintain "partnership" with 
Russia, an "understanding of Russia's vital interests" in states 
of the former Soviet Union is "essential." 
   -- The Defense Ministry's newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda in a 20 
January article titled "Neighboring Foreign Countries Were, Are, 
and Remain a Zone of Russia's Vital Interests," strongly, if 
somewhat ironically,  supported Kozyrev for "unambiguous[ly] and 
definitive[ly]" stating that the CIS and Baltic countries are 
regions of Russia's "paramount interests."  After declaring that 
Russia cannot "close [its] eyes" to the "shameless and at times 
humiliating pressure on our fellow countrymen" in neighboring 
states, which the article called acts of "criminal disrespect," 
the article warned that "attempts by anyone anywhere to assume 
the role of interpreter and organizer" of Russian affairs in such 
countries will be viewed as "unfriendly acts."  The article ended 
by noting that Russia is "making it plain" that states that want 
to live "in love and fond accord" with Russia should take account 
of its "geopolitical interests." 
   -- In a 19 January article, the reformist Kommersant-Daily 
maintained that Kozyrev's speech--and the whole tenor of the 
conference--constituted an "urgent" foreign policy revision in 
response to the December elections.  Claiming that the thesis 
that the Liberal Democratic Party's electoral success resulted 
from a backlash on economic issues, and not nationalism was 
partly a "delusion," the article claimed that the USSR's 
disintegration is still "painfully perceived" by many Russians--a 
fact understood by Kozyrev who was now making "adjustments." 
Commenting on the "masses of Russian refugees" in 1993, the 
article also noted with apparent approval Kozyrev's statement 
that the protection of ethnic Russians in the near abroad was now 
a strategic priority--a sharp contrast, the article pointed out, 
to the provisions of the Concept on Foreign Policy adopted by the 
Russian Security Council in March 1993 which ignored the subject. 
   Izvestiya Dissents 
   In contrast to most of the media, Izvestiya, which in the past 
has supported Kozyrev on many issues, (See Note 2) took issue 
with both his statements and the MFA's subsequent actions.  In a 
a 20 January report, Maksim Yusin castigated Kozyrev and the MFA 
for responding with "remarkably limp" denials to ITAR-TASS' 
initial "annoying blunder," adding that this response had led to 
"far from favorable" foreign commentary.  Even stronger criticism 
appeared in a 22 January article titled "Lithuania Takes Fright 
and Changes Foreign Policy Orientation; But This Is Not the Way 
To Help the Russian Minority."  The article distinguished between 
an idealistic "early Kozyrev" and a "late Kozyrev" whose "new 
tough-talking approach" is, it contended, only apt to increase 
the Baltic states hostility toward their Russian minorities and 
drive the Baltics into NATO.  The article noted that "it is the 
task of diplomats not to cause frictions between their country 
and its neighbors, but to make them friends," as the "early 
Kozyrev" had done. 
   (Note 2)  For example, Izvestiya supported Kozyrev after his 14 
December 1992 "shock" treatment speech to the CSCE in Stockholm. 
See the Trends of 23 December, 1992, page 10. 
   Outlook 
   Kozyrev has been under pressure from critics such as Liberal 
Democratic Party leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy and Vladimir Lukin, 
the new head of the State Duma's International Affairs Committee 
and a longtime rival, who have championed protection of Russian 
national interests while criticizing what they have portrayed as 
Kozyrev's inattention to those interests.  Now that these two are 
perched in positions in the new State Duma, they may turn up the 
heat on Kozyrev.  In apparent response to the critics, Kozyrev 
has become progressively more assertive on Russian interests over 
the past year.  He may backtrack or tone down statements--in 
Krygyzia, for example, he apologized for what he termed "fascist 
statements" that he had made in Moscow recently, while continuing 
to emphasize that Russia cannot "remain indifferent to violations 
of Russians' rights (Interfax, 25 January).  Nevertheless, 
Kozyrev is unlikely to substantially retreat from his tough 
stance on the rights of ethnic Russians, despite international 
concerns. 
   (AUTHOR:  BELLINGER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/CB 29/0020z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43169 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000194001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 93-054--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
29 December 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   BULGARIA 

   COMMERCIAL BANKS REPORT 9 BILLION LEVA LOSS IN OCTOBER: 
According to figures published in the information bulletin of the 
Bulgarian National Bank (BNB), commercial banks reported profits of 
497 million leva during October, but the banks' balance sheets still 
showed losses in excess of 9 billion leva, mainly arising from bad 
loans to loss-making enterprises.  The banks' stability continues to 
the threatened because of the failure to settle the problem of 
enterprise bad debt, delays in privatization of the banking sector, 
and the holdup of the structural reform.  The recorded losses stem 
chiefly from financial operations -- the banks' principal activity. 
Expenditures for wages, insurance, and allowances are also running 
at a high level, although these make up only a small proportion of 
the banks' costs.  BNB experts are unanimous in declaring that the 
commercial banks' problems are primarily due to bad loans to 
enterprises.  It is said that, because of this, one state bank will 
be unable to pay a dividend to shareholders this year.  (Sofia 
KONTINENT in Bulgarian 7 Dec 93 p 8 AU) 

   PRIVATIZATION AGENCY APPROVES SALE OF SUGAR PLANT:  On 6 
December, the Supervisory Board of the Privatization Agency formally 
approved a deal to sell the Svoboda-Kristal Sugar Plant in Kameno, 
Burgas District, to a Bulgarian private company named Barteks. 
According to experts, the Multigroup concern has an interest in 
Barteks, which reportedly has experience in sugar processing. 
(Sofia KONTINENT in Bulgarian 7 Dec 93 p 9 AU) 

   NATIONAL BANK'S DOLLAR RESERVES FALL:  According to REUTER, in 
the month ending 30 November, the foreign exchange reserves of the 
Bulgarian National Bank (BNB) fell by $30 million, declining from 
$827.2 million on 30 October.  These figures do not include the 
value of the gold reserves held by the BNB.  (Sofia PARI in 
Bulgarian 9 Dec 93 p 1 AU) 

   BULGARIAN-MACEDONIAN BANK'S ACTIVITY REPORTED:  "Within a year, 
the Balkan Bank-Skopje will monopolize all economic relations 
between the Republic of Macedonia and Bulgaria."  This is the 
opinion of Georgi Kyurkchiyski, the bank's director general, 
expressed in an interview he gave to the Blagoevgrad newspaper 
ZAPAD.  The bank was founded as a subsidiary company of Balkanbank, 
which holds 34 percent of the shares.  Bulgarian and Macedonian 
shareholders each own 33 percent of the capital.  The bank already 
has an office in Sofia and will soon open branches in other 
Macedonian towns besides Skopje.  (Sofia BTA in English 1645 GMT 12 
Dec 93 AU) 

   TURKISH FIRM OFFERS TO BUILD YEAST PLANT IN NIKOPOL:  The Turkish 
Company Pakmaya has made an offer to the Nikopol Town Council to 
build the largest yeast factory in the Balkan peninsula, the PARI 
daily reports.  According to the newspaper, the planned annual 
production capacity is 10,000 tons of fresh and dry yeast.  The 
production equipment, worth $1 million, will be provided by the 
Turkish company on soft credit terms.  (Sofia BTA in English 1645 
GMT 12 Dec 93 AU) 

   PAINT EXPORT DEAL SIGNED:  Paints manufactured at the Khudozhnik 
(Artist) Factory will be sold in the 12 EC countries, Austria, 
Sweden, and Switzerland as well as in the francophone countries in 
Africa.  The contract was signed between the Union of Bulgarian 
Artists and the French company DPS, which produces equipment and 
paint for airplanes.  According to the company manager, Rober 
Vassilevski, the high-quality Bulgarian paints will be competitive 
in the Western market.  The founding of a joint venture between the 
Union of Bulgarian Artists and DPS is planned for next year. 
According to the union's president, Prof. Borislav Stoev, this will 
result in an increase in output by the end of 1996.  (Sofia BTA in 
English 1645 GMT 12 Dec 93 AU) 

   SHELL INVESTMENT PLANS:  Shell has invested almost $3 million in 
Bulgaria so far, Jules Kortenhorst, director general of Shell 
Bulgaria, told the DUMA daily.  Shell Bulgaria is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of the London-based company, Kortenhorst explained.  He 
expects at least another $10 million to be invested here in 1994. 
So far, none of the invested money has been borrowed from Bulgarian 
banks.  The completion of the first gas station that Shell built in 
Dragichevo at a cost of $1 million is being now followed by four 
more stations -- one each in Montana and Asenovgrad and two in 
Pazardzhik -- all of which are under construction.  Shell Bulgaria 
controls less than 1 percent of the petroleum-products market but 
aspires to bring this percentage up to 5-30 percent, Kortenhorst 
said.  Kortenhorst is pleased with his main Bulgarian partner 
Nef tokhim and says that "the Burgas Refinery works well and its 
products meet our standard requirements."  He denied allegations by 
the Union of Private Oil Business Companies in Bulgaria that Shell 
bribes public officers to obtain building permits for its gas 
stations.  (Sofia BTA in English 1244 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   BULGARIAN-CZECH ECONOMIC SEMINAR:  A Bulgarian-Czech economic 
seminar opened in Sofia on 14 December under the auspices of Prime 
Minister Lyuben Berov.  Cabinet ministers, deputy ministers, and 
experts will discuss the Czech republic's experience in implementing 
the economic reform and privatization.  The seminar is sponsored by 
the Czech Embassy in Bulgaria and the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry.  (Sofia BTA in English 2013 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CENTER IN OPERATION:  An agricultural credit 
center, established in September 1992, has been in operation since 
early 1993.  Its authorized capital is 107.3 million leva, of which 
90 percent (98.7 million leva) is held by the Foreign Aid Agency. 
Balkanbank is the exclusive distributor of loans.  The credit center 
aims to help the land reform through medium- and long-term 
investment lending to Bulgarian agriculture, its executive director 
Dimitur Keremidchiyski explains in an article published in the 
latest issue of the "Capital Press" weekly.  Loans to sole farmers 
range from 40,000 to 180,000 leva, while up to 500,000 leva is lent 
to cooperatives.  The money can be invested in equipment, livestock, 
construction, and repairs.  The center lends at an annual interest 
rate of 7.9 percent, with a one-year grace period.  The maximum term 
for repayment of the principal is seven years. 

   The sources of financing are the credit center's owned capital 
and reserves, leva loans from banks and lending institutions at 6 
percent annual interest, an anti-inflationary scheme, foreign 
currency funds borrowed abroad, and funds granted under specialized 
assistance programs.  According to Keremidchiyski, so far the only 
source of financing has been the center's own share capital.  Since 
the start of 1993, the credit center has opened two credit lines of 
107 million leva and 17 million leva each.  Shares in the credit 
center can be held by juristic and physical persons, industrial 
companies, nonprofit corporations, and so on.  (Sofia BTA in English 
1408 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   NEFTOKHIM BOARD REMOVES DIRECTOR:  On 30 November, the Board of 
Directors of Nef tokhim AD, the country's largest petroleum 
refinery, decided to remove Georgi Stankov from the board and to 
relieve him from the post of executive marketing director.  The 
grounds for the board's decision included the irregular deliveries 
of petroleum from Russia last month and certain weaknesses in 
concluding contracts for processing.  The company's Supervisory 
Council has also recommended that the board remove Managing Director 
Georgi Sarustov.  The board will consider this matter at a meeting 
later this week.  (Sofia PARI in Bulgarian 1 Dec 93 p 2 AU) 

   IRISH-BULGARIAN GOLD-MINING VENTURE:  A few days ago the Ministry 
of Industry gave the green light for the formation of BIMAK -- a 
Bulgarian-Irish mining company.  The company documents will be 
registered at Sofia District Court next week.  The Irish partner in 
the joint enterprise is the Navan company, which will transfer $4 
million to the credit of Biokhim to finance its 25-percent share in 
the venture.  The Bulgarian share of the new company consists of 
long-term assets belonging to the erstwhile Chelopech Limited 
Company.  Navan managed to convince Bulgarian experts of the 
economic viability of a new process to eliminate arsenic from the 
gold-bearing ore concentrate produced at the Chelopech mine, and the 
new venture will install the necessary equipment.  The existing 
mining and ore-concentrating plant, which came into operation in the 
seventies, is outdated and standing idle at present, but is 
nonetheless capable of producing and concentrating up to 0.5 million 
tons of ore annually.  Up to two years ago, when work at the mine 
was suspended, the mine produced 57 percent of Bulgaria's gold 
output.  The mine is estimated to have about 50 million tons of ore 
reserves, with a content of 47 grams of gold and 120 grams of silver 
per ton.  (Bulgaria PARI in Bulgarian 29 Nov 93 p 5 AU) 

   EU LOWERS TARIFFS ON BULGARIAN WINES:  Bulgaria will be able to 
export 333,000 hectoliters of wine annually, paying reduced customs 
duties, under an agreement with the European Union (EU) that Deputy 
Trade Minister Dencho Georgiev signed in Brussels.  According to 
another agreement signed by him, some 40 Bulgarian wines will have 
their trademarks protected in European markets.  The agreement on 
reciprocal tariff quotas for certain wines grants preferential 
tariffs for the annual export by Bulgaria of 214,000 hectoliters of 
bottled wines, 118,000 hectoliters of cask wines, and 1,000 
hectoliters of sparkling wines, Georgiev said on his return from 
Brussels on 1 December. 

   To qualify for this treatment, the wines should be of controlled 
quality and carry appellations of origin.  The customs duties will 
be reduced 20 percent during the first year, 40 percent during the 
second year, and 60 percent from the third year on.  For their part, 
the member countries of the European Union will be able to export to 
Bulgaria 42,000 hectoliters of bottled and cask wines and 1,000 
hectoliters of sparkling wines at 10, 20, and 30 percent reduced 
duties during the first, second, and third years respectively.  The 
two agreements will take effect after the entry into force of the 
interim trade agreement with the European Union, Georgiev said. 
(Sofia BTA in English 0914 GMT 2 Dec 93 AU) 

   DANUBE BASIN WATER MANAGEMENT CONVENTION:  The convention on 
management of the Danube River waters will be signed in Bulgaria -- 
this was the decision of a government officials' meeting held from 
29 November to 3 December.  Officials from Austria, Bulgaria, 
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, and Slovakia took 
part in the talks, which were also attended by an EC Commission 
delegation.  Slovenia, Ukraine, and Moldova will receive copies of 
adopted resolutions, Branimir Natov, deputy minister of environment 
and leader of the Bulgarian delegation, told a news conference in 
Sofia on 3 December.  The meeting coordinated the final version of 
the draft convention, which is expected to be signed in the middle 
of 1994. 

   The convention aims to achieve stable and balanced water 
management, including the protection and rational use of surfaceand 
ground waters, in the Danube basin.  It will apply to an area of 
almost 817,000 square kilometers including the territories of 14 
European countries.  Bulgaria attaches special importance to the 
convention because of the serious pollution of the Danube's lower 
reaches, most sources of which are outside this country.  The 
measures that the convention sets out will help reduce water 
pollution in the lower reaches of the Danube River.  An 
international system of notification and control of pollution 
incidents will be set up.  (Sofia BTA in English 1407 GMT 3 Dec 93 
AU) 

   SUGAR REFINERY PRIVATIZED:  The Privatization Agency announced on 
3 December that it had signed a bill of sale for the Kristal Svoboda 
Sugar Processing plant in Kameno, Burgas District, but declined to 
identify the new owner.  The plant is the largest of its kind in the 
country, but at present it is operating far below capacity.  (Sofia 
Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 2000 GMT 3 Dec 93 AU) 

   CONSTRUCTION WORKERS EMPLOYED IN GERMANY:  5,800 Bulgarian 
builders were employed in Germany in November, officials announced 
at the Bulgarian-German working meeting held at the Ministry of 
Construction in Sofia.  The last two months saw a fulfillment of 
over 28 percent of the annual quota (of 2,000 workers a month).  The 
sides will sign a protocol to specify the 1991 bilateral accord. 
(Sofia BTA in English 1521 GMT 4 Dec 93 AU) 

   NEW TYPE OF CEMENT:  The Granatoid Company near Pernik has begun 
producing a new type of cement, used for making stressed concrete. 
The material's strength has been enhanced.  Experts say that it is 
suitable for building bridges.  According to Deputy Director Panayot 
Panayotov, many companies have shown interest.  (Sofia BTA in 
English 1521 GMT 4 Dec 93 AU) 

   OVER 30,000 TOURISTS EXPECTED THIS WINTER:   Bulgaria's largest 
travel agent, Balkantourist Ltd., is expecting the first 2,500 
foreign tourists, who will arrive on charter flights from Germany, 
the U.K., and the Netherlands immediately after the winter tourist 
season opens on December 16.  A good season is expected, and the 
tourist industry expects to increase its revenues as compared to 
last year, Balkantourist Executive Director Aleksandur Spasov said. 
Hotels at Borovets, Pamporovo, and on Mount Vitosha as well as the 
whole facilities of the agency are ready to receive 28,OOO charter 
program tourists and another 3,000 on regular flights from the U.K., 
Germany, France, Israel, Hungary, Russia, Macedonia, the Czech 
Republic, and RSA (Republic of South Africa).  Such an exchange 
determines the agency's leading role for winter holidaymakers in the 
country.  There are 3,100 beds, distributed among Borovets (1,833), 
Pamporovo (963), Vitosha (164), and Bansko (140).  (Sofia BTA in 
English 1432 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   BULGARTABAK BUYS UP TOBACCO CROP:  Bulgartabak has purchased over 
90 percent of the Virginia and Burleigh tobacco crop, the holding 
company's executive director, Rafail Ivanov, informed the KONTINENT 
daily on 24 November.  He explained that the commercial bank had 
granted credits of 2 billion leva to finance the purchase of the 
1992 harvest.  According to Ivanov, the same amount of credit will 
be needed to purchase the 1993 crop.  Before the end of December, 
the Ministries of Finance, Trade, and Agriculture have to prepare a 
program for the future development of tobacco production.  So far, 
severe financial difficulties have prevented the joint stock 
companies controlled by Bulgartabak from buying any of the 1993 
tobacco crop.  (Sofia KONTINENT in Bulgarian 25 Nov 93 p 8 AU) 

   BULGARIAN-MACEDONIAN FAIR OPENS IN SKOPJE:  The first Bulgarian- 
Macedonian Fair opened in Skopje on 25 November.  The event was 
organized by Business-Center Ltd., Sofia, and the M Publishing 
House, Skopje.  The fair occupies an area of 6O0 square meters, and 
46 Bulgarian companies, five of them established as Bulgarian- 
Macedonian joint ventures, are exhibiting.  It is planned to hold a 
consultation session on "How To Do Business With Bulgaria," at which 
economists and specialists from Bulgaria and Macedonia will exchange 
experience and ideas.  (Sofia BTA in English 2105 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   STATE RAILROAD CHIEF HINTS AT FARE RISE:  According to the TRUD 
daily on 27 November, Atanas Tonev, director general of Bulgarian 
State Railways, has stated that as of 1 December, the fares for all 
types of passenger trains will go up by an average of 19.8 percent. 
Long distance fares will be most expensive, rising by up to 25 
percent.  (Sofia BTA in English 1737 GMT 27 Nov 93 AU) 

   THREE MORE GAS STATIONS PRIVATIZED:  Three petrol stations, until 
recently run by Petrol Inc., were privatized at an open-bid auction 
held at the Ministry of Trade.  Now eight petrol stations are 
already in private hands.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 
AU) 

   CHINESE EXHIBITION OPENS IN SOFIA:  China's famous silk, fine 
cottonwear, various products of its food processing industry, and a 
wide range of medicines and biostimulators are on display at the 
Chinese exhibition that opened in the National Palace of Culture in 
Sofia on 23 November.  The items are provided by leading Chinese 
manufacturing and commercial companies.  The exhibition was staged 
for the purpose of establishing direct business contacts and 
studying the possibility of cooperation in different production 
sectors.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   SHUMEN FIRM LICENSED TO EXPORT MEAT TO EU COUNTRIES:  The Rhodopa 
Meat Processing Enterprise in Shumen (northeastern Bulgaria) has 
received an officially license to export its products to European 
Union (EU) member countries.  The first contracts were concluded for 
the export of lamb to Italy and Turkey.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 
GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   INADEQUATE PACKING HAMPERS HERB EXPORTS:  Offering 350 species of 
herbs, the Bilkokoop Cooperative Enterprise fully meets the 
requirements in the domestic market, Vasil Georgiev, the firm's 
director general, told a news conference.  However, the enterprise's 
major problem is inadequate packing, which affects its 
competitiveness in international markets.  Nevertheless, Georgiev 
said, Bilkokoop has delegated rights in Germany, Spain, and the 
United States, and maintains business contacts with Italy, Austria, 
Switzerland, Hungary, and Great Britain.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 
GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   ELEKTROIMPEX JOINT VENTURE:  Elektroimpex signed an agreement to 
form a limited liability venture with Germany's ASEA Braun Bovery. 
The ABB-Electroimpex-Engineering Ltd. will carry out engineering 
activities in the field of electrical high- and medium-voltage 
distributors.  The new venture also plans to enter third country 
markets.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   SECOND TANKER BUILT FOR RUSSIA:  The shipyard in Ruse launched a 
second 2,150-ton tanker built for the Russian Likoprommarket 
company.  In addition to the four tankers of the Liko series, the 
shipyard will build more river and sea-going vessels for the Russian 
company.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   TURKISH BUSINESSMEN CONSIDER INVESTMENTS IN SHUMEN:  A meeting 
with representatives of the Ankara-based Turkish Business 
Association discussed the possibilities for trade and investments in 
the Shumen District.  The participants were familiarized with the 
legal conditions for foreigners carrying out economic activity in 
Bulgaria, Bulgarian customs regulations, quality control of exported 
and imported goods, protection of foreign intellectual property in 
Bulgaria, etc.  The chairman of the Turkish Business Association 
said that the participants in the meeting would pass on the 
information they had learned to 8,000 other businessmen in Turkey. 
(Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   MICROALGAE CULTIVATION:  The capacity of the cultivated 
microalgae installations in Rupite on the Struma River (southwestern 
Bulgaria) make it possible to process approximately five or six tons 
of biomass per year.  A Japanese company offered to purchase 50 tons 
a year at about $15 per kilogram.  However, Medika, the company 
running the installations, should make some additional investments 
to increase their output -- something it cannot afford at the 
moment.  (Sofia BTA in English 1640 GMT 28 Nov 93 AU) 

   MINISTRY REPORTS ON MEAT PRICES, LIVESTOCK NUMBERS:  In late 
1994, Bulgarians will pay 108 leva for a kilogram of pork, 
Agriculture Ministry experts stated on 1 December.  Pork presently 
costs 80 leva per kilogram, while chicken costs 50 leva.  The 
minimum monthly wage in Bulgaria of 1,400 leva would 18 kg of pork 
or 28 kg of chicken.  Meat prices are rising in line with the annual 
inflation rate, which, according to the national budget bill, will 
average 45 percent in 1994, ministry experts said.  Demand for meat 
slackened dramatically in 1993, and state-owned companies reacted by 
cutting meat output by 43 percent in January-September 1993, as 
compared with the same period in 1992.  The output of chicken meat 
alone plummeted 63 percent. 

   Lowered domestic demand was the main reason for the decline in 
animals purchased and in livestock numbers, according to the 
figures.  In January-September 1993, cattle numbers went down by 
266,000 head, pigs by 677,000 head, and sheep by 1 million head. 
The belated land reform and high feed prices were further factors 
contributing to the livestock decimation.  In January-September 
1993, meat exports dropped to one-tenth of their 1992 level, while 
meat imports doubled.  Meat purchase prices are expected to lag 
behind retail prices and will probably go up by no more than 10 
percent.  The margin between purchase and retail prices tends to 
widen and this ruins meat producers, while the profits are 
distributed down the chain of middlemen.  Experts expect domestic 
meat consumption to rise gradually if the economy recovers.  The 
Agriculture Ministry is contemplating measures to encourage meat 
exports and reduce export taxes on furs, wool, and other products. 
(Sofia BTA in English 1444 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 
ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1721z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43170 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000294001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 93-054--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
December 29, 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   HUNGARY 

   PARLIAMENT PASSES 1994 BUDGET:  Parliament approved the law on 
the 1994 budget with 190 votes (54.3 percent) for, 157 against, and 
three abstentions on 14 December.  The budget envisages a deficit of 
329,561.4 million forints, which is the balance of an expenditure of 
1,637,695.2 million forints and a revenue of 1,308,133.8 million 
forints.  The law authorizes the finance minister to issue state 
bonds worth 300 billion forints with over 12 months maturity, and 
increase the stock of treasury bills and other state papers by 
29,561.4 million forints to refinance the deficit.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 2101 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   BUDGET DEFICIT 170.7 BILLION FORINTS ON 31 OCTOBER:  The Finance 
Ministry has published the central budget figures for September and 
October.  The deficit in September was 162.7 billion forints, up to 
170.7 billion forints at the end of October.  The ministry said the 
deficit could so far be financed through state bond issues. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1452 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   LIBERALIZED EXPORT LICENSING SYSTEM FOR 1994:  The government has 
approved a new export-import licensing system for 1994.  No export 
license will be needed next year for poultry industry products, 
certain pork and beef kinds, or for cereals and numerous 
horticultural products, with the exception of wheat.  As for 
industrial products, permits will continue to be necessary for the 
export of energy sources and industrial basic materials of 
fundamental importance.  As a result of the new measures, the export 
de-regulation level will rise from the current 64 percent to 78 
percent next year.  No further restrictions can be introduced in 
industrial imports due to the limitations of international 
contracts.  However, control of imports can be increased in 
agriculture.  The government will therefore bind certain dairy 
industry products and certain sugar and farinaceous industry 
products to permits.  This will cut the import de-regulation level 
from 90 to 88 percent in 1994.  The deficit of the foreign trade 
balance is expected to be more than $3 billion this year.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1207 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   NATIONAL BANK TO FIX ONLY CENTRAL CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATE:  As of 
January 1, 1994, the Hungarian National Bank (MNB) will fix only the 
central rate of foreign currencies to the forint, and stop fixing 
the selling and buying rates.  The change will be effected under an 
amendment to the 1991 law on accounting.  The amendment allows 
foreign importers and exporters to pay in forints.  Previously, only 
foreign currencies were approved as a means of payment.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 2131 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   BANKS TO BE PRIVATIZED IN THREE STAGES:  The State Holding 
Company (AV RT) is to privatize the major commercial banks in its 
portfolio in three stages.  The first Step will be to find 
professional strategic investors to take stakes of between 30 
percent and 50 percent.  In exceptional cases, investors could 
acquire more than 50 percent.  The second step will be to involve 
other long-term investors to provide the necessary capital for the 
expansion of the banks' activities.  This could include domestic and 
foreign insurance companies, pension insurance funds, and investment 
companies.  In the third phase, the banks' shares will be introduced 
onto the Budapest Stock Exchange (BSE). 

   After privatization, the breakdown of ownership in each of the 
banks is expected to be:  Strategic investors between 30 and 50 
percent, financial investors between 2 and 10 percent, employees and 
management between 5 and 10 percent, and small investors between 5 
and 20 percent.  The state will retain a stake in the banks, with 
the proportion to remain in long-term state ownership laid down in 
an August 1992 government decree.  In the case of the National 
Savings Bank (OTP) and the Hungarian Bank for Investment and 
Development (MBFB) the amount is 50 percent plus one vote, in the 
case of the Hungarian Credit Bank (MHB), the Commercial and Credit 
Bank (K and H), the General Banking and Trust Co. (AEB), Budapest 
Bank (BB), and the Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank (MKB), the amount is 
25 percent plus one vote, and in the case of Postabank it is 20 
percent.  The state, through the AV RT, currently holds between 35 
and 65 percent in MHB, BB, MKB, K and H, and AEB, and wholly owns 
the OTP bank.  Under the 1991 law on financial institutions, the 
state must not hold more than 25 percent of a bank's registered 
capital, either directly or indirectly, after January 1, 1997 and 
from January 1, 1995 the state may only have voting rights on a 25- 
percent stake even if the actual stake is higher.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 0903 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   NATIONAL BANK BOND ISSUE IN JAPAN:  The Hungarian National Bank 
(MNB) launched a 50 billion Japanese yen (JPY) bond issue with a 
maturity of 10 years on the Japanese capital market.  The bonds, 
which bear annual interest of 5.45 percent, were issued at 100 
percent.  The annual yield is 209 basis points above the yield of 
the most recently issued comparable Japanese state bonds.  The yield 
spread of the latest Hungarian Samurai bonds, which were issued in 
July and which had a maturity of six years, was 235 basis points 
over the comparable Japanese state bonds.  With its 16th issue of 
Samurai bonds, the MNB has been able to exploit the opportunity for 
cheap borrowing on the Japanese capital market.  The lead manager of 
the issue was Daiwa Securities.  Nine Japanese, together with 
another three financial institutions, were involved in organizing 
the issue.  A total of 28 banks have signed up for the subscription. 
The bonds may be subscribed on December 21.  The payment date is 
January 6. 

   The funds raised from the bond issue will contribute to next 
year's debt-servicing obligations.  Funds from the issue of 1 
billion German marks' worth of bonds in Germany at the end of 
November and 10 billion Spanish pesetas' worth of bonds issued in 
Spain early this month will also flow into the MNB's account in 
January.  Taken together, a total of $1.3 billion will flow into the 
central bank's account, including the current Samurai bond issue and 
a $175 million syndicated loan organized by the Central-European 
International Bank (CIB).  This will cover more than 50 percent of 
the MNB's $2.4 billion in principal repayment obligations next year. 
The MNB has foreign exchange reserves of more than $6 billion.  This 
year, the central bank took out JPY 170 billion from four bond 
issues on the Japanese capital market.  Since 1987 there have been 
15 bond issues on the Japanese capital market, to a total value of 
JPY 460 billion.  The current issue of Hungarian bonds in Japan 
takes place a week after the Japan Credit Rating Agency (JCR) 
downgraded Hungary from triple B plus category to triple B. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0722 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   HUNGARIAN-RUSSIAN FOUNDATION TO DEVELOP ECONOMIC TIES:  The 
commercial representation of Russia in Hungary and seven Hungarian 
ventures have set up a Hungarian-Russian foundation under the name 
of "Eastern Connection," in order to develop bilateral trade and 
expand socio-economic relations.  The main goals of the foundation 
include seeking out and creating reliable business relations for 
Hungarian and Russian firms.  It will maintain offices in both 
Budapest and Moscow.  The organization also wishes to promote the 
establishment of joint ventures.  The value of Hungarian-Russian 
trade in the first 10 months of the year totalled $2.5 billion, and 
could be over $3 billion by the end of the year.  This figure places 
Russia in seventh place among Hungary's trading partners, and first 
among Eastern European countries.  (Budapest MTI in English 1910 GMT 
9 Dec 93 AU) 

   SAAB-SCANIA NEGOTIATIONS WITH DUNA AIRCRAFT:  The Swedish company 
Saab-Scania is holding talks with Duna Aircraft Factory Inc. on a 
possible cooperation agreement.  According to Saab-Scania's defense 
industry specialist Hans Werner, there is an opportunity to 
cooperate with the Duna Factory in the manufacture of aircraft 
bodies and frames.  It was neither confirmed nor denied whether the 
two companies had signed a contract regarding the manufacture of 
Saab-Scania's multifunction JAS 39 Gripen military aircraft next 
year.  Saab-Scania has approached several Hungarian electronics and 
software companies with the aim of future cooperation.  The names of 
these companies have not been disclosed.  The company had also 
received recommendations from the Industry and Trade Ministry.  The 
modern Gripen fighter planes, which cost much less to maintain than 
MiG-29s, would be suitable for the Hungarian Army, Werner said.  He 
said it would also be possible to sell Gripen planes manufactured in 
cooperation with Hungarian companies on third world markets. 

   Duna Aircraft's production manager, Csaba Szucs, confirmed that 
the company was holding talks with Saab-Scania.  The aircraft 
factory was established last year with initial capital of 10 million 
forints and is owned by company employees.  Duna Aircraft leases 
machinery and offices from the Pest Region Machine Factory, which is 
now in liquidation.  As well as maintaining the Hungarian Army's 
MiG-21 fighter planes and MI-2, MI-8, and MI-24 helicopters, the 
company manufactures heating equipment and machinery for enamelling 
wires according to demand.  This year, the aircraft factory is 
expected to have turnover of 1 billion forints and to turn a profit. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0811 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   PANNON GSM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH DENMARK, FINLAND:  Pannon GSM has 
signed a roaming agreement with Denmark and Finland in order to 
facilitate the use of telephones throughout Europe by Hungarian GSM 
900 MHZ subscribers.  This is the first such agreement, a Pannon GSM 
press release said.   Pannon GSM is made up of Telecom Finland, 
Telecom Denmark, Telecom Sweden International, PTT Netherlands, 
Norwegian Telecom, and the Hungarian companies MOL RT, Videoton, and 
Wallis Holding.  Pannon GSM won a tender for the development and 
operation of the 900 MHZ GSM system in October.  Under the tender, 
Pannon GSM and Matav-US West are to share the concession rights for 
Hungary.  The service should be launched by April 1, 1994 at the 
latest.  The cost of constructing the two parallel networks is 
expected to be around $200 million each.  (Budapest MTI in English 
1903 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   FUTURE COCA COLA BOTTLING, DISTRIBUTION CENTER:  Coca Cola Amatil 
is to establish a 2 billion-forint soft-drink canning and 
distribution center for Eastern Europe at Dunaharaszti, south of 
Budapest.  Coca Cola Amatil Italaru (Magyarorszag) has spent 7 
billion forints on establishing bottling, refilling, canning, and 
polyethylene container plants in Hungary during its two-and-a-half 
year existence.  The current investment is planned to be carried out 
in several steps by 2000.  In the first phase, a new sales center, 
warehouse, and central office building will be completed by May 
1994.  Coca Cola Amatil's share of the Hungarian sof t-drink market 
is 50 percent.  The Hungarian investment by the Australian-owned 
Coca Cola Amatil is part of the Coca Cola Company's $1.5 billion 
project for Central and Eastern Europe.  (Budapest MTI in English 
0812 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   HUNGARO DIGITEL VSAT CONTRACT GOES TO ATT TRIDOM:  The Hungarian 
telecommunications company Hungaro Digitel has purchased $3.2 
million worth of satellite communications equipment and services 
from the U.S. company AT and T Tridom.  AT and T Tridom won the deal 
following a closed tender.  Hungaro Digitel, a consortium of high 
technology and investment companies, including Antenna Hungaria, 
Hungary's second largest telecommunications company, will provide 
data, voice, facsimile, and video communications services to 
businesses and other organizations throughout Hungary and Europe. 
Hungaro Digitel will install an AT and T Clearlink hub station with 
an eight-meter antenna and Clearlink System 400 VSAT's (very small 
aperture terminals).  In addition, Hungaro Digitel will become an 
authorized AT and T Tridom distributor.  The purchase is part of 
Hungaro Digitel's long-term commitment to VSAT technology.  Hungaro 
Digitel has successfully installed and operated a pilot VSAT hub in 
Hungary. 

   The general manager of Hungaro Digitel, Denes Jobbagy, said that 
selecting AT and T Tridom equipment in combination with the large 
hub antenna would enable them to use smaller antennas at customer 
sites.  He said that the smaller, 1.2-meter antennas would make for 
speedy installation and significant cost savings for customers.  The 
construction of hub facilities in Budapest has begun, and the 
nationwide network is expected to be operational by early next year. 
AT and T Tridom, which is headquartered in Georgia, United States, 
is a wholly owned subsidiary of AT and T specializing in global VSAT 
satellite communications.  This will be the third hub in Hungary. 
One owned by Hungaro Digitel is in experimental operation phase 
while the other was constructed for Banknet.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 0712 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   STOLLWERCK PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN BUDAPEST PLANT:  The 
confectionery firm Stollwerck Budapest Ltd. plans to invest more 
than 1 billion forints in its Budapest factory.  The German parent 
company will install machinery worth 20 million German marks in 
order to establish a regional production center in Budapest.  Last 
July, the German company bought the Hungarian confectionery company 
Ouintie and sold two of its four factories to Jacobs Suchard and 
Nestle.  Stollwerck Budapest Ltd. currently makes 30,000 tons of 
confectionery products a year.  Eighty percent of the company's 
output is sold in Hungary, with the remainder exported to 
neighboring countries.  Turnover this year is expected to be 6 
billion forints.  (Budapest MTI in English 0740 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   UNILEVER BUYS FROZEN-FOOD PRODUCER:  Unilever has signed an 
agreement with the State Property Agency to buy the Baja 
Refrigerating Co., a producer of deep-frozen vegetables.  Unilever 
has bought 96.3 percent of the shares for $3.7 million and is taking 
over the company's debts.  The remaining shares, 3.7 percent, are 
owned by the local municipality.  Over the next two years, Unilever 
plans to invest $5 million for production modernization and output 
increase.  In 1992, Unilever bought an ice-cream factory in Hungary, 
and later it purchased one of the country's largest vegetable oil 
plants, which currently produces margarine, soap, and detergents. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0757 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   EBRD NAMES DAIWA-MKB LEAD MANAGER FOR BOND ISSUE:  The European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) has selected Daiwa- 
MKB (Budapest) to be lead manager for a forint denominated bond 
issue on the Hungarian capital market, the president of the 
investment and securities company, Mitsuo Kiyokawa, said.  More than 
a year ago, EBRD sources revealed plans to issue forint-denominated 
bonds with a maturity of five to seven years to the value of at 
least 2 billion forints.  The timing of the issue was dependent on 
finding suitable projects for investment in Hungary and on 
conditions on the capital market.  Last year, the Hungarian partner 
in Daiwa-MKB, the Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank (MKB), was named in 
the Hungarian press as a possible investment target for the EBRD. 
The MKB has been talked about as one of the first Hungarian 
commercial banks that will be privatized.  (Budapest MTI in English 
0749 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   IMF EXPERTS HOLD TALKS WITH FINANCIAL OFFICIALS:  The current 
balance of payments deficit is expected to reach nearly $3 billion 
by the end of the year, according to State Secretary of the Finance 
Ministry Almos Kovacs, who outlined talks with an IMF delegation in 
Budapest.  Kovacs said the IMF experts examined the fulfillment of 
terms of the stand-by credit agreement between the Hungarian 
government and the IMF.  Government representatives detailed the 
measures taken to boost exports and cut domestic consumption, 
including amendment of the tax and customs rules, devaluation of the 
forint, raising central bank interest rates, and increased support 
for agricultural producers in next year's budget.  The IMF experts 
agreed with the measures and said that, in January-February 1994, 
they will examine whether deterioration of the balance of payments 
has been halted.  The talks also included the state budget deficit 
for 1994.  The deficit is increasing due to revenues from 
privatization being over-estimated.  The IMF ensures a stand-by loan 
of about $400 million for Hungary.  The first tranche, $80 million, 
was paid immediately after the agreement.  Further payments will 
take place only if Hungary encounters solvency problems.  At 
present, the country's foreign currency reserves are at more than $6 
billion, thus there is no need to call upon the loan.  (Budapest MTI 
in English 1115 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   DECLINE IN TOURISM SURPLUS:  At the end of September, the tourism 
surplus (the balance of income from tourism and the amount of 
foreign currency bought by Hungarians) was $150 million less than at 
the same time last year.  Income from tourism in the nine-month 
period was $902.2 million, 3 percent down on last year, while 
expenditure was up 30 percent at $532.1 million, the Hungarian 
National Bank announced.  The nine-month surplus in tourism was 
$370.1 million as compared to $516.8 million in the same period of 
last year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1238 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   CONTINUED DROP IN UNEMPLOYMENT:  The number of registered 
unemployed continued to fall in November, the National Labor Center 
reported.  At the end of the month, 635,000 jobless were on record, 
20,100 fewer than in October and 70,100 fewer than the February 
maximum.  The out-of-work rate is down from 12.6 to 12.2 percent. 
The proportion of first-job-seekers among the unemployed fell from 
10.7 percent to 10.5 percent.  (Budapest MTI in English 1805 GMT 10 
Dec 93 AU) 

   PARLIAMENT PASSES MAIN 1994 BUDGET PROVISIONS:  In a voting 
procedure, MP's adopted the main components of next year's central 
budget with 174 votes for, 128 votes against and one abstention. 
The deficit of 329,561.4 million forints is the balance of an 
expenditure of 1,637,695.2 million forints and a revenue of 
1,308,133.8 million forints.  The law authorizes the finance 
minister to issue state bonds worth 300 billion with over 12 months' 
maturity, and increase the stock of treasury bills and other state 
papers by 29,561.4 million forints to refinance the deficit.  As 
MP's approved the proposed amendments backed by the finance 
minister, the original main estimates did not considerably change. 
The only exception was the proposal to boost the Welfare Ministry's 
budget for payment of a one-off supplement to large families. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0910 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   HONG KONG TRADE SHOW IN BUDAPEST:  Nineteen companies from Hong 
Kong are displaying their products at a trade show that opened in 
Budapest's Grand Hotel Corvinus Kempinski.  The trade show, 
organized by the Hong Kong Trade Development Council, has been held 
twice a year since 1990.  Trade between Hungary and Hong Kong grew 
by 38 percent in the first six months of this year, compared to the 
same period of last year, and is expected to amount to $42 million 
for the full 12 months.  Hong Kong trade development council 
officials say trade shows have played an important role in 
increasing trade and stimulating the demand for computers, office 
technology, clothes and entertainment electronics in Hungary. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0925 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   FRENCH GROUP ACQUIRES 51 PERCENT OF PANNONIA HOTELS:  The French 
hotel group Accor has bought 51 percent of Pannonia Hotels Rt under 
a deal expected to be finalized between the State Property Agency 
(SPA) and Accor.  The SPA had held 82 percent in Pannonia Hotels Rt, 
with the remainder held by local councils.  Ten percent of the SPA 
stake is to be sold in exchange for compensation coupons.  Pannonia 
has a registered capital of 6 billion forints and is the third 
biggest hotel chain in Hungary, operating 27 hotels.  Pannonia owns 
the Novotel in Budapest, which has been operating under a Novotel 
and Accor franchise since 1982.  Pannonia hotels had pre-tax profits 
of 540 million forints on net turnover of 4.906 billion forints last 
year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1022 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   TRADE MINISTER VISITS ISRAEL:  Hungary's Industry and Trade 
Minister Janos Latorcai, arriving in Israel to discuss industrial 
and trade cooperation with leading Israeli companies earlier this 
week.  Latorcai held talks with the president of Bank Leumi, which 
has an affiliate in Hungary, leading officials from the National 
Federation of Israeli Industrialists and managers of several firms 
with Hungarian partners, including Elbit, an electronics company and 
Clal, a department store chain.  Sun Frost, a member of the 
investment group Clal, is partial owner of a Budapest discount store 
and the refrigerating company of Zalaegerszeg, Western Hungary.  To 
boost cooperation, Clal offered to set up a supermarket chain in 
Hungary, in which Hungarian goods would make up 70 percent.  Clal 
also plans to build more cold-storage plants and supply machines for 
vegetable growing. Elbit, the largest Israeli investor in Hungary 
today, proposed cooperation in manufacturing medical and other 
electronic equipment.  The company already operates diagnostic 
centers and dialysis stations at several Hungarian locations. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1030 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   FREE-TRADE AGREEMENT WITH ISRAEL BEING PREPARED:  A free-trade 
agreement with Israel is currently in the planning stage, but is 
unlikely to be signed before the general election, an official at 
the Ministry of International Economic Relations said.  Hungarian 
exports to Israel were worth $23 million in the first nine months of 
this year, while imports amounted to $24.7 million.  In 1992, 
Hungary imported $43.3 million worth of products from Israel, while 
exports to Israel amounted to $30.5 million.  Israelis have so far 
invested $100 million in Hungary, though the proportion of 
investments in the industrial sector is low.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1144 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   THIRTY MILLION FOREIGN VISITORS DURING JAN-SEPT 1993:  Thirty 
million foreigners visited Hungary from January to the end of 
September this year, 20 percent up from the same period last year, 
according to a report released by the national tourism office. 
Twenty million visitors came from Eastern Europe, 10 million from 
Western Europe and overseas.  Interest toward Hungary is growing 
again in Austria and Germany, the report says.  This year, the flow 
of Turkish citizens travelling via Hungary eased a little compared 
to previous years.  The growth in the number of visitors from 
Eastern Europe was due mainly to those coming from Soviet and 
Yugoslav successor states.  According to end-of-August figures from 
the National Tourism Office, currency revenues from tourism totalled 
$770 million, while expenditures, mainly currency allowance to 
Hungarian citizens travelling abroad, amounted to $460 million.  The 
surplus amounted to $310 million.  The growth in expenditure was 
caused by the rise in currency allowances to Hungarians.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1936 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   RISE IN MANUFACTURING OUTPUT:  Figures for the first nine months 
of this year show an increase in Hungary's industrial production, 
after a 40-percent drop between 1985 and 1992.  There was also a 
rise in machine engineering output, and the value of 
telecommunications and information technology exports.  However, 
experts still warn for caution.  With exports falling in aggregate 
and investments stagnating, growth might prove fragile.  The 
economic system is constantly changing in Hungary.  Due to the 
liberalization of import prices, the removal of state subsidies, the 
privatization of state property, and the closure of lame-duck 
factories, industrial production fell sharply, entailing 
unemployment and in places serious social tension.  Presuming that 
limited state intervention was vital in the transition period, the 
Ministry of Industry worked out a program to help 14 large companies 
of outstanding importance for industrial and employment policy. 
Implementation of the scheme has already begun. 

   This January, the government adopted the industrial policy plan 
of the Ministry of Industry and Trade running until 2010 in three 
stages.  Crisis situations will have to be tackled and the 
production fall stopped by 1995, when COMECON-linked capacities will 
be fully dismantled and remaining ones modernized.  Certain loss- 
making branches, such as mining, metallurgy, textile, clothes, and 
shoe production will be radically cut. 

   Stabilization after successful crisis management is expected to 
lay the foundations for a planned 4-6 percent growth between 1996 
and 2000, with a simultaneous drop in the industrial workforce from 
the present 750,000 to 650,OOO-700,OOO.  No breakthrough in 
industrial restructuring is seen likely before 2000-2010.  The 
government intends to promote the desired changes by programs to 
encourage enterprise and innovation, assist technical and 
infrastructure development, and ensure foreign market, financial 
human policy and other services. 

   According to the ministry, the conditions for a lasting growth 
are not yet reached, but there are several signs of improvement. 
Over the first nine months of this year, production was 3.5 percent 
up on last year, with a 10-percent drop in workforce.  The number of 
bankruptcy and liquidation procedures has decreased.  The government 
measures for the 14 large companies included in the crisis- 
management program have been carried out, and a credit and debtor 
consolidation scheme involving 70-80 companies has started. 

   At present, the remainder of iron metallurgy is being 
reorganized, and the situation of the textile, clothing and 
electronics industries analyzed.  With state participation, a 
research and development program is to be launched in the fields of 
medicine and vehicle production, automation, information technology 
and quality development.  (Budapest MTI in English 1522 GMT 2 Dec 93 
AU) 

   EBRD TO PARTICIPATE IN HOTEL PRIVATIZATION:  The European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is to participate in the 
first major Hungarian hotel privatization, with $7 million.  The 
EBRD will be a main shareholder, up to $7 million, in the HOLPA SA 
intermediate holding company, together with the strategic investor, 
the French Accord firm, which is to acquire 51 percent of Pannonia 
hotels, the third largest hotel chain in Hungary.  Hungarian 
shareholders, including Pannonia employees and the State Property 
Agency (SPA), own the remaining 49 percent.  The EBRD officials said 
that through its participation, Pannonia will acquire new sources 
for its investments in Hungary and in Central and Eastern Europe. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0907 GMT 3 Dec 93 AU) 

   TRADE TALKS WITH IRAN:  Conditions for a more balanced and varied 
bilateral trade between Hungary and Iran are the topic of discussion 
between a Hungarian delegation, headed by International Economic 
Relations Minister Bela Kadar, and Iranian partners at talks begun 
in Tehran over the weekend.  The Hungarian delegation travelled to 
Tehran to attend the 9th session of a bilateral joint-economic 
committee.  They held talks with Commerce Minister Yahya al-Eshaq, 
heavy industry minister Muhammad Hadi Nejad Hosseinian, and the head 
of the Central Bank.  At the talks, Kadar asked the Iranians to 
finalize the order for a further 500 Ikarus buses from Hungary, and 
the head of the Central Bank agreed that Iran should expedite the 
settlement of outstanding debts.  (Budapest MTI in English 1518 GMT 
6 Dec 93 AU) 

   Hungarian-Iranian joint committee talks ended with favorable 
results.  Minister of International Economic Relations Bela Kadar 
reviewed ways to develop bilateral economic relations with his 
Iranian partners during his visit to Tehran in December.  Iran 
continues to count on Hungarian capital goods, in spite of the 
unbalanced bilateral trade levels.  Hungarian imports from Iran are 
far lower than exports to that country.  In 1992, the value of 
Hungarian exports to Iran totalled $116.2 million, but was hardly 
more than $50 million in the first nine months of this year.  The 
value of imports from Iran were only 5 percent of this.  As a result 
of the talks, the Iranian side agreed to pay its debt of some $30 
million within 100 days.  So far, agricultural cooperation between 
the two nations has mainly implied training and education.  As a 
result of the current talks, both sides agreed to create production 
cooperation -- for instance, in the cultivation of plants improved 
with Hungarian technologies, which Iran could then export to various 
Asian countries.  As of January 1, Hungary will reduce the import 
customs on Iranian carpets and Iranian processed marble from 12 to 3 
percent and fully abolish duties on unprocessed products.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1135 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   FRENCH-AMERICAN CONSORTIUM IN RUNNING FOR MATAV SHARES:  A 
French-American consortium of France Telecom and US West is trying 
to win the national concession competition announced to acquire the 
minority share in the Hungarian Telecommunications Company, MATAV 
Co.  The two foreign firms have united their professional skills 
under the name Duna Telecom, the firm told the press today.  Four 
consortiums comprising well-known world firms are in the running for 
the MATAV Co.  MATAV is Eastern Europe's first state 
telecommunications company to be privatized, with a value estimated 
at $3 billion.  (Budapest MTI in English 1857 GMT 6 Dec 93 AU) 

   AVERAGE EARNINGS 29,500 FORINTS IN OCTOBER:  Employees at 
companies with more than 20 workers earned 29,502 forints on average 
in October, nearly 1,000 forints more than in September and 27.1 
percent more than at the same time last year, according to the 
Central Statistics Office (CSO).  Average earnings in the first 10 
months were 26,959 forints, with manual workers earning 21,061 
forints and white-collar workers 40,387 forints a month. Bank 
employees earned the most, 70,100 forints, and textile industry 
workers the least:  Their incomes rose by less than 18 percent from 
January to 0ctober.  The 10-month net value of average earnings was 
18,237 forints, 20.2 percent up on last year.  With consumer prices 
rising by 22.8 percent this year, real incomes fell by 2.1 percent. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1008 GMT 7 Dec) 

   TEN-MONTH BUDGET DEFICIT 170.7 BILLION FORINTS:  At the end of 
October, the central budget showed a deficit of 170.7 billion 
forints, with revenue of 710.3 billion forints and expenditure of 
881 billion forints.  The deficit rose by 8 billion forints from the 
end of September.  The finance ministry, however, has not published 
detailed budget figures for September.  The ten-month deficit 
represented 80.3 percent of the annual target deficit of 213.3 
billion forints contained in the supplementary budget approved by 
parliament in July.  Budget revenue stood at 75.5 percent and 
expenditure at 76.4 percent of the figures projected for the whole 
of 1993 in the supplementary budget.  The Finance Ministry's ten- 
month budget figures are similar to preliminary figures published in 
the National Bank of Hungary's Monthly Report at the end of 
November.  The central budget deficit stood at 160.4 billion forints 
at the end of October last year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1316 GMT 
7 Dec 93 AU) 

   OPEL TO SELL MORE THAN 15,000 CARS IN HUNGARY THIS YEAR:  By the 
end of November, GM Hungary had sold 14,926 new Opels in Hungary, 
and the company has orders this year for 15,760, according to PR 
Manager Andras Danos.  This gives Opel a market share of around 20 
percent.  Of the total, 9,587 were Opel Astras (including the sedan 
version, which is not made in Hungary).  In addition, GM Hungary 
sold 3,943 Opel Corsas, 827 Opel Vectras and 434 small commercial 
vehicles, of which 285 were Opel Campos. 

   By the end of November, the General Motors plant in Szentgotthard 
(western Hungary) had assembled 12,386 Opel Astras and made 70,395 
1.6-liter Opel engines.  The number of Opel Astras assembled is 
expected to reach 13,374 by the end of the year, and the number of 
engines 75,466.  GM Hungary originally planned to produce more 
engines this year, but production plans were cut back as a result of 
the recession in the Western European car industry, Danos said.  Of 
the 70,395 engines, 8,900 were 16-valve Opel Corsa GSI engines and 
all the others were 1.6-liter Opel Astra engines.  Of the Opel 
Astras assembled at the Szentgotthard factory, 9,444 were put on the 
Hungarian market and 2,942 went for export, with 1,910 going to 
Turkey, 768 to Italy, 168 to Germany and 96 to the Czech Republic. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0843 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   CHANGES PROPOSED TO FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATIONS:  The government 
is expected to discuss changes to the foreign exchange regulations 
this year.  The legislation will be submitted to Parliament only in 
the first half of next year.  The new regulations will contain 
restrictions instead of the list of permitted activities contained 
in the existing regulations.  The proposed legislation contains the 
following restrictions: 

   Transport of products:  Convertible currency for the transport of 
products can be purchased only with the permission of the foreign 
exchange authorities.  This restriction, however, does not apply to 
companies with international business activities. 

   Insurance:  With the exception of insurance companies, those 
classified as resident under the foreign exchange act may not take 
out insurance policies with foreign insurance companies.  This 
restriction does not apply to certain kinds of policy taken out by 
Hungarians working abroad or to Hungarians taking out insurance on 
foreign real estate abroad or on moveables inherited or received as 
a gift.  Construction companies working under a foreign contract can 
purchase convertible foreign currency for the insurance of their 
moveables abroad. 

   Hungarian insurance companies may provide insurance to foreigners 
only on real estate and moveable property based in Hungary. 
Individual non-residents may take out accident and life insurance 
from Hungarian insurance companies during their stay in Hungary.  If 
the insurance premium is paid in forints that have been exchanged 
from foreign currency, the insurance payment will be made in 
convertible currency. 

   Business profits, dividends, and capital gains:  With certain 
exceptions stipulated in the foreign exchange act, Hungarians must 
exchange these forms of income into forints in Hungary.  (Residents 
may reinvest the income on their shares in foreign companies in the 
same company without the permission of the foreign exchange 
authorities.) 
   Income from rents:  Forint amounts deriving from the renting of 
foreign-owned property may not be converted into foreign currency. 
Resident individuals may purchase foreign currency to pay rent on 
property abroad only with the permission of the foreign exchange 
authorities. 

   Resident individuals will be allowed to take up to 20,000 
forints' worth of convertible currency out of the country without 
permission.  Foreigners may take out the same amount without having 
to show a certificate to prove that the equivalent amount was 
brought into Hungary.  Resident and foreign individuals are allowed 
to take out or bring in up to 10,000 forints in denominations of no 
more than 1,000 forints. 

   Exchange of currencies:  Foreigners will be allowed to convert 
forints into convertible currency only with the permission of the 
foreign exchange authorities.  Residents will be able to purchase 
convertible currency to pay foreigners for pensions, social security 
contributions, copyright fees, or entry fees for sporting events. 

   In order to prevent money laundering, the foreign exchange 
authorities will stipulate the documents and statements the banks 
must require for the sale or transfer of foreign currency. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1007 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   FINANCE MINISTER SAYS ECONOMY IMPROVING:  "Hungary is on the 
threshold of economic growth, and industrial production will be up 
by between 3 percent and 3.5 percent this year," Finance Minister 
Ivan Szabo has said.  Inflation could be kept under control, and 
consumer prices would probably increase by between 16 percent and 18 
percent next year after an expected 22 to 23 percent increase this 
year.  He estimated that production in the manufacturing sector 
would grow by approximately 7 percent and that production in the 
building industry would increase by 10 percent this year.  Although 
the sharp increase in imports was the main factor behind the 
deterioration in the current account, the fact that machinery and 
investment goods make up the bulk of imports was a positive sign. 
Szabo stressed that next year's economic policy would focus on three 
areas:  economic growth, maintaining economic equilibrium, and 
keeping inflation under control.  (Budapest MTI in English 1850 GMT 
29 Nov 93 AU) 

   INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION UP IN FIRST 9 MONTHS:  Industrial 
production was up 4.3 percent at comparative prices in the first 
nine months compared with the same period of 1992, the Central 
Statistical Office reports.  The value of industrial production was 
1,675 billion forints in the first nine months of this year.  In 
September, the seasonally adjusted volume of production was 3.4 
percent down on August but 6.5 percent up on the monthly average of 
1992.  Nine-month industrial sales were 3.4 percent up on last year. 
Output in manufacturing industry, which represents 84 percent of all 
industrial production, was up 3.3 percent on the same period of last 
year. 

   Domestic sales accounted for 72 percent of total sales of 
manufactured goods.  Domestic sales were 3.9 percent up and export 
sales 2 percent down compared with the corresponding period of 1992. 
Domestic sales of food, drinks, tobacco products, textiles, clothing 
and leather goods all fell, while domestic sales of other 
manufactured goods rose.  Drastic falls occurred in exports of 
vegetable oil (57 percent down) and meat (38 percent down), while 
exports of clothing were up 7.6 percent, textiles up 17 percent, and 
shoes up 28 percent.  Exports of engineering products rose by 1.9 
percent, and exports of chemicals were up by 9.7 percent.  Existing 
orders in manufacturing industry were on average the equivalent of 
two and a half months of production.  The period for the engineering 
industry was 3.4 months, for the chemical industry 2.6 months, and 
the iron and steel industry 2.2 months.  The lowest levels of orders 
was in light industry (1.4 months) and the building industry (1.1 
months).  (Budapest MTI in English 1314 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   MNB DEPUTY CHAIRMAN ON STATE OF ECONOMY:  The net external debt 
has stayed almost unchanged since 1989, at $15.3 billion at the end 
of August 1993.  Hungary could meet all its foreign capital and 
credit obligations with still about $3 billion of currency reserves 
and borrow no money next year, Deputy Chairman of the Hungarian 
National Bank (MNB) Frigyes Harshegyi said.  At the end of 1989, 
Hungary's gross foreign debt was $20.3 billion and its net foreign 
debt $15 billion.  At the end of August 1993, gross foreign debt 
stood at $23.8 billion, while net foreign debt at $15.3 billion.  At 
1989 end, Hungary's currency reserves were about $1.7 billion, and 
now they total $6 billion.  Last year and this year, annual interest 
payments were $1.2 billion.  Capital and interest payments together 
make $3.5-4 billion this year, like last year.  Last year, Hungary 
had $13-14 billion from exports and services, and this year about 
$11 billion.  Both years, $1.5 billion of working capital came into 
Hungary.  Hungary's annual interest burdens are only 3-3.5 percent 
of gross domestic product.  (Budapest MTI in English 1919 GMT 30 Nov 
93 AU) 

   EBRD TO LAUNCH NEW PROGRAMS:  The European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is to assist Hungarian 
privatization, finance certain infrastructure investments, and grant 
loans to small and medium companies.  The EBRD is already examining, 
under its special restructuring program, how 18 selected Hungarian 
firms not suited for sale in their current condition could be 
preprared for privatization.  A new construction is emerging in 
connection with the trans-European network program approved at the 
Copenhagen EC summit, to finance Hungarian highway building and 
railroad modernization ventures.  The EBRD would provide 70 percent 
of the loans, the PHARE program would provide up to 15 percent of 
the cash, and the remaining 15 percent would be covered by the 
Hungarian budget.  Discussions were also held about possible EBRD 
participation with micro-loan constructions in the financing of 
small and medium ventures in Hungary.  This could probably take 
place in the second half of 1994, and will be a new element in the 
EBRD practice, as the bank has so far not dealt directly with loans 
valued at less than $5 million.  (Budapest MTI in English 0737 GMT 
26 Nov 93 AU) 

   ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL, MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESSES:  The State 
Property Agency (AVU) is currently preparing proposals for the 
provision of financial assistance to small and medium-sized 
businesses.  The scheme would help small and medium-sized companies 
that have purchased property from the AVU, and which do not now have 
adequate operating capital.  Many such companies are unable to 
borrow money because of a lack of collateral.  The AVU approved the 
basis of the proposal, under which the businesses would receive 
assistance to borrow money.  The companies could take out loans 
guaranteed by Hitelgarancia Inc., which was set up in December last 
year, with initial capital of 3.5 billion forints to guarantee loans 
connected with privatization, ESOP (Employees' Shared Ownership 
Program) schemes, and development loans.  In addition, the 
businesses would be eligible for a 50 to 60 percent state subsidy on 
the interest payable on the loan.  In order for the program to go 
ahead, the Hungarian National Bank must ensure refinancing, the 
state budget must guarantee provision of the interest subsidy for 
five years at an estimated cost of 2 billion forints a year, and the 
AVU must increase Hitelgarancia's capital by 1.5 billion forints. 
The state currently holds 57 percent in Hitelgarancia.  Under this 
year's property policy guidelines, not yet approved by Parliament, 
the AVU was to raise Hitelgarancia's capital by 4 billion forints. 
Only 2.5 billion forints has so far been paid.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1557 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   SUGAR INDUSTRY OVERCAPACITY:  Annual consumption of raw sugar 
produced from sugar beet is expected to be 400,000 tons this year 
and is likely to remain at that level.  Synthetic sugar consumption 
is expected to amount to 50,000 tons.  Both figures take into 
account the amount of sugar used by the food industry as well as 
that for household consumption.  Hungarians consumed an average of 
34 kilograms of sugar each this year.  Five years ago, domestic 
sugar consumption amounted to an annual 550,000 tons.  A reduction 
in the export of wine to the former Soviet Union alone reduced sugar 
consumption by 50,000 tons.  According to Agricultural Ministry 
State Secretary Rasko, the sugar industry is oversized.  In the 
eighties, the sector had the capacity to refine 47,000 tons of sugar 
beet a day, and this had increased to a daily capacity of 52,000 
tons by this year.  The lack of demand will result in a reduction in 
the amount of sugar produced because exports are impossible as a 
result of low world market prices.  He expects that five or six of 
the 12 sugar plants will close down within the next 10 years. 

   Only those sugar refineries which can solve the main problems of 
the industry, such as high energy and manpower costs, will be able 
to survive.  It costs $570-580 to produce one ton of sugar in 
Hungary, while the world market price, with freight and insurance, 
is around $280-300.  Sugar may only be imported under license, with 
sugar imports burdened with a levy of 86 percent.  80 percent of 
this is a customs levy and 6 percent is customs duty.  As a result 
of the poor harvest this year, 40,000 to 50,000 tons of sugar will 
have to be imported next year.  The Ministry of Agriculture is to 
import sugar through the State Office for Reserve Management next 
spring.  The Ministry of International Economic Relations has given 
permission for the import of 97,000 tons of sugar this year on which 
the duty has been reduced to 45 percent.  The machinery used to 
produce sugar in Hungary is obsolete, and while Belgium is able to 
produce 80 tons of raw sugar per hectare, Hungary produced only 24 
tons per hectare this year.  The average production of raw sugar per 
hectare is 30 to 31 tons in Hungary.  However, Rasko estimated that 
in optimal conditions 45 to 50 tons of raw sugar could be produced 
per hectare.  As a result of this year's drought, sugar beet was 
harvested from only 84,000 hectares, 18,000 hectares fewer than the 
area sown.  (Budapest MTI in English 1602 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   HUNGARY REPORTS POOR AGRICULTURAL SITUATION TO FAO: 
Deterioration in security of food-supply is especially alarming in 
Africa and several Eastern and Central European countries, it was 
stated at the Rome General Assembly of the UN Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO).  According to the Hungarian Agricultural 
Ministry, agricultural producers and entrepreneurs in Hungary have 
far less protection than in most industrialized states.  In 1992, 
OECD countries subsidized agriculture by an average 44 percent, 
while the level of state support in Hungary over the last four years 
has fallen by four-fifths to 8 percent.  Farm export subsidies are 
more than 70 percent in EU countries, compared with less than 10 
percent in Hungary. 

   The Hungarian group reported a nearly 30-percent drop in 
agricultural output in the last three years, owing to unfavorable 
weather (only three of the past 10 years had nearly enough 
precipitation), the loss of eastern markets, worldwide recession, 
declining domestic demand because of waning purchasing power, delay 
of ownership changes, and a debt of 27O billion forints, which 
discourages banks from giving credit.  Hungary asked FAO to give 
priority to help the changes and development in Eastern Europe 
without hurting the interests of developing countries.  The 
agricultural minister stressed that Hungary had no wish to compete 
for the scanty resources available to FAO, which he said should 
concentrate on promoting the transition to a free-market economy and 
improving market access in reforming countries.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1354 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   EC, HUNGARY SIGN AGREEMENT TO PROTECT WINE BRAND NAMES:  An 
agreement to protect wine names and regulate the EC-Hungarian wine 
trade was signed by Hungary and the EC Commission.  The wine 
agreement, closing a four-year dispute, clarifies the protection of 
Hungarian wine names.  For a long time, Italian and French companies 
exporting wines under similar names were reluctant to recognize 
Hungary's exclusive right to the name "Tokay."  The agreement, in 
force as of December 1, protects EC wine brands in Hungary and 
Hungarian wine names in EC markets.  Similarly to other agricultural 
products, a certain amount of wine will be given customs preferences 
by both sides.  (Budapest MTI in English 1816 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONTINUED ASSISTANCE FROM BRITISH KNOW-HOW FUND:  The British 
Government's know-how fund will continue to help restructure and 
develop Hungary's economy.  After giving advice to banks, helping 
set up entrepreneurial centers and Budapest's stock exchange, and 
assisting privatization, the London-based fund will now give support 
in launching a privatization program for small investors next year. 
It will also continue training Hungarian managers in Britain.  Since 
1990, British investors have put $450 million of capital into 
Hungary, about half of all British investment in Eastern Europe. 
There are 150 joint ventures with British participation and 70 
British companies have representations in Hungary.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1624 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   MNB ISSUES 1-BILLION-MARK BOND ON GERMAN MARKET:  The Hungarian 
National Bank (MNB) issued its third bond package on the German 
market this year, valued at 1 billion German marks (DM) 
(approximately $600 million).  The maturity is 10 years.  Interest 
warrant conditions have improved since the last issue in August, 
however, when interest was 8.75 percent, as compared with 8 percent 
for this issue.  A 27-bank consortium, headed by Commerzbank, quoted 
the issuing price as 101.80 percent.  The interest margin has 
narrowed relative to German state bonds.  The current issue brings 
the value of bonds issued by the MNB on international capital 
markets to about $5 billion.  The fact that a further cut in German 
interest rates can be expected was a consideration in the current 
step.  Payment is expected to take place on January 13, at which 
time the sum will be at the disposal of the MNB.  Three German banks 
-- Commerzbank, Deutsche Bank, and Bayerische Landesbank -- have 
listed about 80 percent of the bonds.  In 1993, the MNB issued bonds 
on the German capital market valued at DM3 billion, compared with 
DM1.2 billion in 1992 and DM75O million in 1991.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1309 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONTROVERSY OVER BANK CONSOLIDATION:  Hungarian State Holding 
Company (AV RT) Chairman Szabolcs Szekeres described as "suicide" 
the carrying out of bank consolidation each year.  In his view, it 
should be made clear instead that even the largest banks can be 
liquidated if necessary.  Szekeres was outlining the reasons why a 
decision on this year's bank consolidation was delayed and doubted 
whether the recapitalization of banks is necessary at all. 
According to the AV RT, it would be sufficient if the government 
gave guarantees on classified loans, which the banks could use.  A 
decision has also not been reached as to who should have property 
rights following the bank equity raises, the Finance Ministry or AV 
RT.  In the latter case there would be a legal problem, Szekeres 
said.  Corporation law stipulates that if a shareholders company 
acquires a majority share in another shareholders company, which 
then becomes a controlled company, it is obliged to offer the owners 
the chance to purchase their shares, or to pay a fixed dividend. 
Szekeres said that it is still not known how much the AV RT would 
have to pay to banks involved in bank consolidation.  He did not 
exclude the possibility of AV RT paying with its own shares. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0942 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   AV RT LOOKING TO REDUCE STAKES IN INSURANCE COMPANIES:  The 
Hungarian State Holding Company's (AV RT) board of directors has 
decided that it will move to reduce AV RT's stakes in Hungaria- 
Allianz and AB-Aegon insurance companies.  Despite a government 
decree stipulating that AV RT's current stakes in the two firms, 
accounting for 35 percent in Hungaria and 20 percent in AB-Aegon, 
are to be held in permanent state ownership, AV RT would like to 
reduce these to 5 percent each, with difference to be offered for 
sale.  The two insurance companies represent a total 3 billion 
forints of the losses of AV RT's 17 most unprofitable companies, 
with Hungaria taking the lion's share of 2.1 billion forints.  The 
two firms are included in a strategic study on growth and 
development AV RT is preparing on several of its companies. 
However, AV RT has said that Allianz, a majority shareholder in 
Hungaria, is unwilling to cooperate in the study, making it 
impossible to complete.  According to AV RT's chairman, one reason 
for Hungaria's problems is government regulation of premiums. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0905 GMT 30 Nov 93) 
ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1736z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43171 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000394001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 93-054--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No.  54, 
29 December 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   ROMANIA 

   ILIESCU RECEIVES AMOCO CORPORATION REPRESENTATIVES:  Romanian 
President Ion Iliescu had an interview on Friday, 10 December, with 
a delegation of the U.S.-based Amoco Corporation, headed by Patrick 
Joseph Early, vice chairman of that corporation's board of 
administration.  After the interview, Early stated to journalists 
that the company had already started major investments in Romania 
that were expected to grow next year and that talks at the 
government headquarters and the presidency had encouraged them to 
further cooperation with Romania. 

   Operating in more than 4O countries, Amoco has a first project in 
Romania in the so-called Section Seven in the Carpathian Mountains 
that was auctioned in 1990.  The contract was concluded in August 
1992.  The project has in view a first installment of investments 
for oil exploitation works.  Investments are put at some $250 
million.  Prospect ion works are in an advanced stage, and drilling 
operations are expected to start next year.  A contract is already 
signed between Amoco and the Romanian Government to share the output 
on a period of 20 years.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1237 GMT 10 
Dec 93 AU) 

   COMMODITIES EXCHANGE OPENS IN CONSTANTA:  A maritime and goods 
stock exchange will officially open in the Black Sea port of 
Constanta on December 17, the second goods stock exchange in Romania 
after the one opened in Bucharest.  A maritime and goods stock 
exchange in a Black Sea port, that can be good business, Viorel- 
Marian Pana, chairman of the maritime stock exchange told a reporter 
from the periodical ECONOMISTUL.  For the beginning, the Constanta 
stock exchange has half a billion lei (about $460,000) in capital 
and 124 shareholders, among which the Romanian Foreign Trade Bank, 
the Romanian Commercial Bank, the Credit Bank, Bankcoop, and the 
Romanian Development Bank.  "We have a system of computers which we 
can call high-tech, and by its means we will be permanently in touch 
with all goods stock exchange agencies that are to be set up by our 
shareholders.  These agencies will participate, via their brokers, 
in auctions," said Pana.  We have completed studies showing that we 
should structure our activity, at least over the initial phase, for 
a service market and a maritime management one.  Barter transactions 
will also be made," added the Constanta goods stock exchange 
chairman.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0927 GMT 13 Dec 93 AU) 

   SLOWDOWN IN FOREIGN INVESTMENT:  Foreign investments growth in 
Romania slowed down in 1993.  The number of companies with foreign 
capital registered until 13 December 1993 was 28,761, with a total 
capital of $745 million.  The evolution of foreign investments over 
the past four years is as follows:  in 1990 -- 1,589 companies with 
a capital of $112.4 million; in 1991 -- 6,433 companies with a 
capital of $156.3 million; and in 1992 -- over 12,000 companies with 
a capital of $300 million.  Some 8,000 companies were set up this 
year with a capital of $206 million.  In terms of the amount of 
invested capital, only 100 joint ventures are holders of a capital 
exceeding $1 million each.  Their total investments accounted for 
$525.7 million, which represents 70 percent of all investments in 
Romania.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1143 GMT 16 Dec 93 ) 

   LOSSES DUE TO FRY EMBARGO:  The Solventul trade company in 
Timisoara reports more than $100 million losses over the period of 
the embargo against Yugoslavia.  The company was supplied with 
materials by a Yugoslav firm.  Part of the equipment has been 
stopped, part of it has operated only at 70 percent of its capacity. 
More than 1,000 employees have been made redundant.  The company has 
spent a lot of money on buying raw materials from other markets. 
Spending is increasing parallel with the drop in production. 
Solventul's situation is daily worsening.  (Bucharest R0MPRES 1033 
GMT 3 Dec 93 AU) 

   JAPANESE MANAGEMENT-TRAINING ASSISTANCE:  Instruction facilities 
-- video recording and processing devices, work stations, and 
programs -- were inaugurated at the Bucharest Institute of 
Management and Data Processing.  This is a donation by the Japanese 
Government and is part and parcel of the Romanian?Japanese 
                                                ? 
intergovernment agreement designed to help ensure an adequate 
standard of instruction in management and related areas with most 
up-to-date equipment.  Japanese Ambassador Joshiki Sugiura expressed 
his confidence that the donated equipment, along with the 
instruction of Romanian experts in Japan and the presence of 
Japanese experts in Romania, would help the Bucharest institute 
fulfill its targets.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1741 GMT 3 Dec 
93 AU) 

   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR MOLDOVA:  According to the program for 
economic assistance granted by Romania to the Republic of Moldova, 
the government has adopted two important decisions.  The first one 
meets a request by the Government of Moldova regarding 245 million 
lei from the funds at the disposal of the government for relations 
with Moldova, which was initially intended to equip 65 trucks.  The 
government decided that this sum of money should be spent to ensure 
deliveries of veterinary medicines, sanitary equipment, and electric 
utensils.  The second decision regards a 20-billion-lei credit made 
available for the Republic of Moldova to finance Romanian deliveries 
of fuels, mineral oils, and other goods urgently needed for 1993. 
(Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1842 GMT 3 Dec 93 AU) 

   SUCCESS OF ROMANIAN-TURKISH COMPANY:  The Freedom Star group of 
companies, headquartered in Constanta, represents an example of 
success in business.  In 1993 the turnover of this five-member 
company -- international, holding, trading, electronics, and 
shipping -- totaled some 60 billion lei (about $55 million).  About 
80 percent of the turnover is represented by investments in 
metallurgy and raw materials and the remainding 20 percent by 
investments in electronics and household electrical appliances.  The 
board of directors includes two Romanians and two Turks.  Freedom 
Star International was founded in the fall of 1990.  First, its 
trade consisted of small import-export operations.  "We have been 
cooperating with two Turkish partners for three years now.  We have 
made joint investments in the manufacture of television sets and in 
a milk-processing unit.  The Turks could have cashed their profit, 
that is 2 1/2 billion lei, but instead our Turkish partners 
reinvested their profit along with us," Ion Serban, president of the 
Board of Directors said.  "We will start new investments in 1994. 
We believe in Romania's future and we want to continue to invest 
here," Turkish Director Erhan Iarhun said.  Freedom Star is a group 
with a special economic potential and with strong economic 
relations.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0534 GMT 6 Dec 93 AU) 

   ROMANIAN-AUSTRIAN COMMISSION SESSION CONCLUDES:  "An assessment 
of the current stage of bilateral trade relations and various 
projects of firm collaboration were two major subjects approached 
during the recent session of the joint Romanian-Austrian Commission 
in Vienna," Mihai Berinde, state secretary at the Ministry of Trade, 
said.  Mr. Berinde also pointed out that the bilateral talks 
referred to an increased share of commercial exchanges by growing 
imports as well as exports.  He also added that "an appeal was made 
on Austrian firms holding collaboration ties with Romanian companies 
to act more firmly for the investment process in Romania, for the 
manufacturing of products that will be subsequently exported on 
third markets and even on the Austrian market."  Presently, Romanian 
imports from Austria cover exports by only 64 percent, which is the 
main reason why stress was laid on the achievement of a greater 
equilibrium of the trade balance between the two countries.  During 
the proceedings of the joint commission, the Austrian side showed 
interest in the completion of several concrete projects for 
collaboration.  "It is in fact the building of the Grand Hotel in 
Bucharest, mostly financed by the Austrian side and Austrian support 
in the building of a bridge across the Danube that would ensure a 
smooth path for commercial exchanges within the current context of 
the embargo imposed on Yugoslavia," said Mr. Berinde.  (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 0507 GMT 7 Dec 93 AU) 

   ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH FINLAND:  "Romanian-Finnish commercial 
ties accounted for some $10 million last year, which is rather 
little compared with the real possibilities," the ambassador of 
Finland in Bucharest, Timo Koponen, told the daily JURNAL NATIONAL. 
Some $8 million has been registered until present, according to the 
Finnish diplomat, which forecasts a certain growth for the current 
year compared to 1992.  Ten Finnish companies are currently 
operating in Romania, said the ambassador of Finland, the newest 
one, Metaneff.  In his opinion, these projects started after the 
signing of several agreements last year, following the visits paid 
to Finland by Romania's President Ion Iliescu and the speaker of the 
Chamber of Deputies, Adrian Nastase, and during the meetings in 
Bucharest of the Romanian Foreign Minister Teodor Melescanu with 
Finnish officials, agreements in the field of industry and 
agriculture, as well as the understanding signed among eight 
countries including Romania and Finland.  The ambassador also 
considered as extremely important the Romanian-Finnish understanding 
in the field of investment protection, which sets the legal 
framework necessary for all investors.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in 
English 0550 GMT 7 Dec 93 AU) 

   ROMANIAN-AMERICAN JOINT VENTURE:  The United States 
Administration announced the financial support and assistance that 
should be granted to a Romanian-American joint venture led by 
Purolite International of Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania.  The joint 
company will produce ion-exchanging resins for water purification. 
The overseas private investments corporation (OPIC), which is an 
agency of the American Administration, will provide up to $20 
million for the virolite functional polymers plant.  This is the 
first OPIC project in Romania.  The project will lead to the 
technological improvement in water purification for the domestic 
market and will generate exports for hard currency.  This joint 
venture will encourage other American businessmen to invest in 
Romania, said OPIC president Ruth R. Harkin.  Representatives of the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) announced at 
the signing ceremony in Bucharest that the EBRD would invest an 
additional $3.5 million in this project and that it would make an 
$11 million loan to the joint venture.  About 60 percent of the 
production is estimated to be exported, thus bringing over $17 
million from the exports to the American market alone.  (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 0543 GMT 7 Dec 93 AU) 

   EXPORT OF ROMANIAN-BUILT PLANES:  Two light aircraft of the Yak- 
52 type, made by the Aerostar commercial company in Bacau, Romania, 
took off at the local airport with British pilots on board, heading 
for England.  The aircraft, used as training planes, were until 1992 
sold only to the former USSR.  Ten planes have now been sold to 
Western countries, the U.S. and Canada and 12 are prepared for 
delivery to Hungary in the first quarter of next year. 

   FORUM FOR EXPARTIATE BUSINESSMEN:  Foreign Secretary Adrian 
Dohotaru and Aurel Ghibutiu, president of the Romanian Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, held a news conference at the Gafencu Hall of 
the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Friday, 26 November, 
about the forthcoming forum of Romanian and Romanian-born 
businessmen, scheduled for 29-30 November in Bucharest under the 
aegis of the president of Romania, Ion Iliescu, at the initiative of 
the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry.  Of the about 500 Romanian business people invited 
from the diaspora, some 100 have already confirmed that they will 
participate.  Top executives will present the Romanian legislation, 
the restructuring programs, and the potential and requirements of 
the Romanian economy in the present phase of the transition to a 
market economy.  Business meetings and workshops will be organized 
on specific subjects:  industry, agriculture, transportation, 
finance, tourism, privatization, banking, and others.  (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 1807 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   COMMERCIAL LINKS WITH BRAZIL:  The session of the Romanian- 
Brazilian Joint Commission closed a few days ago in Bucharest, and 
measures intended to lead to commercial exchanges between the two 
countries of more than $100 million daily were agreed upon. 
Structural changes that have taken place in Romania set Romanian- 
Brazilian ties on a new foundation.  Brazilians are interested in 
free trade in Romania.  The South Constanta Port may work as 
supplier of Brazilian iron ore to Central European countries.  At 
the close of the Romanian-Brazilian Joint Commission, Mihai Berinde, 
secretary of state in the Romanian Trade Ministry, and Francisco 
Junquira, head of the Europe Department of the Brazilian Foreign 
Ministry, initialed a trade and economic cooperation agreement, a 
stimulation for long-term business.  On the basis of this agreement, 
a framework was created for the free action of economic units of the 
two countries willing to cooperate.  (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
1130 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   INVESTMENTS BY ROMANIAN-BORN ITALIAN BUSINESSMAN:  With more than 
$30 million invested in the Romanian economy and holding $4 million 
worth of shares in the Dacia Felix Bank, ethnic Romanian Ioan Mania, 
president of the Stima Industrial Group of Italy, is the biggest 
investor in Romania.  In June 1991, Mania set up -- together with 
the Electrotimis company of Timisoara -- Stimel, an Italian-Romanian 
joint venture manufacturing electrical equipment, with $4 four 
million worth of capital.  Stimel's turnover had reached $1 million 
by the end of 1991.  Mania and the Infratirea enterprise of Oradea 
later set up Stimin.  The Stima group of Italy intends to open some 
more Italian-Romanian joint ventures in Romanian towns.  Together 
with the Dacia Felix Bank, Ioan Mania drafted a financial project 
aimed at facilitating exports by the Italian industrial group and 
finance Romanian industry.  Although important, tradition and human 
resources are not enough for Romania's development, as equipment and 
productivity have to be considered, Mania said.  "The existing 
handicaps can be overcome," added the Romanian industrialist.  He 
said his love for his country had acted as an incentive in his 
cooperation with Romania.  (Bucharest ROMPRESS in English 0824 GMT 1 
Dec 93 AU) 
ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1744z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43172 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000494001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 93-054--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
December 29, 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   POLAND 

   FIRST TEST OF STOCK EXCHANGE RULE ON NEW SHARE ISSUES:  The 
planned one-for-four rights issue by Poland's Export Development 
Bank (Bank Rozwoju Eksportu BRE) will be the first test of a new 
regulation covering new share issues on the Warsaw stock exchange. 
The stock exchange passed a new regulation covering preemptive 
rights on November 30, although it was only made available to 
investors on December 9, according to which the price adjustment 
between the existing shares and the new issue is to be made at the 
stock-market session immediately following the fixing date for the 
entitlement rights.  According to Ryszard Czerniawski, legal 
director of the Warsaw stock exchange, the new regulation will 
prevent existing shareholders from making excess profits out of 
their rights to the new issue.  BRE is planning to raise 500 billion 
zlotys (Z) ($25 million) through the issue of 500,000 new shares at 
a price of Z1 million per share, based on the shareholder register 
as at December 13.  Existing shareholders are to be offered one new 
share for every four held at that date. 

   The stock market is, however, unhappy at the new share issue 
planned by furniture-maker Swarzedz in the new year, under which 
existing shareholders will not be offered preemptive rights, but 
will be granted preference in the event of over-subscription.  "It 
cannot be ruled out that these plans are contrary to the existing 
law, but we will make our official position known after we have 
received a detailed explanation from the company," Czerniawski 
explained.  Meanwhile, the steady growth of interest in the stock 
exchange has put pressure on the cost-bases of Polish brokerage 
houses, and they, in turn, are responding by sharply increasing 
their charges for opening new brokerage accounts. 

   Under Poland's paperless trading system, investors must hold a 
brokerage account, while their investments are lodged with a central 
securities depository.  The cost of opening an account has until 
recently been minimal, with brokerage costs largely covered from 
transaction commissions, but brokers privately fear that the 
prospect of a "blitz" on their offices by smaller investors trying 
to dispose of their handfuls of shares from the Bank Slaski 
privatization will lead to a proliferation of costly, almost-dormant 
accounts.  The most extreme increase is planned by Bank Slaski 
itself, which is planning a five-fold hike in its account-opening 
charges from the present Z1O0,OOO zlotys ($5) to Z500,OOO. 

   The increasing interest in the stock market has also forced 
brokerages to limit the number of new accounts to be opened per day, 
because of excessive demand and a lack of qualified staff.  In one 
case, that of the Bank of Economic Initiatives (Bank Inicjatyw 
Gospodarczych BIG), the bank's brokerage arm has imposed a 
moratorium on new accounts until mid-December.  According to BIG, 
this is linked to the need to prepare the bank's computer system for 
the planned increase of market trading sessions in the new year. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1400 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   SILESIAN BANK DENIES MAKING EXCESS PROFITS FROM SHARE OFFER:  The 
Katowice-based Silesian Bank (Bank Slaski), faced with widespread 
allegations that it earned excess profits because of the massive 
over-subscription of the recent flotation of its shares, has issued 
a strongly-worded denial of the charges.  The BSK board denied press 
claims that the massive over-subscription in the share issue had 
given the bank an interest-free loan running into trillions of 
zlotys by virtue of the prepayments by would-be investors. 

   The BSK board notes that "it is not possible to invest a sum of 
Z5 trillion ($250 million -- the estimated amount received from 
applicants) on the Polish money markets for a period of three weeks, 
where the deposit must be made on a low-risk basis."  Furthermore, 
the board notes that the costs of handling the money received had 
been high, and that 23 percent of the sum received had been 
deposited with the National Bank of Poland as a non-interest-bearing 
reserve. 

   The BSK board insisted that "despite certain distortions," 
smaller shareholders will be the beneficiaries of the issue, and not 
"a small group of sharks," as the press has suggested.  It noted 
thatthe risks and consequences of over-subscription had been clearly 
spelled out in the issue prospectus, and that prospective investors 
had signed a declaration to that effect.  BSK had been aware of the 
likelihood of heavy over-subscription, and had itself taken no 
specific steps through advertising and promotion to inflate the 
demand for the shares.  Faced with the prospect of thousands of 
shareholders trying to unload a handful of shares each, the BSK 
board called for "appreciation of what this will entail for 
brokerage offices, confronted with 700-800,000 additional clients 
whose affairs will need to be sorted out in a matter of days, and 
for forbearance, if service does not meet with the expectations of 
clients." (Warsaw PAP in English 1154 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   KRUPP FOUNDATION ASSISTANCE TO POLAND:  Aleksander Luczak, Polish 
deputy prime minister and minister of education, and Berthold Beiz, 
chairman of the Krupp Foundation, have signed a document summing up 
12 years of scientific and technological cooperation.  During these 
years, the Foundation has earmarked 15 million German marks to 
support Polish research studies at the Zabrze Center for Coal 
Enrichment.  Fifty percent of the costs of setting up the center 
have been paid by Krupp.  The Foundation has also donated 4.7 
million marks to the Warsaw Child Health Center.  Its total aid 
granted to Polish institutions during the past 20 years reached 23.5 
million marks.  The Foundation has extended its aid to the library 
and printing house of the Jagiellonian University of Krakow, the 
Lublin Catholic University, the Academy of Catholic Theology, and 
many other institutions, as well as to a number of young artists. 
The German side finances scholarships for Poles studying at the 
Viadrin European University in Frankfurt an der Oder and supports 
the miners' occupational diseases research center in Lublin. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1546 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   LOT, KLM TO INCREASE WARSAW-AMSTERDAM FLIGHTS:  LOT Polish 
Airlines and the Dutch airline KLM plan to increase the weekly 
number of flights between Warsaw and Amsterdam from 7 to 14 in the 
near future, spokesman for the Polish airline Henryka Kopacz said on 
9 December.  Marzena Grabiszewska-Gryka, spokeswoman for the Polish 
Ministry of Transportation, said that the Polish and Dutch aviation 
authorities have concluded a round of talks on a new government 
aviation agreement.  Both sides agreed on the program of air 
connection for the current winter and the forthcoming summer season. 
The talks, now nearing their end, were started last year.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1914 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   EIB LOANS FOR RAILWAY MODERNIZATION, SMALL ENTERPRISES:  Poland 
has received two loans from the European Investment Bank (EIB) worth 
250 million ECU for the modernization of the Polish section of the 
Berlin-Warsaw route (200 million ECU) and a number of undertakings 
in small enterprises (50 million ECU), the EIB reported on 9 
December.  The total value of the modernization work, to last until 
1997, is estimated at 487 million ECU.  The undertaking is also 
financed by the European Commission through the PHARE (Economic 
Reconstruction Aid for Poland and Hungary) program, and a loan from 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is also 
expected.  The 50 million ECU loan is to be appropriated for 
industry modernization, environment protection and energy 
conservation.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2138 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   WALESA, PAWLAK, RECEIVE AMOCO OFFICIAL:  On 9 December, President 
Lech Walesa received Patrick J. Early, vice-president of Amoco 
Corporation, and Amoco's representatives working in Poland to 
discuss the firm's plans to exploit natural gas and oil in Poland. 
President Walesa said that he hoped that Amoco would help Poland 
develop her economy.  The president stressed the role of the 
extraction and oil industries in making the Polish economy 
independent in terms of economy and policy.  He called on American 
firms for greater involvement in investing in our country. 

   Patrick J. Early was also received by Prime Minister Waldemar 
Pawlak to discuss the implementation of two contracts, signed by 
Amoco and the Polish Government.  The contracts, signed in 1992 and 
1993, gave the Chicago-based Amoco the right to prospect and exploit 
oil and natural gas as well as methane deposits in central and 
south-eastern parts of Poland and in upper Silesia.  Following these 
meetings, the American businessman told journalists that to 
implement the contracts, certain questions related to taxes and hard 
currency needed to be worked out but declined to specify them.  He 
only said that it is indispensable to adjust the Polish tax system 
to one that is binding in the world and expressed hope that his 
corporation will start operations in Poland soon.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2209 GMT 9 Dec 93 ) 

   HEWLETT-PACKARD RECORDS 77-PERCENT INCREASE IN ORDERS:  Hewlett- 
Packard recorded in fiscal year 1993 a 77-percent growth of orders 
for computer-related equipment in Poland as compared to 1992, the 
company's sales and marketing manager for Central and Eastern Europe 
Owen Kemp said on 9 December.  Addressing the Hewlett-Packard annual 
news conference at the Bristol Hotel in Warsaw, Kemp said that the 
value of orders in 1993 totalled $45 million.   He explained the 
increased number of orders by the ever-growing demand from 
customers, mainly banks and governmental bodies, for reliable high- 
quality products like computers and peripherals. 

   Also during the conference, Piotr Smolski, who replaced Adam 
Kowalski as head of Hewlett-Packard Poland as of November 1, said 
that the Polish team of Hewlett-Packard, which presently consists of 
85 professionals, will be expanding.  He stressed that Hewlett- 
Packard will continue to train computer specialists and expand 
professional service throughout Poland in the coming year.  The 
Hewlett-Packard company of Palo Alto, California, is one of the 
world's leading manufacturers of computer and peripheral products, 
networking products, measurement systems and electronic components. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2327 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   RELEASE OF MEAT RESERVES EASES SITUATION ON MARKET:  The decision 
of the Agricultural Market Agency to release its meat reserves has 
eased the situation on the market and has proved that meat shortages 
are not as acute as was previously forecast.  The agency has offered 
12.5 thousand tons of meat, of which only 6 tons has been bought so 
far by meat-processing plants, a director in the Agricultural Market 
Agency said on 9 December.   Also on 9 December, the "Pek-Pol" meat- 
processing and distribution company announced it had decided to 
lower retail prices for some meat products sold by its chain of 
shops throughout the country.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1103 GMT 10 
Dec 93 AU) 

   FIRST FOREIGN BROKERAGE OPENS IN WARSAW:  Creditanstalt 
Securities Inc. will be the first foreign brokerage to offer its 
services in Warsaw.  The head of the office, Wolfgang Bauer, told 
reporters in Warsaw that its services will be available only to 
institutional investors, and the minimum investment was set at Z50O 
million zlotys (about $25,000).  The chairman of the Warsaw Stock 
Exchange, Wieslaw Rozlucki, said that the Creditanstalt group, the 
owner of the brokerage, was instrumental in drawing the bulk of 
foreign investors now present at the Warsaw exchange.  Foreign 
investors hold some 20 to 25 percent of shares traded at the 
exchange and account for some 10 percent of turnover, Rozlucki said. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1524 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   DEBATE ON OIL INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING:  Experts from seven Polish 
refineries, the CPN gasoline distributor, the Progress and Business 
Foundation, and the European Union met in Warsaw on 10 December to 
discuss the transformation of the Polish oil sector.  Maciej 
Zebrowski of the Progress and Business Foundation, which is working 
on the restructuring project, said that it was based on the 
principle of "a gradual liberalization of the fuel market" in 
Poland.  He warned against early deregulation of petrol prices in 
view of the absence of mechanisms protecting consumers.  Experts of 
the European Union advocated the privatization of one of the 
refineries, as well as the CPN oil trader and distributor.  Other 
refineries should also be privatized in stages, they said.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1526 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   MOSTOSTAL EXPORT BUYS 80 PERCENT OF ZAMET SHARES:  Mostostal 
Export Inc. has bought 80 percent of the shares in the Zamet SA 
mechanical plant in Tarnowskie Gory (Katowice Province) for Z17.6 
billion (some $900,000).  The remaining shares will be sold to the 
Zamet employees at preferential prices, the Privatization Ministry 
announced on 10 December.  The investor is obliged to increase the 
capital of the plant by Z32 billion within one month of signing the 
agreement.  Mostostal will also invest 50 billion zlotys within the 
next three years.  Under the agreement the present level of 
employment is to be maintained for 24 months.  Zamet manufactures 
machines and equipment for the mining and steel industries and, due 
to the recession in mining, is in a bad financial condition.  The 
company hopes that after the transaction with Mostostal it will get 
new export orders.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2002 GMT 1O Dec 93 AU) 

   BOROWSKI CALLS FOR STUDY OF LONDON CLUB PROPOSAL:  It is too 
early to assess the proposal of the London Club of commercial banks 
concerning the reduction of the Polish debt, according to a 10 
December statement by Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister 
Marek Browski.  REUTER reported that the London Club put forward new 
proposals concerning the reduction of the Polish debt, which amounts 
to $12.3 billion.  Quoting bank sources, REUTER said that the banks 
proposed to change the debt into a long-term discount bond and 
offered a debt redemption of one-third.  We have to consider the 
banks' proposal, Borowski said, recognizing that it is too early to 
make any assessments.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2146 GMT 1O Dec 93 AU) 

   INCREASED SALES OF FRENCH FOOD PRODUCTS:  Some Warsaw shops have 
been offering French cheese, processed vegetables, spices, wines, 
and champagne during the French Food Week that started on 10 
December.  On show are primarily products of French firms affiliated 
by the club of exporters to countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
(PECO Club) and other firms well-known in Poland, including Danone. 
According to representatives of the Sopexa firm promoting French 
food abroad, the offer includes products that enrich the Poles' menu 
but are not competitive to Polish food.  Sales of French foodstuffs 
have risen by 45 percent in Poland over the past seven months. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2148 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   CENTRAL PLANNING OFFICE DRAFTS 1994-97 ECONOMIC PLAN:  The basic 
aim of the government will be to improve the material situation of 
society, reads the draft "Program of Socio-Economic Policy for 1994- 
97" prepared by the Central Office of Planning (CUP).  The document 
is to be presented to the government soon. 

   According to CUP, in 1997 consumption will increase by 14 
percent, unemployment will not exceed 13.5 percent, and investments 
in education and health care will not be lower than in 1989.  In the 
opinion of the planning office, this year's economic results "allow 
us to assume that the economy has overcome the recession," but the 
growth tendencies have not been steady enough yet.  The main threats 
to economic stability are posed by the bad state of public finances, 
the deficit in foreign trade and low-profit-making enterprises.  CUP 
intends to strengthen the purchasing power of the Polish zloty and 
reduce inflation, which is to drop from 27.2 percent this year to 14 
percent next year.  In order to improve the Polish banking system, 
CUP wants to prepare a separate program for bank mergers.  According 
to the project, out of 14 big banking institutions that exist now, 
only five to eight will remain till 1997. 

   The draft program of socio-economic policy also envisages a 6- 
percent rise in Polish exports in 1994.  To ensure this increase, 
CUP plans to implement a system of investment reliefs and improve 
credit systems, as well as set up a special institution insuring 
credits for exporters.  According to CUP, an important element of 
the trade policy would be to reenter the markets of Eastern Europe 
and to continue negotiations with Western Europe about opening their 
markets to Polish products.  Polish products should also be promoted 
in non-European markets in China, Japan, India or Latin America. 

   As for privatization, CUP envisages the privatization of some 
800-1,000 state-owned enterprises next year.  Also, the first phase 
of the mass privatization program -- the introduction of national 
investment funds, will be implemented in 1994.  The reprivatization 
law is to be ready by mid-1994.  CUP also wants to verify the 
privatization processes of the state-owned farms.  As concerns 
social policy, the government basic aims should include the 
improvement of social security and creating conditions conducive to 
offering equal opportunity to all citizens.  The program of 
reforming the social insurance system will be ready within half a 
year along with the reform of education.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
1858 GMT 11 Dec 93 AU) 

   OFFICIALS VIEW MINING SECT0R PROBLEMS:  The managing director of 
the State Coal Mining Agency, Andrzej Karbownik, said on 10 December 
that the "present program for preventing the collapse of mining is 
positive, but lacks funding."  He was speaking at the Mining 
Industry Discussion Forum in Katowice.  Industry Minister Marek Pol 
said that the decisions reached at the forum were to help formulate 
the final version of the government plan for restructuring industry. 
Janina Kraus, a parliamentary deputy for the Confederation for an 
Independent Poland (KPN), demanded that coal exports be increased to 
35-40 million tons a year.  She argued against allowing foreign 
capital to take over any Polish mines 

   Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) deputy Andrzej Szarawarski 
stressed that a clearly defined legal-financial system was necessary 
in Polish mining.  He thought mines should be allowed the autonomy 
to be able to join together in various ways, but on the basis of 
mutual interests, and not for administrative reasons.  Eugeniusz 
Ciszak from the Mining Chamber of Commerce said that "mining could 
not be seen as a few dozen mines but as a fuel-energy complex, 
grouping together over 200 mines and other workplaces connected with 
the mining industry."  He maintained that, for three years, plans to 
restructure mining had concentrated on extraction to the detriment 
of the auxiliary branches of the mining industry.  Deputy Industry 
Minister Eugeniusz Morawski added that "in Poland the cost of 
producing a unit of energy from coal is two and a half times cheaper 
than from oil or gas, forms of energy that are in short supply." 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1907 GMT 11 Dec 93 AU) 

   FSO, GENERAL MOTORS EUROPE FORM JOINT VENTURE:  The Warsaw FSO 
car plant, General Motors Europe, the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade, and the Finance Ministry signed a cooperation agreement in 
Warsaw on 13 December, including a contract providing for the 
establishment of a joint venture company between FSO and General 
Motors Europe and an investment accord between the Polish Government 
and General Motors Europe.  Under the agreement, up to 10,000 Opel 
Astra cars will be assembled in the FSO plant annually starting from 
autumn 1994.  The documents were signed by Minister of Industry and 
Trade Marek Pol, FSO General Director Andrzej Tyszkiewicz, head of 
General Motors Europe Luis R. Hughes, and head of 0pel AG David J. 
Herman.  General Motors Europe is to invest some 10 million German 
marks at the start but its investments will total 75 million marks a 
year after the production is launched.  Output capacity is then to 
reach 33,000 cars annually and employment level -- 1,000 workers. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1837 GMT 13 Dec 93 AU) 

   JAPAN HELPS FINANCE LABORATORY FOR POLISH SURVEYING CENTER:  A 
fully computerized and automated photo-reproduction laboratory was 
opened at the Center of Surveying and Cartographic Documentation 
inside the Ministry of Construction on 14 December to enable Polish 
surveyors to process aerial photographs of terrain.  The institution 
was set up with financial assistance from the Japanese Government. 
Construction Minister Barbara Blida told journalists that this was a 
laboratory that met the world's highest standards.  Japanese 
Ambassador Nagao Hyodo said that devices for drawing colored maps 
would be installed at the laboratory in the second stage to 
considerably increase the Center's potential.  An aerial photograph, 
used to draw a map, can also serve to grasp the ecological condition 
of a terrain and to detect unreported buildings when making their 
cadastral surveys.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1910 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   NEW COMPUTER SYSTEMS FOR FIAT AUTO POLAND:  Representatives of 
the Italian Fiat concern announced on 14 December that they intend 
to introduce new computer systems and new industrial technologies at 
the Fiat Auto Poland company in the years 1994-1995.  The 
announcement was made during a conference on the evolution of 
computer systems in the Polish car industry, which began in Szczyrk, 
Bielsko-Biala province.  According to Marco Merlini, chief expert 
responsible for the computer sector, the introduction of an 
integrated system, which is expected to rationalize the work of the 
administration and the accounts department, will start on January 1, 
1994.  Merlini also said that the installation of computer systems 
controlling production will begin in the middle of next year. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2159 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   SCHNEIDER ELECTRONICS GROUP OPENS POLISH BRANCH:  The Schneider 
group, the world leader in electronics and automation, has opened a 
branch in Poland, a director of Schneider Poland Ltd. told a news 
conference in Warsaw on 14 December.  "The firm plans to control 25 
percent of the Polish electronic market," Antoni Wysocki, technical 
director of the newly opened branch, said.  This year, the firm's 
turnover in Poland has reached 3O million French francs.  The 
biggest Polish clients are the electric power stations in Belchatow 
and Kozienice and the Labedy ironworks.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2322 
GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   NOVEMBER UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES:  In November 1993, there were 
2,846,183 registered unemployed, up by 37,138 persons or 1.3 percent 
over the October figure.  In November, 15.5 percent of all persons 
of working age were unemployed, as compared to 15.3 percent in 
October, announced Deputy Labor Minister Jerzy Szreter at a 15 
December news conference at the ministry in Warsaw.  Forty-two 
provinces have experienced a growth in unemployment.  The greatest 
increases have occurred in the provinces of Szczecin, 4.5 percent, 
and Slupsk, 4 percent.  A decrease in unemployment was noted in 6 
provinces, the greatest being noted in the province of Opole at 2.2 
percent.  The highest rates of structural unemployment were noted in 
the provinces of Koszalin (28.4 percent) and Suwalki, while the 
lowest were to be found in the provinces of Krakow at 7 percent and 
Warsaw (7.7 percent).  Fifty-two percent of all unemployed were 
entitled to unemployment benefits.  Women made up 52.8 percent of 
the unemployed.  Szreter described the growth in the unemployment 
rate in November as a seasonal phenomenon, which the Labor Ministry 
was expecting.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1447 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   FOREIGN CREDITS GOING UNUSED:  Several billion dollars worth of 
credits offered to Poland by international financial institutions 
and foreign banks remain unused, according to Jerzy Hylewski, head 
of the Department of International Financial Institutions at the 
National Bank of Poland.  His statement was confirmed by Ian Hume, 
head of the World Bank mission in Poland.  Both bank officials were 
addressing a conference opened here devoted to the possibilities of 
obtaining foreign and polish credits by Polish businessmen.  The 150 
businessmen attending the conference are to try to learn how to 
effectively draw on available credit facilities.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 1752 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   NESTLE TO ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE WITH CHOCOLATE PLANT:  On 25 
November, representatives of the Swiss "Nestle" concern initialed an 
agreement with the provincial governor of Poznan and the "Goplana" 
confectionery plant to establish a joint venture with "Goplana" and 
privatize the Polish factory.  They also initialed the charter of 
the planned Polish-Swiss company "Goplana SA."  Under the agreement, 
6 percent of the stock in the new company will go to the employees, 
while 47 percent will be held by the Polish Treasury and "Nestle" 
each.  After the agreement has been approved by the minister of 
privatization, it will be ready for signing.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
1825 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   GERMANS ACQUIRE STAKE IN CONSTRUCTION FIRM:  The German 
construction firm "Bauunternehmung und Betonwerke Lorenz Kesting 
GmbH and Co. Kg." has bought 80 percent of the shares in the 
"Prefabet-Rakowice" limited liability company worth 2.4 million 
German marks (DM).  The remaining 20 percent of the shares are to be 
offered to the work force of "Prefabet-Rakowice" on a preferential 
basis.  The German side has committed itself to invest an additional 
DM3 million in the modernization of the plant and to increase the 
capital of "Prefabet-Rakowice" by DMO.5 million.  The German firm 
has also guaranteed to "Prefabet" a standing order for its concrete 
elements.  "Prefabet-Rakowice", operating in Jelenia Gora province, 
manufactures concrete products designed for industrial and housing 
construction.  It has been cooperating with the German firm since 
1989.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2123 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONSORTIUM ESTABLISHED TO APPLY FOR TV LICENSE:  The Polish 
television consortium TV 7 was established today by a group of 
Polish private businessmen, the Polish Investment Consortium, CLT TV 
network of Luxembourg, and REUTER Poland Ltd.  TV 7 plans to apply 
to the National Radio and TV Council for a license for TV 
broadcasting in Poland, both from terrestrial stations and via 
satellite.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1540 GMT 26 Nov 93 AU) 

   ELECTRICAL FIRM TO EQUIP INDIAN POWER STATION:  The "Elektrim" 
company has signed an agreement with the Indian firm "Gujarat 
Electricity" providing for the delivery of equipment to the Kutch 
power station in India.  The contract is worth $65 million dollars. 
"Elektrim" has been carrying out contracts in India for 20 years now 
worth several hundred million dollars.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1827 
GMT 26 Nov 93 AU) 

   FORMER MILITARY PLANT TO MAKE MERCEDES VEHICLES:  The employees' 
council of the military motor plant in Glowno near here has agreed 
to its merger with the Sobieslaw Zasada Centrum SA firm in Warsaw. 
The agreement is to result in the production in Glowno of various 
types of Mercedes cars.  The start of the production of the Mercedes 
cars depends on how swiftly the factory in Glowno is privatized. 
Until now, the plant has been part of the Defense Ministry.  The 
plant has already started assembling Mercedes delivery vans.  The 
merger of both firms will make it possible to produce various types 
of cars of the Mercedes company.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1821 GMT 29 
Nov 93 AU) 

   MCDONALD'S OPENS NINTH RESTAURANT:  The ninth McDonald's 
restaurant in Poland opened in Krakow on 29 November.  The firm is 
to invest a further $16 million in Poland by the end of 1993. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1658 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   SKODA CONSIDERS SETTING UP ASSEMBLY PLANT:  Skoda, the Czech car 
manufacturer financially linked to the Volkswagen group, is 
considering opening an assembly plant in Poland, Volkhard Koehler, 
deputy chairman of Volkswagen, told the German HANDELSBLATT economic 
paper on 29 November.  Koehler explained the project was being 
examined in view of the high duties on car imports to Poland. 
Koehler represents the German Volkswagen concern in the board of 
directors of Skoda, in which the Czech Government continues to have 
a majority stake.  Volkswagen has a 30 percent stake in Skoda. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1948 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   BUSINESS FORUM STARTS OPERATIONS:  The forum of leaders of the 
world of business in Poland, a branch of the international business 
forum set up by heir to the British throne Prince Charles, 
inaugurated its Polish operations on 29 November by means of a press 
conference headed by chairman of the board Janusz Golebiowski.  The 
Polish forum aims to support the development of small business, and 
of tourist operations.  It also plans operations in the fields of 
youth employment and the restructuring of state enterprises. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2109 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   COMPAQ OPENS SUBSIDIARY IN WARSAW:  The Compaq Corporation, the 
world's second largest manufacturer of personal computers, opened 
its Polish subsidiary in Warsaw on 30 November.  Compaq Vice 
President Andreas Barth said at a press conference that the Polish 
computer market is developing more dynamically than in Western 
countries and that only high-quality hardware can be sold here. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1710 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   BRITISH GAS SUBSIDIARY TO EXPLORE FOR OIL, GAS:  Polish 
Environment Minister Stanislaw Zelichowski and Philip Byrne, head of 
exploration for Central Europe of British Gas PLC, signed an 
agreement on 30 November enabling British Gas to explore some 9,000 
square kilometers of Polish territory.  Under the agreement, the 
company's subsidiary, British gas Oil and Production Ltd., will 
spend around $30 million conducting seismological and drilling tests 
around Kutno, some 100 km west of Warsaw.  According to experts, the 
geological terrain in the area resembles that of gas-bearing strata 
in the North Sea, where British gas played a major developmental 
role.  "It is a great success that such an important firm is 
interested in exploring for oil and gas in Poland," commented Michal 
Wilczynski, Poland' chief geologist.  He added that if gas is 
discovered in commercial quantities, it would greatly improve 
Poland's energy balance of payments.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2219 
GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   OFFICIALS HAPPY WITH VAT COMPLIANCE:  A deputy minister of 
finance announced that proceeds from the value-added tax have been 
growing steadily; the projected intake for October comes to 17 
trillion zlotys.  The growth trend is considered to be stable.  In 
addition, no "dramatic" arrears have so far been registered in VAT 
collection. To be sure, the largest late payment came to a few dozen 
billion zlotys, but it was only outstanding for one month.  No 
substantial mistakes have been registered in filling out tax 
declarations, nor has the Ministry of Finance received complaints 
from taxpayers about delays in receiving the VAT refunds due them. 
(Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish No 207, 22-24 Oct 93 p 4) 

   DATA SOUGHT ON PROPERTY SUBJECT TO REPRIVATIZATION:  The Ministry 
of Ownership Transformations has published in the press a detailed 
questionnaire on property taken over by the state between 1944 and 
1962.  The purpose is to assess the exposure of the state budget in 
the event a reprivatization law is passed by the Sejm.  It is 
stressed that filling out the confidential questionnaire does not 
constitute filing for the return of the property.  Property lost by 
individuals in conjunction with World War II, including in the 
Polish territory taken over by the Soviet Union, is specifically 
excluded. 

   Detailed personal information is solicited about the owners of 
nationalized assets and their legal successors (including their 
citizenship at the time of the takeover and at present; if their 
Polish citizenship has been acquired the date should be furnished). 
Legal title to ownership (sole proprietor, partner, shareholder, 
etc.) should also be mentioned.  Other data concerns the type, 
estimated current value, and current owner/user of the nationalized 
assets (a farm, an industrial enterprise, an apartment, etc.).  The 
questionnaire lists 13 decrees under which private property was 
confiscated between 1944 and 1962; the one used to nationalize the 
assets in question should be marked.  A separate questionnaire needs 
to be filled out for each type of confiscated property (farm, urban 
real estate, vessels on inland waterways, etc.).  (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA (WEEKEND SUPPLEMENT) in Polish No 207, 22-24 Oct 93 p VI) 

   RETURN TO SHORTAGE-DRIVEN INFLATI0N SEEN:  Proceeding from his 
personal business experience, a ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE author foresees a 
prompt recurrence of the most "malignant" form of inflation, that 
driven by shortages of merchandise.  It is not generally understood 
how much the production potential of Polish enterprises has shrunk, 
in many cases irreversibly.  Merchants already have problems 
purchasing many types of popular merchandise from "the few producers 
who survived the pogrom of transformation and operate more or less 
normally."  Nor are imports always a good way out, since the 
exchange rate of the zloty has drawn closer to its value based on 
the productivity of the Polish economy.  Needless to say, nothing 
gives merchants a better incentive to raise prices. 

   The author quotes the owner of a shop carrying tailor and 
upholsterer supplies:  "No, we do not have thread like that; the 
state factory in Silesia has gone under, while the private factory 
in Gdansk is taking orders on a waiting list running through the end 
of next month.  No, you will not get such punching dies anywhere; 
the only producer has closed down shop, and his son has started an 
alcohol wholesale business.  Ask me for taps next month.  I visited 
the producer yesterday and went on a sit-down strike, but I only got 
100 of them."  (Warsaw ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE in Polish No 42, 17 Oct 93 
p 31) 

   POLISH FARMERS GETTING YOUNGER, DIVERSIFYING:  Recent economic 
dislocations have spurred a generational change in Polish farming 
and caused farmers to diversify their operations.  A drop in 
migration to urban areas (from 38 persons per 1,000 rural population 
in 1988 to 36 in 1992) and an increase in returns from the cities 
(from 12 to 16 per 1,000) have combined to make the rural population 
younger.  Men have started returning to farms after military 
service.  School graduates have remained in the rural areas in 
greater numbers.  The rate of generational change in Polish 
agriculture came to 4 percent, the highest it has been since World 
War II.  As a rule, farms were taken over by just one younger family 
member; only one farm in eight was split between two or more heirs. 
The tradition of passing farms on to men is becoming less of a 
factor -- one-quarter of the farms went to women.  As a result of 
such changes, the proportion of farm owners under 44 years of age 
increased by 10 percent, to one-half of the total; one farm owner in 
five is under 35. 

   Some 52 percent of Polish farms still have additional sources of 
income, as they used to; however, the proportion of those employed 
in urban areas fell from 62 to 52 percent.  The greatest change is 
that one in three farmers is now employed privately, whereas a few 
years ago only one in 11 was.  Almost one-half of those employed 
privately are self-employed.  The services they offer either fill in 
the gaps left by the now defunct socialist-era organizations (farm 
equipment rentals) or are new to rural areas (e.g., videocassette 
rental).  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 40, 1 Oct 93 p 27) 

   REASONS FOR DISMISSAL OF PZU CHAIRMAN QUESTIONED:  The chairman 
of the board of the PZU (State Insurance Bureau) has been fired by 
the board of trustees, ostensibly for juggling statistics on the 
balance sheet to show a profit instead of a loss.  However, the 
dismissed official maintains that more profound differences in 
insurance philosophies were at the root of his discharge. 

   PZU is a single-person partnership of the state treasury; as a 
result, the deputy minister of finance plays the role of the general 
meeting of shareholders.  To fire the chairman, the deputy minister 
changed the composition of the board of trustees so that out of 10 
members, six are directly associated with the Ministry of Finance, 
or were until recently.  Two of the others represent the trade union 
of PZU employees. 

   The PZU, a former state insurance monopoly, showed losses on the 
balance sheet in 1990 and 1991.  The dismissed chairman was brought 
in to repair company finances.  The 1992 balance sheet (unaudited) 
showed gross profits of 182 billion zlotys.  This was accomplished 
by assigning some of the PZU deficit accumulated in previous years 
to its subsidiary, PZU-Life.  This transaction was entered on the 
books in early 1993 but backdated to 31 December 1992.  It improved 
the balance sheet of PZU without worsening that of PZU-Life because 
it was classified as prepaid expenses.  However, the necessary 
solvency margin for PZU-Life was lost. 

   The general meeting of PZU shareholders was informed about the 
transaction in April; no questions were raised by the minister until 
some time later.  Insurance supervision did not raise an objection 
or demand to see plans for restoring the solvency margin of PZU-Life 
(which it had the right and duty to do).  The reversal of the 
transaction was not ordered until July, and the PZU chairman was not 
dismissed over alleged improprieties until the end of September. 

   It is noted that the government has been pursuing a 
demonopolization policy in the insurance industry (breaking up and 
downsizing the PZU); this is the opposite of the government policy 
with regard to banks where the government is promoting mergers and 
consortiums. The chairman of the board who was fired did not regard 
the PZU as a monopoly; he pointed out that its market share has been 
pushed below 40 percent in some types of insurance.  He expected 
this share to be driven further down by competition.  The former 
chairman also viewed the breakup of the PZU as counterproductive and 
reducing the value of the company for privatization purposes. 

   The timing of the chairman's dismissal was extremely unfortunate, 
as it severely disrupted the continuity of management at a time when 
strategic decisions needed to be made for the year 1994.  The 
dismissal alarmed Western reinsurers doing business with the PZU and 
has the potential for worsening the terms which the company may 
expect to secure.  It is suspected that the outgoing government was 
in a hurry to fire the PZU chairman so as not to leave in place an 
individual capable of persuading the incoming minister of finance 
that breaking up the PZU is not wise.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in 
Polish No 41, 8 Oct 93 p 3) 

   'QUASI-BANKS' STILL DOING WELL:  The cottage industry of "quasi- 
banks" -- institutions engaging in banking operations without 
relevant licenses -- is still strong in Poland.  Technically, such 
activities may earn one a prison sentence of three years.  However, 
not even the recurring failures of quasi-banks and the attendant 
negative publicity seem to scare away their potential clients, who 
are lured by promises of high interest rates.  Actually, one of the 
quasi-banks is still in operation despite the arrest of its chairman 
of the board.  Another one does not seem to be hurting despite 
investigative reports in the press to the effect that the operation 
is fraudulent.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 41, 8 Oct 93 p 
5) 

   INTEREST IN MILITARY INSTITUTE INVENTIONS GROWING:  For several 
months, interest on the part of the business community in inventions 
and technologies developed by the WAT (Military Technical Institute) 
has been growing steadily.  On some days, businessmen line up at the 
headquarters of the military school.  Of 900 patents received by the 
personnel of the school to date, some 300 to 400 may be used in 
various civilian industries.  The school would like to put the 
patents to commercial use as soon as possible.  However, military 
scientists speculate that the interest in their developments is due 
to the businessmen's hopes for future military orders rather than 
the profit motive.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 42, 15 Oct 
93 pp 16-17) 

   LACK OF LONG-TERM VALUATION IN MONEY MARKET:  Poor liquidity and 
economic uncertainty have combined to stunt the development of the 
Polish money market.  Stagnation -- and some say retrogression -- in 
this sector is particularly apparent in comparison with the capital 
market and the securities exchange.  Hope of stabilizing and 
extending the quotation periods (to at least six months) is becoming 
unrealistic.  At present, three-month investments are the longest 
ones available on the market and then only for small amounts of 
funds.  Treasury bills and certain commercial bills are six-month 
instruments; however, they are not liquid enough, and the volume of 
trading is too small to arrive at the real price of money for longer 
periods of time.  The same is true of one- and three-year bonds 
quoted on the exchange. 

   The further shortening of transaction periods may bring about 
disappearance of the real price for three-month funds, as well. 
This situation results in a lack of confidence on the part of 
foreign financial institutions; one of their representatives called 
funds shorter than three months "a speculative dealer game."  Within 
Poland, this lack of confidence is exacerbated by periods of acute 
shortages of "cash" when, as an experienced dealer put it, 
"obtaining funds hinges on social contacts."  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA 
in Polish No 42, 15 Oct 93 p 22) 

   FUNDING FOR HOUSING CONSTRUCTION PONDERED:  The "New Housing 
Order" -- a document of the old Polish government which the incoming 
coalition intends to follow -- would introduce several significant 
changes in funding for housing construction.  First, contractor 
enterprises will use short- and medium-term credit only for the 
duration of construction proper.  Long-term credit will be reserved 
for the builders of rental housing.  Funding for the acquisition of 
housing will be separate from construction funding; it will be 
differentiated depending upon the affluence of residents. 

   Long-term mortgages will be intended mostly for affluent 
families. It is envisaged that the use of proprietary capital of PKO 
BP (General Savings Bank-National Bank) for sustaining such credit 
will be restricted gradually in favor of using a World Bank credit 
line for these purposes.  Savings and loans institutions will 
provide mortgages for families in the middle income brackets. 
Finally, there will be "social housing construction" for those in 
the lowest income brackets. 

   The outgoing government has started a dozen or so pilot projects 
which involve the use of matching government funding, with some of 
the monies coming from proprietary sources and off-budget funds. 
(Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA (ECONOMY AND MARKET SUPPLEMENT) in Polish 22 
Oct 93 p 8) 

   IMPACT OF ARRANGEMENTS WITH AUSTRIA ASSESSED:  The free-trade 
agreement with the EFTA is expected to improve the competitive 
position of Poland on the Austrian market.  Currently, Austria ranks 
fifth in Polish imports and seventh in Polish exports.  In addition 
to the EFTA agreement, a bilateral Polish-Austrian agreement is 
being prepared which will cover the employment of Poles in Austria 
and environmental issues. 

   Liberalization of customs duties on manufactures will be 
important for Poland; about 80 percent of Polish exports will come 
to Austria duty-free, including cars (the Bielsko-Biala Automotive 
Plant is already present in Austria).  The Polish commercial attache 
expects exports to grow in several significant groups, even if the 
reduction in duties is from 3-5 to zero percent (copper, electric 
motors, apparel, furniture, certain chemicals). Growth is expected 
even in agricultural exports, despite the many protections remaining 
in place in Austria. 

   Poland is interested in increasing transit trade through Austria 
(it is estimated that such imports account for 29 percent, and 
exports for 19 percent, of Polish trade with Austria).  Differences 
in the statistical treatment of transit trade are responsible for 
Polish statistics showing a far greater exchange with Austria than 
Austrian statistics suggest.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE (D0MESTIC 
MARKETS SUPPLEMENT) in Polish No 126, 21 0ct 93 p 7) 

ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1836z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43173 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000594001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-1--CIS MUSLIM 
<H3> <TI>      NEAR EAST/SOUTH ASIA:  RELATIONS WITH CIS MUSLIM STATES, No. 1 </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
REGIONAL 

       Turkey Fears Losing Oil Advantage to Moscow 

   In an interview, Turkish economist Mustafa Sonmez expressed 
concern over developments in the route-selection process for oil and 
natural gas pipelines from Central Asia to Europe.  Sonmez, who is 
known for his pipeline research, said that Russia's preference for 
Novorossiysk Port for both oil and natural gas would put control of 
the spigots in Russia's hands and cautioned operators and financing 
institutions to concentrate lobbying activities on avoiding such a 
possibility.  Upon his return from a three-day international 
conference at Tampa, Florida at which the pipelines were a major 
topic of debate, Sonmez answered questions about how the Central 
Asia pipelines will affect regional economic and diplomatic balances 
and whether Turkey will be able to take advantage of the "golden 
opportunity" they represent. 

   Sonmez said that Turkmenistan natural gas will help Turkey 
develop gas-fueled power plants and chemical facilities to meet the 
increased fertilizer requirement resulting from the irrigation side 
of the giant Southeast Anatolia (dam and irrigation) Project. 
Sonmez stated that the gas pipeline will create jobs, bring in $250 
to $400 million annually in foreign exchange through transshipment, 
and produce up to $600 million annually in the export of goods and 
services, as well as the opportunity to "offset" the cost of gas 
used. 

   According to Sonmez, four routes have been proposed:  (1) 
Turkmenistan prefers a route to Eastern Anatolia via Iran, to avoid 
riling that neighbor; (2) Turkey prefers a pipeline under the 
Caspian Sea to Azerbaijan-Nakhichevan and on to Anatolia, (3) while 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), which 
will finance the project, has tried to balance Muslim and Christian 
interests by supporting; a route passing through Armenia from 
Azerbaijan-Nakhichevan, or; (4) Azerbaijan-Georgia-Anatolia. 

   Sonmez estimated that an oil pipeline from the Caspian to the 
Mediterranean would carry 40 million tons of crude oil per year, 25 
million tons of which would be Azerbaijan oil.  The 1,040-km line 
would intersect the existing Kirkuk-Ceyhan pipeline at Viransehir in 
Turkey and would cost $1.5 billion.  He added that the Caspian- 
Mediterranean route would benefit Turkey by providing constant 
foreign exchange from offset and transit earnings and could be built 
with $400 million in capital and $800 million in credit (numbers as 
reported).  (Istanbul NOKTA 3-9 Oct 93) 

   Sonmez noted, however, that Russia does not favor this route and 
was denied its preferred route through the Turkish Straits because 
Turkey would not accept the environmental pollution risk.  In 
addition, Russia wanted Azerbaijan and Central Asian oil piped to 
Novorossiysk and then shipped to the Turkish port of Samsun.  A 
pipeline would be built from Samsun to join the existing Kirikkale- 
Ceyhan line, perhaps including Sile and Kiyikoy which flank the 
Straits. 

   IRAN 

   Head of Uzbekistan's Airline Visits Iran 

   The head of Uzbekistan's airline, Rafikov, arrived in Tehran on 9 
November for talks on topics of mutual interest with Iranian 
officials.  During his visit, Rafikov met with Minister of Roads and 
Transportation Engineer Akbar Torkan, toured Iran Air's office and 
exchanged views on aviation matters with the head of the airline. 
(Tehran HAMSHAHRI 10 Nov 93) 

   TURKEY 

   Tatarstan Sells Helicopters To Turkish Military 

   Turkey's Gendarmerie Forces have purchased 25 helicopters from 
Tatarstan.  The republic's prime minister, Muhammad Sabirof, said 
that Tatarstan wants to develop economic relations with Turkey and 
that it will sell war industry products on a commodity exchange 
basis. The helicopters sale represents the first realization of this 
policy, according to a report datelined Kazan.  However, Sabirof 
said that the Turks are not making the necessary effort for trade, 
that they had sent poor quality goods to Kazan, and that "we had to 
cancel a recent exhibition."  On a different note, Sabirof also said 
that Tatar geological experts believe that rich oil deposits exist 
in Anatolia and are doing oil exploration in Turkey.  (Istanbul 
MILLIYET 3 Nov 93) 

   Kyrgyzstan Establishes Direct Flights to Istanbul 

   Turkey leads other nations in construction in Kyrgyzstan, whose 
capital, Bishkek, is "jammed" with Turkish, American, and other 
Western businessmen, according to reporters who were in Bishkek for 
the inauguration of the direct Bishkek-Istanbul flights by 
Kyrgyzstan Airlines.  President Akaev said, "We are trying to 
attract Europe and Turkey to our country via air, the modern Silk 
Road."  Turkish Ambassador in Bishkek Metin Goker said that the 
Kyrgyz consider the Turks to be brothers, as attested by their 
giving Turkey an embassy building.  (Istanbul MILLIYET 27 Oct 93) 

   Turks Accused of "Bad Business" in Kazakhstan 

   Following a business tour of Kazakhstan by the Central Anatolia 
Exporters Union (OAIB) on 10-18 September, OAIB president Murat 
Evirgen said that they visited more than 20 government 
organizations, which gave the OAIB numerous reports of Turkish firms 
that failed to pay for goods purchased.  He said that Turkish 
businessmen have operated in Kazakhstan on a "scam" mentality and 
have left behind a very negative impression.  According to Evirgen, 
the Kazakhs are now angry and afraid to do business with Turks, and 
"this was very painful for us."  (Istanbul MILLIYET 14 Oct 93) 

   Company To Build in Azerbaijan 

   Raks Holding, Inc., a Turkish firm that produces audio and video 
cassettes and compact disks, has concluded a $60 million contract 
with Azerbaijan to build a studio and production center, according 
to board chairman Aslan Tekin Onel in an interview.  Raks will sell 
its technology, including the building, machinery, and management 
for a period of time specified in the contract, when Azerbaijan gets 
the money, Onel said.  (Istanbul DUNYA "DAILY MARKET BULLETIN" 
Supplement 6 October 1993) 

   Political Risk Insurance Provided 

   Ege Insurance, a Turkish firm, has added a "political risks" 
policy to the services it offers in response to demands by Turkish 
businessmen in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and other CIS 
states.  The policy will insure businessmen against losses owing to 
changes of regime in foreign countries.  (Istanbul DUNYA 6 Oct 93) 

   Last Word on "Turkish"-"Turkic" Quandary 

   A column in Turkish daily MILLIYET cites comments by professor 
Nadir Devlet on the ongoing debate over whether to use "Turkish" or 
Turkic" in reference to the CIS Muslim states.  In Devlet's view, 
with the republics now tending to pull away from Turkey, perhaps the 
Turks have been "presumptuous" and "patronizing" in reducing the 
republics' languages to the status of Turkish dialects and that, to 
preserve the bridge between them, they should use the term used by 
the CIS Muslim states themselves-- "Turkic."  Hasan Pulur published 
Dr. Devlet's comments in his regular column in an attempt to "lay 
the question to rest."  (Istanbul MILLIYET 8 Oct 93) 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, PERSIAN GULF/ 
SOUTH ASIA BRANCH AT (703) 733-6518) 
ENEAG/03 Jan/POLCHF/ECONF/NEASA Division/PF 03/1845z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43174 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000694001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 93-054--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
December 29, 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   CZECH REPUBLIC 

   OCTOBER UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES:  A total of 169,383 unemployed were 
registered in the Czech Republic on 31 October 1993, which 
represented an unemployment rate of 3.22 percent, compared with 3.17 
percent at the end of September.  In the course of October, labor 
offices in the Czech Republic registered 36,449 new job applicants 
and removed 34,029 persons from their records.  Recent school 
graduates represented 26,571 of the new job seekers; 1,282 of them 
were university graduates.  The number of reported vacancies 
declined from 65,800 at the end of September to 60,513 at the end of 
October.  Unemployment benefits were collected by 84,461 persons in 
October, and another 2,859 citizens were undergoing retraining. 
Regionally, the rate of unemployment ranged from 0.33 percent in 
Prague to 5.73 percent in north Moravia.  With 7.29 percent of the 
population out of work, Jicin in north Moravia was the district with 
the highest unemployment in the republic.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 16 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   NINE-MONTH RETAIL SALES DATA:  According to preliminary Czech 
Statistical Office data, retail sales turnover in the first nine 
months of 1993 amounted to 305 billion Czech korunas (Kc), 24.4 
percent more than in the same period a year ago in nominal terms and 
3.6 percent more in real terms.  The private sector accounted for 77 
percent of retail trade turnover.  (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 16 
Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   SURVEY ON JOB PROSPECTS:  Over a quarter (28 percent) of working 
Czech citizens see their employer's prospects next year as very 
uncertain, according to a recent survey by the Institute for Public 
Opinion Research (IVVM).  However, only 2 percent of these believe 
that their employers will go bankrupt.  Forty percent said they 
believe the company for which they worked would manage to overcome 
problems although they would be large ones, while 27 percent believe 
that their companies will have no problems at all. 

   However, 60 percent of respondents viewed their personal 
prospects optimistically.  About a tenth were considering leaving 
their present jobs next year.  The percentage of people expecting to 
lose their jobs remained about the same as that shown in a similar 
survey in April, while the percentage of those who wanted to change 
their jobs had grown slightly.  The latter were most likely to be 
aged 29 and under.  People who worked for smaller private companies 
with up to 25 employees tended to see the future most 
optimistically.  The more education respondents had received, the 
better they judged their personal prospects in the company to be. 
Inhabitants of north Moravia expressed the least amount of 
confidence, with only 52 percent believing they would not lose their 
jobs.  Around a third of the 28 percent who saw the future of their 
company as very uncertain expressed interest in working abroad, and 
about a third of these were skilled workers.  The survey, conducted 
in October, questioned 534 working Czechs.  (Prague CTK in English 
16 Nov 93 AU) 

   CENTRAL BANK WANTS TO HOLD INFLATION BELOW 10 PERCENT:  Speaking 
in Znojmo, south Moravia, on 16 November, Czech National Bank (CNB) 
Governor Josef Tosovsky said that the bank intended to follow a 
monetary policy next year that would keep inflation below 10 
percent.  If inflation were slightly above 10 percent we would not 
consider it a catastrophe, Tosovsky added.  Besides measures the 
bank will take, there are several domestic factors that it cannot 
control, the governor noted.  These include wage developments, the 
inflow of foreign capital, and prices of raw materials, especially 
crude oil.  I would like to cast some doubt on the idea that one can 
definitely determine the rate of inflation in the Czech Republic, 
Tosovsky said.  (Prague CTK in English 16 Nov 93 AU) 

   PRIVATIZATION REVENUE:  Since its founding, the National Property 
Fund (FNM) has taken in Kc59.2 billion in revenue from large-scale 
privatization.  Of this, the FNM's income was Kc26.9 billion in 
1991-92 and Kc32.3 billion in the first nine months of 1993.  This 
is due to the gradual acceleration of the privatization process, FNM 
Chairman Tomas Jezek told the economic daily HOSPODARSKE NOVINY.  In 
the same period, the FNM spent Kc49.7 billion from its large- 
privatization account, most of it (Kc35 billion) to repay 
debentures.  Hence, the end-of-September 1993 net balance was Kc9.5 
billion.  Jezek expects proceeds from large-scale privatization to 
peak in 1994, when the FNM anticipates revenues of Kc4O billion. 
They will be spent to pay interest on the public debt (Kc18.3 
billion), to pay for the Ingolstadt-Kralupy oil pipeline (Kc5.1 
billion), to write off the debts of large companies prior to their 
privatization (Kc2.5 billion), to subsidize the Land Fund (Kc3.2 
billion), and to meet environmental commitments (Kc1 billion). 

   The FNM's small-scale privatization account shows aggregate 
revenues of Kc34.8 billion, of which only Kc3.8 billion have been 
taken in this year, Jezek said.  This is because small-scale 
privatization "is being wound down and can be considered closed." 
The bulk of proceeds from small-scale privatization is "blocked" for 
another four years.  Only Kc3.8 billion from the small-scale 
privatization account has been spent thus far to satisfy restitution 
claims, to liquidate state enterprises, and to fund the operation of 
district privatization commissions, so that Kc31 billion was left on 
the account on 30 September 1993.  Interest accrued on this account 
(worth Kc2.27 billion) has been used to subsidize interest rates in 
privatizing health care facilities.  The FNM's total assets reached 
Kc484 billion by 30 September, the bulk of which (Kc359 billion) 
consisted of securities, mainly shares from the first wave of coupon 
privatization.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 1 
AU) 

   IFC CREDIT FOR CAR-WHEEL MANUFACTURER:  On 15 November, the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the World Bank 
group, approved a credit of DM63 million for the Autokola Nova Hut 
a.s., a car-wheel manufacturing joint venture set up by Nova Hut 
Ostrava (Ostrava New Steel Mill) and the U.S. Hayes Wheels 
International Company last year.  The credit will be used to finance 
the modernization and expansion of the company's production 
facilities.  The total cost of the project is DM104 million.  Part 
of the credit (DM27 million) will be provided by the IFC from its 
own resources, the remainder will be financed by a consortium of 
seven European and U.S. banks.  According to IFC Vice President W. 
Kaffenberger, the project deserves IFC support because, owing to low 
production costs and high quality, Czech car wheels are a highly 
competitive product.  Once the joint venture reaches full capacity, 
two-thirds of its output will be supplied to West European car- 
makers.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 2; Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY FINANCNI NOVINY Supplement 17 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   FOREIGN INVESTMENT STATISTICS UPDATED:  According to Czech 
National Bank (CNB) data, Kc58.2 billion, that is, $2.078 billion, 
worth of foreign capital was invested in the Czech Republic in the 
form of direct investment between 1 January 1990 and 31 September 
1993.  Foreign capital has been invested mainly in the consumer 
goods and tobacco industry (26.3 percent), the automobile and 
vehicles industry (21.3 percent), the construction industry (13.2 
percent), the food industry (9.6 percent), and banking (9.3 
percent).  In terms of territorial structure, the most important 
investors have come from the FRG ($634 million, 31.3 percent); the 
United States ($590.2 million, 29.0 percent), France ($263.3 
million, 13.1 percent), Belgium (7.4 percent), and Austria (5.5 
percent).  In the first three quarters of this year, direct foreign 
investment in the Czech Republic reached the sum of $455 million, of 
which 54.5 percent has come from U.S. investors.  German investors 
account for only 10.6 percent of the foreign capital invested in the 
Czech Republic in the first three quarters of 1993.  (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 9; Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES 
in Czech 18 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   PRAGUE MUNICIPAL TRANSPORT FARES TO RISE:  On 16 November, the 
Prague City Council approved increases in municipal public transport 
fares as of 1 January 1994.  The price of a regular one-way ticket 
will go up from Kc4 to Kc6, the price of a monthly pass will go up 
from Kc20O to Kc280, and a yearly pass will cost Kc2,200 instead of 
Kc1,700.  Tickets for students and pensioners will also become more 
expensive.  Prague Mayor Jan Koukal expects the provide Dopravni 
Podnik, the municipal transport authority, with about Kc4OO million 
in additinal revenue next year.  The last increase in Prague public 
transport fares was in October 1992.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 17 Nov 93 p 1; Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 18 Nov 93 p 3 
AU) 

   DUTY-FREE IMPORTS FOR JOINT VENTURES:  Under a new government 
decree, companies with foreign capital participation may import 
components and raw materials for their own production needs without 
paying customs duty, provided that these imports are offset by 
exports.  The decree applies to all branches of industry.  Companies 
asking for this customs exemption must have a foreign stake of at 
least 30 percent and Kc5O million.  The imported goods need not come 
from the foreign partner in the venture.  (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY 
FINANCNI NOVINY Supplement in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   RENTERS' UNION ASKS FOR HEATING ALLOWANCES:  The Union for the 
Protection of Renters is demanding that government rental allowances 
also cover costs for heating and hot water, union chairman Stanislav 
Krecek said at a press conference on 17 November.  Krecek said that 
in Western Europe, 50 percent of renters receive housing allowances, 
and in some towns this figure is as high as 80 percent.  The 
difference between rental costs and the abilities of citizens to pay 
is too great, Krecek said, adding that this fact must be respected, 
even if allowances place a significant burden on the state budget. 
The union's principle criticism of the government bill on rental 
allowances is the fact that this appropriate does not cover heating 
and hot water.  Krecek noted that particularly people living in 
housing estates are not able to regulate the amount of heat they 
use.  He said that payments for heat and hot water constitute 52 
percent of the amount paid for rent by the average renter in the 
Czech Republic.  (Prague CTK in English 17 Nov 93 AU) 

   SALE OF SYNAGOGUE TO FOOD COMPANY PROTESTED:  Head of the north 
Bohemian Jewish community Chaim Klein aid he vehemently disagreed 
with the sale of the Zatec synagogue to the Milko company, which 
plans to use the building for selling hops.  The Jewish community 
sold the synagogue and an adjoining building to the Zatec Town 
Council in 1956, probably under duress, Klein believes.  He said he 
suspects the council wanted to sell the building before a law on the 
restitution of Jewish property is passed.  Klein quoted from the 
purchase agreement, which states that the synagogue was sold for 
Kc2.5 million, about $85,000, and Milko, a local food and real 
estate company, intends to use it for the sale of hops.  A municipal 
official responsible for property claimed, however, that the 
building would be used for cultural purposes and the new owner would 
consult the Jewish community on its future use.  (Prague CTK in 
English 17 Nov 93 AU) 

   STATE TV DEPENDENT ON INCOME FROM COMMERCIALS:  If the proposal 
by Council for Radio and Television Broadcasting regarding a ban on 
commercials in Czech Television is accepted, Czech Television as a 
public corporation would be liquidated, Czech Television Director 
General Ivo Mathe told CTK on 17 November.  The proposal was 
elaborated for the planned amendment to the Radio and Television 
Broadcasting Law.  We cannot do without the money from the 
commercials, which take up 1 percent of broadcasting time.  It 
amounts to one third of our income at present, Mathe said.  He noted 
that the 1 percent of commercials swallowed only 14 minutes of the 
24-hour television broadcasting.  This is a reason why Czech 
Television cannot compete with private TV companies regarding 
commercial broadcasting, Mathe explained.  (Prague CTK in English 17 
Nov 93 AU) 

   FOREIGN CURRENCY ALLOCATION RAISED:  The Czech National Bank 
(CNB) announced on 17 November that the amount of foreign exchange 
Czech citizens may legally exchange in banks will be raised to 
Kc12,0O0 korunas per year as of 1 January 1994.  When purchasing 
foreign currency, citizens will have to present their passports, in 
which the purchase will be noted.  Children under 15 will be able to 
purchase 50 percent of the full sum.  This year, citizens were 
allowed to purchase the equivalent of Kc7,500 of foreign exchange; 
the new allowance represents an increase of more than 55 percent. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 1; Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 18 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   MOST CZECHS BELIEVE INCOMES SHOULD NOT BE LIMITED:  The amount of 
money which can be made legally should be unlimited, according to 77 
percent of the respondents in a survey of 777 Czechs conducted by 
the Institute for Public Opinion Research (IVVM).  Only 11 percent 
of Czechs believe that legal incomes should be limited in some way. 
Ten percent said they did not know.  The opinion that legal incomes 
should not be limited was found most often amongst young people 
between the ages of 15 and 29 (84 percent), and people aged between 
30 and 44 (80 percent).  However, only 18 percent of pensioners 
believe that incomes should be unlimited. 

   People were also asked how they believed entrepreneurs made their 
money, with the IVVM offering seven possible ways.  Sixty eight 
percent of the respondents said they believed either the majority or 
almost all entrepreneurs in the same branch looked out for each 
other and did not allow prices to decrease, 17 percent believed that 
a minority or almost no entrepreneurs behaved in this way, 65 
percent of respondents believed that almost all or the majority of 
entrepreneurs looked for weak spots in the law and made use of them, 
while 25 percent believed that a minority or almost no entrepreneurs 
did so.  Sixty-four percent said that almost all or the majority 
worked long hours to the detriment of their families, and 26 percent 
thought a minority or almost no entrepreneurs overdid it in this 
respect.  Respondents viewed entrepreneurs' treatment of their 
competition more favorably, with 29 percent saying entrepreneurs 
liquidated the competition indiscriminately and 46 percent believing 
they did not. 

   However, respondents were not so kind in their assessment of 
entrepreneurs' indirect treatment of their customers.  Asked if 
entrepreneurs added only a reasonable amount of profit mark-up on to 
their prices, 24 percent said they did and 71 percent said they did 
not.  Twenty-three percent said entrepreneurs tried to find cheap 
and yet good quality goods for their customers, and 67 percent said 
they did not.  Only 12 percent were unkind enough to say that most 
or almost all entrepreneurs knowingly falsified documents, with 41 
percent believing that this was done only by a minority or by almost 
no entrepreneurs.  (Prague CTK in English 18 Nov 93 AU) 

   PRIVATE LAND OWNERSHIP:  A total of 76 percent of the 4.2 million 
hectares of agricultural land in the Czech Republic is administered 
by the private sector, while only 24 percent remains in state 
ownership.  Some 740,000 hectares are owned by family farms, while 
56 percent is owned by various companies.  This was stated by 
Minister of Agriculture Josef Lux at a news conference in Zlin on 18 
November.  According to Lux, about one-half of the 600,000 people 
who used to work in agriculture have left for other branches of the 
economy and the agricultural labor force is expected to shrink by 
another 50,000 people.  "Transformation of agriculture has thereby 
surpassed transformation of industry," Lux claimed.  (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 19 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   CZECH, DUTCH TRANSPORT MINISTERS DISCUSS CIVIL AVIATION:  Dutch 
and Czech Transport Ministers Hanja Maij-Weggen and Jan Strasky 
acquainted each other with the transport situation in the two 
countries, the Czech Transport Ministry's press official Pavel Kavka 
told CTK on 18 November.  The talks focused on civil aviation, Kavka 
reported.  Strasky pointed to the unbalanced air connection between 
Prague and Amsterdam.  While the Czech contractor runs 9 lines, his 
Dutch counterpart runs 14 lines.  A better situation is in truck 
transport where the trade exchange is carried out by about the same 
number of trucks from both countries, Strasky said.  The Dutch 
Government delegation was accompanied on its one-day visit by 
representatives of the Dutch trade circles, especially in the sphere 
of transport and telecommunications, who had conducted talks with 
representatives of the Czech Railways and the Czech Airport 
Management.  (Prague CTK in English 18 Nov 93 AU) 

   TRADE, CULTURAL CENTER OPENS IN TAIWAN:  The Czech Economic and 
Cultural Office started activities in the capital of Taiwan, Taipei, 
on 18 November, the spokesman for the Skoda Group of Plzen, Jaroslav 
Hudec, told CTK.  The office is a nongovernment organization aimed 
at the development of economic, especially trade, relations between 
the two countries.  The joint-stock companies Skoda Plzen and 
Strojimport played an important role in its founding.  It is to 
become a basis for the supply of Skoda's products to Taiwan and 
neighboring areas.  The office is expected to help establish trade 
relations in the territory for other Czech firms as well.  It has 
also been entrusted by the Czech Foreign Ministry to deal with visa 
and consular affairs.  Skoda Plzen in the future intends to build 
other trade centers that would allow it to penetrate new world 
markets, for instance in southeast Asia and Latin America.  It wants 
to open a business office in Rio de Janeiro in January, and later on 
in Brussels and the Baltic countries.  It would also like to expand 
its representation in Moscow.  (Prague CTK in English 18 Nov 93 AU) 

   CZECH-GERMAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OPENS:  The constituent assembly 
of the German-Czech Chamber of Industry and Commerce took place in 
Prague on 19 November.  The chamber, whose aim is to expand economic 
ties between the two countries, is taking over the tasks of the 
trade mission at the FRG Embassy.  Even though its activity is only 
starting, the chamber already has 191 members.  This year, Germany 
has overtaken Slovakia as the Czech Republic's most important 
trading partner, accounting for 27 percent of the Czech Republic's 
exports and 25 percent of its imports.  With a share of 34 percent, 
the FRG is also the most important foreign investor in the Czech 
Republic.  Since 1990, German investments in the Czech Republic have 
reached the sum of almost Kc60 billion.  According to the experts of 
six German economic institutes, the Czech Republic is the only post- 
communist country that has managed to increase its exports this 
year.  German experts also expect the Czech Republic to be the only 
post-communist country to achieve growth of gross national product 
in 1994.  Carl H. Hahn, former president of Volkswagen, has become 
president of the German-Czech Chamber of Industry and Commerce, 
Juergen Moellering is its executive director.  (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY 
in Czech 20 Nov 93 p 3; Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 22 Nov 
93 p 4 AU) 

   MINISTER VIEWS PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRY PRIVATIZATON:  Czech Trade 
and Industry Minister Vladimir Dlouhy expressed disappointment over 
the slow pace of privatization of petrochemical companies.  Speaking 
at an extraordinary meeting of the Czech Association of 
Petrochemical Industry on 19 November Dlouhy gave the reason as the 
need for a solution to the sensitive issue of separating refineries 
from petrochemical complexes.  The ministry decided that 
privatization of the petrochemical giants Chemopetrol Litvinov and 
Kaucuk Kralupy -- both of which are to be transformed into joint- 
stock companies -- must exclude the plants' refineries.  The 
companies' directors are not enthusiastic about such a measure. 
They have been looking for ways to include the remaining parts of 
their existing companies into the privatized entities.  According to 
approved privatization projects, the state will control 38 percent 
of shares in Chemopetrol Litvinov, 26 percent in Kaucuk Kralupy, and 
23 percent in Paramo Pardubice, another large petrochemical 
producer.  A significant portion of the shares will be offered for 
direct sale to a previously chosen party, the minister noted. 
Privatization of the state-owned Benzina will also be an important 
step in the petrochemical industry, Dlouhy pointed out, adding that 
the gasoline refinery and distributor is to be divided into three 
companies. 

   Some 230 gasoline stations will remain in the ownership of the 
remaining, unprivatized part of Benzina, to be gradually sold off 
directly.  It is estimated that 320,000 tons of crude oil products 
were illegally imported to the Czech Republic from less developed 
countries in the first eight months of the year, Dlouhy also said at 
the meeting.  The ministry considers introducing an anti-dumping law 
or other protective mechanism necessary, he stressed.  Czech 
authorities want to eliminate the problem by specially marking those 
petroleum products meant for use as boiler fuel.  Refineries are to 
introduce the system on a trial basis January 1, 1994.  The ministry 
also plans to cooperate with Slovak authorities under the joint 
customs union procedures it has in place with that country to create 
legislation which would place heavy sanctions on entities misusing 
crude oil products.  (Prague CTK in English 19 Nov 93 AU) 

   GASOLINE PRICE TO BE DEREGULATED:  The price of gasoline and 
diesel fuel will probably increase twice early in 1994.  The first 
increase, by approximately KcO.60 to Kc0.70 per liter, will be a 
result of the amended law on consumer taxes and will make itself 
felt as of 1 January.  The second increase will be due to the 
abolition of fuel price ceilings as of February.  The intention to 
deregulate fuel prices as of February was announced by Jana 
Fuerstova, head of the price department at the Ministry of Finance, 
at the annual meeting of the Association of Petroleum Industry and 
Trade on 19 November.  A representative of the Aral company 
estimated that the deregulation would raise of gasoline prices by 
another Kc0.50 per liter.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 20 Nov 
93 p 1 AU) 

   SALARY INCREASES FOR CIVIL SERVANTS:  The salaries of the 
approximately 560,000 employees of budget-funded organizations will 
be raised as of 1 December 1993, by between 5 and 23 percent, 
Minister of Labor and Social Affairs Jindrich Vodicka announced in 
Prague on 19 November.  Salaries in the higher wage scales will be 
raised more markedly than in the lower wage scales to reward people 
performing "more demanding and more responsible jobs."  Vodicka 
explained that the rise was made necessary by the widening gap 
between incomes in the budget-funded sphere, where salaries are 
expected to increase 20 percent this year, and in self-financed 
economic organizations where salaries will have increased 27 percent 
by the end of the year.  In December alone, the salary increases 
will cause additional expenditures of Kc300 million.  (Prague LIDOVE 
NOVINY in Czech 20 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   OIL REFINER TO BUILD GAS-STATION CHAIN:  The Kaucuk Kralupy 
petrochemical company, which operates one of the two oil refineries 
in the Czech Republic, has decided to build its own network of gas 
stations.  Its first gas station, built at a cost of Kc30 million, 
was put into operation in Kralupy on 18 November.  Two more gas 
stations, at Humpolec and Melnik, will be opened by the end of the 
year and another 10 new gas stations will be built in 1994.  The 
company claims that, because it is in charge of both production and 
distribution, it will be able to sell all types of fuel for about 
Kc0.30 less (per liter) than its competitors.  (Prague CESKY DENIK 
in Czech 20 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   ONLY SMALL CONSTRUCTION FIRMS REPORT GROWTH:  The Czech 
Statistical Office reports that Czech construction firms' output in 
January-September 1993 reached the value of Kc84.384 billion, 19 
percent more than in the same period a year ago.  In real terms, 
however, construction output dropped more than four percent.  Small 
firms alone reached a real growth of 2.6 percent, however.  The 
value of construction projects carried out abroad dropped by almost 
one-third compared with the first three quarters in 1992.  (Prague 
CESKY DENIK in Czech 20 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   FARM PRODUCT PRICES:  Agricultural producer prices increased 9.6 
percent in the first 10 months of 1993, compared with the same 
period in 1992.  While the prices of products of animal origin 
increased 4.6 percent, prices in crop farming increased 16.8 
percent.  This was announced by the Czech Statistical Office on 19 
November.  (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 20 Nov 93 p 4 AU) 

   TRANSFORMATION OF COOPERATIVE FARMS:  According to the latest 
Ministry of Agriculture statistics, the 1,205 agricultural 
cooperatives in the Czech Republic have been transformed into 1,658 
new cooperatives and other companies.  Their average size has been 
reduced from the original 2,100 hectares to 1,408 hectares.  The 
number of employees of agricultural cooperatives has been cut by 
almost 17 percent since the beginning of 1993.  Cooperatives have 
already settled two-thirds (Kc12.68 billion) of the relatively high 
volume of restitution claims (Kc19.044 billion).  Agricultural 
cooperatives continue to operate at a loss.  In the first half of 
1993, the aggregate loss of all enterprises of primary agricultural 
production amounted to Kc9.425 billion, which was Kc380 million more 
than in the first half of 1992.  Cooperatives account for 60 to 70 
percent of this aggregate loss.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
22 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   SKODA PRAGUE BUYS WESTINGHOUSE SYSTEM:  On 19 November, the 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation informed the economic daily 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY that it had obtained from the Skoda Prague 
company a $3.6 million order for the supply of a digital control 
system for the EME II electric power station in Melnik.  (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 22 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   GROWING CZECH-UKRAINIAN TRADE:  The Czech Republic imported 
Kc2.45 billion worth of goods from Ukraine in the first three 
quarters of 1993, while the volume of Czech exports to Ukraine 
reached Kc1.97 billion, Jan Hronik of the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade told the economic daily HOSPODARSKE NOVINY.  Hronik considers 
this result a "relative success," in view of the fact that no trade 
agreement between the two countries has been concluded this year. 
In the same period in 1992, the Czech-Ukrainian trade turnover 
amounted to only Kc4.1 billion, despite the existence of a Czech- 
Ukrainian trade agreement.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 22 
Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   AUSTRIAN COMPANY TO ACQUIRE CONTROL OF SUGAR REFINERY:  The 
Hrusovany sugar refinery, one of the oldest in the Czech Republic, 
has become the second sugar refinery in the country -- after 
Dobrovice -- with a foreign ownership stake.  The Austrian Agrana 
Beteiligungs AG Wien has acquired 8 percent of the sugar refinery's 
shares and intends to increase its share to 51 percent next year. 
Agrana's representative Manfred Rieff has already assumed a seat on 
the company's board.  Frantisek Gerza, director general of the 
Hrusovany sugar refinery, considers Agrana's interest a great 
success because it is taking place at a time when the Czech sugar 
industry is undergoing a "deep crisis" caused by excess production. 
The Hrusovany sugar refinery, which employs about 400 people, will 
process about 290,000 tons of sugar beet and produce about 35,000 
tons of sugar this year.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY BURZOVNI NOVINY 
Supplement in Czech 22 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   AGING POPULATION:  The age composition of the Czech Republic's 
population will "drastically deteriorate" at the beginning of the 
21st century.  The population will be decreasing by up to 30,000 a 
year, the average age will go up, and the birth rate will go down. 
The proportion of the population of working age, which is now 60 
percent (6.201 million people), will drop to 57.7 percent (5.824 
million) by the year 2020.  Only a relatively high level of 
migration could alter this negative trend.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY KARIERA Supplement in Czech 22 Nov 93 p 8 AU) 

   SUBSISTENCE INCOME TO INCREASE:  The subsistence level in the 
Czech Republic is to be increased by 10 percent as of January 1, 
1994, Czech cabinet ministers decided at their meeting on 23 
November.  The current subsistence level is Kc1,960 ($70) monthly. 
The increase must still be approved by the government, Economics 
Minister Karel Dyba told journalists.  (Prague CTK in English 23 Nov 
93 AU) 

   PHASE-OUT OF FEDERAL COINS:  November 30, 1993, will be the last 
day on which the only remaining coins issued by the Czechoslovak 
Federation -- the 2-crown and the 5-crown coins -- will be still 
valid, spokesman for the Czech National Bank (CNB) Martin Svehla 
told CTK on 22 November.  After that date, these coins will only be 
exchangeable at banks dedicated to currency operations until March 
31, 1994, he added.  November 30 will also be the deadline for 
exchanging federal 10-heller, 20-heller, 50-heller, and 10-crown 
coins, and 10-crown, 20-crown, and 50-crown banknotes, which expired 
on July 1, 1993.  Shops and enterprises can still include the 
federal 2-crown and 5-crown federal coins when turning their 
receipts over to the Czech Post, Komercni Banka, or the Czech 
Savings Bank, until December 10, 1993.  Entrepreneurs will thus be 
able to accept such coins from the customers until then, Svehla 
said.  (Prague CTK in English 23 Nov 93 AU) 

   PORSCHE COMPONENTS FROM KRUMLOV:  After several months of 
negotiations, the Porsche company acquired 100 percent of the shares 
of Jipo Cesky Krumlov, originally a joint venture set up by Porsche 
and Jihostroj Velesin, a manufacturer of components for the aircraft 
industry.  Jipo is to take over the bulk of production from 
Porsche's division in Salzburg, Austria.  It will switch from the 
production of aircraft components to the production of precision 
parts for Porsche automobiles, such as "movable" engine and gearbox 
parts, gear wheels, and shafts.  Jipo's turnover is to increase from 
Kc60 million this year to Kc250 million in 1994.  The workforce is 
to be increased from 35 to 60.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
23 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   SLIGHT INCREASE IN PRODUCER PRICES IN OCTOBER:  Industrial 
producer prices increased only 0.6 percent in October, compared with 
September, the Czech Statistical Office announced.  Since the 
beginning of the year, industrial producer prices increased 11.6 
percent.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 23 Nov 93 p 9 AU) 

   AIRCRAFT COMPANIES TO BE SOLD IN PUBLIC TENDER:  According to 
Zdenek Burian, press spokesman of AERO Holding, a public tender will 
soon be held for the sale of a majority stake in Let Kunovice a.s., 
a manufacturer of transport aircraft.  This is the second Czech 
aircraft equipment producer, the first being Motorlet Prague, to be 
sold within a short period of time.  The reason for the sale of the 
two companies is their "dire financial situation," caused by the 
collapse of the eastern markets and the recession on western 
markets.  Motorlet lost Kc474 million last year and Let Kunovice 
Kc235 million.  This year's losses are expected to be even greater. 
(Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 24 Nov 94 p 6 AU) 

   CANADIANS TO BUILD SKATE FACTORY:  The Canadian Cans tar Sports 
company, one of the world's major producers of skates and ice hockey 
gear, announced on 23 November its intention to build in Zdar nad 
Sazavou a Kc25O-million (10-million-Canadian-dollar) plant for the 
production of skates.  The Czech Republic is to become the basis for 
the Canadian company's expansion to Eastern and West European 
markets.  Some 80 percent of the factory's output is to be exported. 
Gordon Halliday, vice president of Canstar Sports, said that the 
30,0O0-square-meter factory would be completed in October 1994 and 
provide 225 jobs.  Cans tar reckons with Czech suppliers' heavy 
involvement; the Botana shoe factory should be the most important 
supplier.  In its first year of operation, the company is to reach a 
turnover of 5 million Canadian dollars.  (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in 
Czech 24 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   FUEL FRAUD COSTS STATE BILLIONS:  According to the Prague daily 
MLADA FRONTA DNES, some 320,000 tons of heating oil have been 
illegally imported to the Czech Republic in the first eight months 
of the year, mostly from Ukraine and Poland, and sold as diesel fuel 
at a profit.  Because of this fraud, the state has lost over Kc2.5 
billion in taxes (as no consumer tax is levied on heating oil and 
because the VAT on heating oil is 5 percent and the VAT on diesel 
fuel 23 percent).  As the two substances are practically 
undistinguishable, the fraud is difficult to prevent.  One 
indication of the scale of this fraud is the declining sales of 
diesel fuel in the Czech Republic.  Benzina, the former monopoly 
distributor of motor fuels, sold 1,800,000 tons of diesel fuel in 
1991, 1,400,000 tons in 1992, but expects to sell only 850,000 tons 
this year.  The daily notes that, as a first measure against this 
tax evasion, Czech refineries will start in January to mark and 
paint oil products on an experimental basis.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA 
DNES in Czech 24 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   SHRINKING BUDGET SURPLUS:  The state budget surplus has dropped 
from Kc5 billion at the end of October to Kc2.8 billion in late 
November, Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik told students during a 
discussion at the Prague Economic College on 23 November.  (Prague 
MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 24 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   JANUARY-OCTOBER FOREIGN TRADE STATISTICS:  The Czech Republic's 
foreign trade turnover, excluding that with Slovakia, grew 16 
percent in the first 10 months of the year, compared with the same 
period last year, according to figures obtained by CTK from the 
Czech Statistics Office on 25 November.  Imports increased by 16.8 
percent and exports by 15.3 percent.  Imports rose from all 
countries with the exception of those of the former Soviet Union. 
Imports from these countries have been falling continuously, the 
decline amounting to 12 percent.  Exports have also grown to all 
countries with the exception of those to the former USSR, where the 
volume dropped by 6.4 percent.  Exports to European countries going 
through economic reforms fell by 16.4 percent. 

   The foreign trade balance including Slovakia reached a surplus of 
5.3 billion crowns between January and September.  Surpluses were 
achieved in trade with states of the European Union (10.4 billion 
crowns), the developing countries (12.4 billion crowns), European 
countries undergoing reforms without the former USSR (6.6 billion 
crowns), and countries with state-controlled trade (6 billion 
crowns).  A deficit was scored in trade with countries of the 
European Free Trade Association (8.9 billion crowns), other advanced 
countries with market economies (8.3 billion crowns), and with 
countries of the former USSR (19.9 billion crowns).  In the first 
nine months of this year the foreign trade surplus turned into a 
deficit of 1.8 billion crowns.  Trade with Slovakia scored a surplus 
of 7.1 billion crowns.  Slovakia accounted for 19.3 percent of the 
overall foreign trade turnover, countries with an advanced market 
economy for 57.2 percent (European Union countries for 42.3 
percent), countries of the former USSR for 9.1 percent, developing 
countries for 6.8 percent, European countries undergoing reforms 6 
percent and countries with a state-run trade 1.6 percent.  (Prague 
CTK in English 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   BAVARIANS RAISE OBJECTIONS TO CZECH-GERMAN PIPELINE:  Some 400 
German individual and collective reservations against the oil 
pipeline from Ingolstadt to Kralupy nad Vltavou, north Bohemia, have 
been registered by the Bavarian Labor Ministry, Reinhard Schug, the 
ministry's official responsible for the project, told CTK on 25 
November.  The reservations concern the security of the pipeline, 
and water and environment protection, Schug added.  The pipeline, to 
be completed in 1995, is to relieve Czech dependence on the only oil 
pipeline connecting the Czech Republic with Russia.  Central oil- 
storage tanks at Nelahozeves in the Czech Republic and Wollburg in 
Germany are currently under construction.  (Prague CTK in English 25 
Nov 93 AU) 

   INVESTMENT FUNDS:  A total of 353 funds registered for the second 
privatization wave by 23 November, 196 of which are investment funds 
and 157 mutual funds.  About 100 of the registered funds took part 
in the first privatization wave.  Funds that did not register by the 
23 November deadline will not be able to participate in the second 
privatization wave.  The final number could still be reduced 
following a Finance Ministry review.  A total of 264 funds had taken 
part in the first privatization wave in the Czech Republic, 218 of 
which still exist (46 weaker funds have merged with stronger ones). 
(Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 17 Nov 93 p 14; Prague MLADA 
FRONTA DNES in Czech 25 Nov 94 p 14 AU) 

   HUNGARIANS BUY PRAGUE BANK:  A consortium of Hungarian banks 
under the management of Magyar Hi tel Bank (MHB) and the Elso Hazai 
Faktorhaz company has acquired 98 percent of Interbanka Prague 
shares.  The shares have until now been held by the Swiss Portus 
Cham company.  The change in ownership is expected to shift the 
focus of Interbanka's activities toward financing Czech-Slovak- 
Hungarian trade.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 25 Nov 93 p 14 
AU) 

   ZPS ZLIN SETS UP JOINT VENTURES IN PRC:  The ZPS (Precision 
Engineering Works) Zlin a.s. and the China Shonyang City First 
Factory have signed in the PRC an agreement on establishing a joint 
venture for the production of machine tools.  The joint venture will 
make machine tools for the production of hydraulic valves for the 
Chinese market.  This joint venture has increased the number of 
ZPS's joint ventures in China to five.  The other four have been set 
up by ZPS-Shoe Machines, a ZPS subsidiary specializing in the 
production of footwear machinery.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 25 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   DECLINE IN AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES:  The share of agricultural and 
food subsidies in budget expenditures has declined from 18.21 
percent in 1989 to 2.65 percent this year, which represents a 
sevenfold decrease.  This year, Kc8.1 billion will be spent to 
subsidize agriculture and food exports, compared with Kc30 billion 
in 1989.  In 1995, the level of subsidies is to decrease further, to 
Kc4.8 billion.  The above data is included in the "Basic Principles 
of Agricultural Policy of the Czech Republic Government in 1995," a 
document that Agriculture Minister Lux has submitted to the Czech 
Government for approval.  (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 25 Nov 93 p 8 
AU) 

   DISTRIBUTION OF PHARMACEUTICALS IN FOREIGN HANDS:  According to 
Engineer J. Michal, director general of the Leciva a.s., over 300 
pharmaceuticals distribution companies operate in the Czech Republic 
at present, 80 percent of which are foreign-owned.  Michal says that 
most of these companies have "capital links" with foreign 
pharmaceuticals companies, which explains their preference for 
expensive imported drugs.  Michal claims that there have even been 
cases of distributors buying up inexpensive Czech and Slovak drugs 
and holding them back so that doctors would be forced to prescribe 
expensive imported drugs.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 26 Nov 93 
p 1 AU) 

   NEW GLASS FACTORY:  A new production plant of the Glavunion 
Teplice company was put into operation at Kryry on 24 November.  The 
new plant will produce 1 million square meters of mirrors and 
900,000 square meters of "furniture glass" annually, which will make 
it one of the largest European mirror factories.  The construction 
costs amounted to almost Kc500 million.  The plant employs 140 
people.  Following the construction of another production hall in 
1995-96, the plant's capacity will double.  Glavunion is a joint 
venture set up by Sklounion Teplice and the Belgian Glaverbel 
company (67 percent), whose distribution network will secure the 
marketing of glass from Kryry.  (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 26 Nov 
93 p 8 AU) 

   PERMIT ISSUED FOR CZECH PORTION OF OIL PIPELINE:  The building 
permit for the entire Czech part of the Ingolstadt-Kralupy nad 
Vltavou oil pipeline was issued by the Tachov District Office in the 
first week of November.  Construction of the pipeline, whose Czech 
section measures 165,340 meters, is expected to start in March 1994. 
Although the pipelines cross 6,000 land parcels on Czech territory, 
only 1,430 square meters of land will have to be bought from their 
owners because the pipeline will be laid mostly underground.  Most 
parcels will thus be returned to the owners once construction is 
completed.  They will not be permitted to erect any buildings on 
them, however.  (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 9 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   ABB BUYS ELEKTRO-PRAGA:  The Zurich-based Asea Brown Boveri (ABB) 
concern has purchased from the National Property Fund the Elektro- 
Praga Jablonec company, the leading manufacturer of electric 
fixtures in the Czech Republic.  The new name of the company, which 
is 100-percent owned by ABB, is ABB Busch-Jaeger Elektro-Praga Ltd. 
ABB bought the company for Kc280 million, its book value.  It 
pledged, however, to invest another 9 million German marks (Kc153 
million) within the next two years and to retain the 1,170 present 
employees.  Based on the purchase contract, ABB must also reinvest 
75 percent of all profits made in 1998-99.  ABB now owns six 
companies with over 7,000 employees in the Czech Republic.  (Prague 
RUDE PRAVO in Czech 9 Nov 93 p 8; Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 
10 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   NEW K-MART STORE:  The renovated Prior department store in Brno 
was officially reopened on 8 November, under the name K-Mart.  It is 
the U.S. company's sixth department store in the Czech Republic -- 
af ter Hradec Kralove, Plzen, Liberec, Pardubice, and Prague. 
(Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 9 Nov 93 p 8 AU) 

   CONSORTIUM WANTS TO PURCHASE MINES IN AUSTRALIA:  A consortium 
that includes two Czech investors -- Ceskomoravske Doly Kladno 
(Czech-Moravian Mines Kladno, CMD) and Metalimex Prague -- is 
interested in purchasing coal mines in the Hunter Valley near the 
port of New Castle on the Australian east coast, Viktor Kolacek, 
president of the CMD Board of Directors, told the Prague daily RUDE 
PRAVO after returning from Australia.  According to Kolacek, the 
excellent infrastructure and open-pit mining make it possible to 
extract coal in the Hunter Valley at one-sixth to one-seventh of 
German costs.  The Czech investors are interested in mines with an 
annual capacity of 2.5 to 4 million tons of bituminous coal, while 
annual bituminous coal production in the entire Hunter Valley 
amounts to 45 million tons.  By comparison, some 12.7 million tons 
of bituminous coal were extracted in the Czech Republic in the first 
eight months of 1993.  The present owner, the Hunter Valley Coal 
Corporation, is to decide on the sale "in the nearest future." 
(Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 9 Nov 93 p 8 AU) 

   INDUSTRIAL DECLINE CONTINUED IN SEPTEMBER:  Industrial output in 
current prices was 5 percent higher in September than in the same 
month a year ago, but it declined 5.5 percent when using comparable 
prices.  The output of the building industry increased 25.6 percent 
in current prices and 1.9 percent in comparable prices.  The 
physical volume of industrial output for January-September 1993 was 
5.2 percent lower than in the first three-quarters of 1992.  The 
physical construction volume in the first three-quarters of 1993 was 
4.1 percent lower than in the same period a year ago.  These 
figures, which were released by the Czech Statistical Office on 9 
November, include estimates for small companies with fewer than 25 
employees.  (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 10 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   'MINIMAL' INTEREST IN CKD LOCOMOTIVES:  The CKD Prague 
stockholding company has manufactured only about 30 locomotives this 
year, most of them for customers in Ukraine and other CIS republics, 
according to a 9 November statement by CKD Press Spokesman Frantisek 
Rousek.  Compared with the former annual production of about 500 
locomotives, interest in CKD locomotives is "minimal," Rousek said. 
The last major delivery of 200 locomotives went to Russia in 1991, 
but these locomotives have not been paid for yet.  Reacting to 
statements made by Minister of Industry and Trade Vladimir Dlouhy 
after his return from Vietnam about the possibility of selling 40 
Czech locomotives there, Rousek said that CKD was interested in the 
Vietnamese market but that it "does not know about this order."  The 
cooperation with the German AEG is making a slow start, Rousek 
noted, attributing this to AEG's great problems in its own markets. 
Because of these problems, the German manufacturer cannot afford to 
cede some of its orders to CKD as originally planned.  (Prague DENNI 
TELEGRAF in Czech 10 Nov 93 p 6)  Vietnam intends to purchase 40 CKD 
locomotives for approximately $40 million.  This was stated by Josef 
Husek, director of the Inekon company, which will finance the 
contract.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES PENIZE Supplement in Czech 11 
Nov 93 p 10 AU) 

   COMMERCIAL BANK EXPANDS INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS:  Komercni Banka 
(Commercial Bank, KB) has opened a representative office in 
Bratislava as its second representative office abroad.  The KB's 
first representation abroad operates in Moscow.  The opening of a 
third foreign representation, in London, is planned for the near 
future.  The task of the Bratislava office is to provide consultancy 
services, including the mediation of contacts between Czech and 
Slovak businesses and the provision of services in the sphere of 
foreign payments.  (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY FINANCNI NOVINY Supplement 
10 Nov 93 p 2)  The general meeting of KB shareholders, held on 8 
November, approved an increase in the KB's capital stock through the 
issuance of over 2.5 billion Czech korunas' (Kc) worth of new 
shares.  The KB's capital stock will thus be raised from 
Kc5,001,642,0O0 to Kc7,502,463,000.  The KB's shareholders are the 
National Property Fund (44 percent), privatization investment funds 
(41.7 percent), individual shareholders (6.7 percent), and the 
restitution and subsidy investment funds (7.6 percent).  (Prague 
CESKY DENIK in Czech 10 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   'SKYROCKETING' SHARE PRICES:  The average share prices on the 
Prague Stock Exchange have been "skyrocketing" since approximately 
mid-August.  The "DNES Index," compiled by the Prague daily MLADA 
FRONTA DNES, for example, has increased 59 percent since its low in 
mid-August, while the "ZB Index," compiled by Zivnostenska Banka, 
has increased 75 percent.  The price of one CEZ (Czech Power- 
Generating Works) share, the share with the highest turnover on the 
Prague Stock Exchange, increased from Kc645 in mid-August to Kc1,655 
in the first week of November, that is, 156 percent.  Shares of 
Vodni Stavby Praha (Prague Hydraulic Engineering Works) have 
undergone the most spectacular appreciation -- from Kc256 to Kc910. 
Speculating on the reasons for the recent growth of share prices, a 
MLADA FRONTA DNES commentator suggested that the end-of-the-year 
rally may have nothing to do with the companies' true condition.  He 
pointed out that 72 percent of coupon privatization shares are owned 
by investment funds, which may charge up to 2 percent of the average 
value of their property as a fee for the fund's administration. 
They are therefore interested in driving the prices of their shares 
as high as possible.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 10 Nov 93 p 
6 AU) 

   HARVEST ESTIMATE:  According to the latest harvest estimate 
prepared by the Czech Statistical Office, based on data available by 
15 October, 6,449,831 tons of cereals are expected to be harvested 
in the Czech Republic this year, that is, an average of 4.02 tons 
from each of the 1,603,451 hectares that had been sown with cereals. 
The wheat harvest is expected to reach 3,323,873 tons (4.24 tons per 
hectare), the barley harvest 2,428,485 tons (3.80 tons per hectare), 
the rye harvest 251,571 tons (3.76 tons per hectare), the oats 
harvest 243,899 tons (3.59 tons per hectare), the triticale harvest 
63,642 tons (3.71 tons per hectare), and the harvest of corn grown 
for grain 138,361 tons (4.63 tons per hectare).  (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 11 Nov 93 p 9 AU) 

   BANK LENDING:  Despite the lowering of the discount rate and of 
the lombard rate by 1.5 percent in June, commercial banks have been 
pursuing a ''very circumspect" lending policy in the third quarter 
of the year, in view of the rate of inflation and the high level of 
company insolvency.  In July, the volume of credits increased by Kc9 
billion, in August by Kc10 billion, and in September, according to 
preliminary calculations, by only Kc3 billion.  Commercial banks' 
credits in the domestic currency reached a total of Kc65O billion at 
the end of September 1993, which was Kc79 billion (13.8 percent) 
more than at the end of 1992.  The growing proportion of short-term 
credits, which represent 42.5 percent of the credit volume, 
demonstrates the banks' declining confidence in the reliable 
development of businesses.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 11 
Nov 93 p 11 AU) 

   FARM-MACHINERY MAKER TO PRODUCE TRUCKS:  Off-road trucks with a 
carrying capacity of up to six tons will become the main production 
program of the Agrozet Roudnice state enterprise, instead of 
agricultural machinery, according to Zdenek Vrana, the company's 
technical director.  Agrozet Roudnice has thus become the fourth 
truck manufacturer in the country, after Tatra, Liaz, and Avia.  The 
trucks from Roudnice bear the "Viza" trademark and are equipped with 
Italian VM Motori Spa Cento engines.  Agrozet sold the first 120 of 
these trucks this year and is preparing new models for next year. 
The Roudnice trucks cost about half as much as comparable foreign 
vehicles.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES PENIZE Supplement in Czech 11 
Nov 93 p 10 AU) 

   NEW CAR-WHEEL MANUFACTURER:  Agrostroj Jicin and Ronal, a 
Luxembourg-based holding company, have established a joint venture 
for the production of aluminum car wheels.  Production is scheduled 
to start in the second quarter of 1994.  The target capacity of the 
joint venture, in which the Luxembourg firm holds the majority 
stake, is 2,000 wheels per day.  This volume is to be reached with 
approximately 400 employees.  Skoda Mlada Boleslav is expected to be 
the joint venture's main customer, but exports are also planned. 
Agrostroj will have to compete with the Autokola company, a joint 
venture recently formed by Nova Hut Ostrava and the U.S. Hayes 
Wheels International company, which is engaged in the same line of 
business.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES PENIZE Supplement 11 Nov 93 p 
10 AU) 

   AUSTRIAN COMPANY BUYS INTO FOUNDRY:  The National Property Fund 
(FNM) and the Austrian Penn company have signed a contract on the 
sale of 32 percent of Moravske Kovarny (Moravian Foundry) Jihlava 
Co. shares to the Austrian company.  In the privatization project, 
the Austrian partner, which previously cooperated with the Jihlava 
foundry in marketing its products abroad, pledged to invest 8 
million Austrian schillings in the company.  About 60 percent of 
Moravske Kovarny shares were acquired by investment funds and 
individual investors in the first wave of coupon privatization, and 
about 5 percent of shares remain in the FNM's possession.  Moravske 
Kovarny is a supplier for the automobile and aircraft industries. 
(Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 11 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   SKODA PRODUCTION, EXPORT FIGURES:  According to Jiri Hrabovsky, 
spokesman for the Skoda Mlada Boleslav Co., the company produced 
177,500 and sold 176,700 automobiles in the first 10 months of the 
year, of which 63,000 were sold in the Czech Republic and 14,000 in 
the Slovak Republic.  The most important export markers this year 
have been Turkey (17,500 vehicles, 10,000 more than in the same 
period in 1992), Germany (17,000, a drop of 3,600 cars), Great 
Britain (10,500), Slovenia (7,300), PRC (5,200), France (5,000), 
Greece (4,000), and Korea (3,400).  The most disappointing results 
were on the Polish market, Hrabovsky said, where Skoda sold only 
2,200 vehicles in the first 10 months of the year, compared with 
17,700 a year ago.  Hrabovsky attributed this result to the 41- 
percent rise in the Skoda price caused by Polish "protectionist 
measures."  (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 11 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   BRITISH KNOW-HOW FUND ENDS ACTIVITY:  The privatization process 
as a fundamental transformation of the Czech Economy is coming to a 
close, and from now on will continue as normal business, that is, in 
the privatization of individual projects, said Czech Premier Vaclav 
Klaus at a British Embassy commemoration of the end of the Know How 
Fund's activity in the Czech Republic.  British Minister of State at 
the Foreign Office Douglas Hogg also attended the event, and said 
that the Czech Government had achieved huge success in voucher 
privatization.  He added that while it was irrelevant to standard 
privatization methods in the West, it was custom-made for other 
post-communist countries, particularly the CIS. 

   Klaus praised the activity of the government Know-How Fund, whose 
experts functioned as counselors in the Czech Republic for three 
years.  He emphasized that it had been necessary for these people to 
live here for a long period in order for them to identify the 
character and problems of the country, and thus be capable of 
advising effectively.  The British Government has been working with 
the federal and Czech governments on voucher privatization since 
1990.  After the conclusion of the first wave of privatization, the 
British Government sponsored an additional consortium whose task was 
to prepare a study on the development of a secondary market for 
voucher shares.  Next, the fund concentrated on aiding the 
implementation of the RM-S off-board exchange system.  (Prague CTK 
in English 11 Nov 93 AU) 

   CZECH, PORTUGUESE BANKS SIGN TRADE SUPPORT AGREEMENT:  An inter- 
bank agreement signed in Prague on 11 November will support the 
development of bilateral trade between the Czech Republic and 
Portugal, Czech Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy and 
Portuguese Trade and Tourism Minister Ferdinand Faria de Oliviera 
announced.  The agreement, which was signed by five Czech banks and 
the main Portuguese financial institution, Caixa Geraed de Pozitos, 
provides mutual guarantees for the purchase of imports from the 
other country.  The Czech banks are:  Komercni Banka, Ceska 
Sporitelna, Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, Investicni Banka, and 
Agrobanka.  (Prague CTK in English 11 Nov 93 AU) 

   COST OF HEAT, RENTAL HOUSING TO RISE 1 JANUARY:  The regulated 
price of heat supplied by heating plants will go up 16 percent and 
rents in rental houses will go up 40 percent as of 1 January 1994, 
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik announced after a meeting of 
government ministers on 11 November.  The impact of the increase in 
rents will be covered by housing allowances, which can be claimed by 
households where income per household member does not exceed 1.3 
times the minimum sustenance level.  The impact of the increase in 
the price of heat will be compensated by an increase in the minimum 
sustenance level.  No other increases of regulated prices are 
planned for 1 January, Kocarnik said.  The ministers' meeting also 
recommended the allocation of Kc300 million for salary increases in 
the budget-funded sphere as of 1 December.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 12 Nov 93 p 1; Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 12 Nov 93 
pp 1, 2 AU) 

   POLL SHOWS GROWING DISSATISFACTION WITH FOOD PRICES:  Forty 
percent of citizens have, to a smaller or greater degree, problems 
with food and catering expenses, as was revealed by a poll conducted 
by the Institute for Research of Public Opinion (IVVM) among 777 
people over 15 in October.  In comparison with the July data, this 
is a 15-percent increase.  Sixty percent of the polled consider meat 
to be excessively expensive.  The figures for food (as received) and 
vegetables, and milk and dairy products were 22 percent and 12 
percent, respectively.  In September, meat prices increased by 10 to 
25 percent, according to type.  (Prague CTK in English 13 Nov 93 AU) 

   FINANCE MINISTER PREDICTS KORUNA CONVERTIBILITY BY 2000:  Finance 
Minister Ivan Kocarnik believes that "full external convertibility" 
of the Czech koruna will be achieved "by the year 2000 at the 
latest."  In his opinion, "65 percent of the path toward full 
external convertibility" has already been traversed.  Kocarnik also 
believes that the limit on the amount of foreign exchange Czech 
citizens may purchase in banks, which is to be raised to Kc15,0O0 in 
1994, will be completely abolished in 1995.  Kocarnik estimates the 
amount of money that used to be redistributed from the Czech 
Republic to Slovakia in the years of the federation at 23 to 27 
billion korunas annually and admits that the termination of these 
transfers is a "certain advantage for the Czech Republic in the 
sphere of finance." (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 13 Nov 93 p 1 
AU) 

   INCREASE IN FOREIGN WORKERS:  A total of 28,321 foreign workers, 
excluding Slovak workers, were registered with the Ministry of Labor 
and Social Affairs on 30 September 1993, compared with 16,096 at the 
end of March.  The greatest increase was in the number of Ukrainian 
workers (from 3,219 to 8,818) and Polish workers (from 5,753 to 
9,941).  The number of Vietnamese workers, on the other hand, 
declined from 1,066 to 640.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY KARIERA 
Supplement in Czech 15 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   GERMAN COMPANY TO BUILD PLASTICS PLANT:  Rehau, the German 
plastics manufacturer, decided to build a production plant in Ceska 
Lipa at a cost of Kc40 million.  The plant, which is to be built in 
the years 1994-95, will produce plastic parts for automobiles and 
home appliances.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 15 Nov 93 p 6 
AU) 

   GERMAN COMPANY BEGINS MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS:  The German 
Zoeller company, the world's leading manufacturer of feeding 
equipment, decided to produce in the Czech Republic containers for 
household and industrial waste with a capacity of between 60 liters 
and five cubic meters.  The Zoeller Systems Czech Republic Ltd. went 
into operation in Ricany near Prague on 1 October.  It employs 24 
people.  The Ricany plant also produces parts for the parent company 
in Laubenheim near Mainz.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 15 
Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   MONETARY SPLIT PROCESS TO BE SETTLED IN MAY 1994:  The last two 
federal coins still in use both in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, 
the five-crown and two-crown pieces, are to go out of circulation on 
November 30, according to a 15 November statement by Czech National 
Bank Spokesman Martin Svehla.  This measure is the last of concern 
to ordinary citizens in a number of steps making up the monetary 
split.  The monetary division will continue, as the banknotes and 
coins that are no longer valid have to be siphoned off from 
individuals and firms and destroyed and accounts with the Slovak 
National Bank settled, Svehla said.  The two-to-one currency 
division ratio agreed at the beginning of this year was taken to be 
tentative, as the two sides could not arrive at a binding ratio. 
The Czech National Bank has so far accumulated an equivalent of 
about 2.5 billion crowns ($85 million) more from old currency 
emissions than was to be its share after the breakup of the 
Czechoslovak State Bank.  Under a proviso based on the estimate that 
the two state banks would in the end accumulate only 99 billion 
crowns ($3,366 million), 1 billion crowns ($34 million) less than 
originally emitted, the two banks' commission was put at 1 million 
crowns to be shared according to the two-to-one ratio.  The end of 
May 1994 has been set as the deadline for balancing out the monetary 
split, Svehla said.  (Prague CTK in English 15 Nov 93 AU) 

   PRAGUE TO HOST EUROPEAN ECONOMISTS' CONFERENCE:  A conference of 
the European Economic Association will take place in Prague in 1995, 
Czech Economics Minister Karel Dyba said at a news conference on 15 
November.  It will be the first annual meeting of the association to 
take place outside Western Europe.  It is an honor that indicates 
how Prague is viewed in advanced circles of economic science and 
research, Dyba stressed.  The conference will bring to Prague top 
European and world economists.  Transformation processes, our 
experience and potential theoretical generalization of this 
experience will definitely be one of the main topics, he stressed. 
The association's members are prominent economists from 
universities, scientific institutes, international and government 
institutions, and financial circles.  (Prague CTK in English 15 Nov 
93 AU) 

   AGREEMENT ON WORLD BANK TELECOM LOAN SIGNED:  Jiri Makovec, 
general director of the Czech state-run Telecom company, and 
Wilfried Thalwitz, vice-president of the World Bank for Europe and 
Central Asia, signed an agreement on a World Bank loan of $80 
million for the modernization of Czech telecommunications in 
Washington on 1 November.  Simultaneously, the Czech ambassador to 
the United States, Michael Zantovsky, on behalf of the Czech 
Government, signed an agreement to guarantee the loan.  The planned 
modernization, which was approved by the World Bank on September 9, 
is to support further digitalization and extension of the Czech 
Republic's telecommunications network.  It also puts the 
telecommunications operation on a fully commercial basis.  The World 
Bank is one of the contributors to the project, which is to cost 
$891 million.  The European Investment Bank and the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) are also participating. 
The World Bank loan is to be paid off within 15 years, with a five- 
year deferment.  (Prague CTK in English 1 Nov 93 AU) 

   DROP IN MILK, BEEF CONSUMPTION:  According to data of the 
Research Institute for the Economy of Agriculture, residents of the 
Czech Republic consumed an average of 81 kg of meat per capita last 
year, of which 44 kg was pork, 20.5 kg beef, and 11.4 kg poultry. 
Consumption of beef alone has dropped by one-third since 1989.  The 
annual consumption of milk also declined by one-third since 1989, to 
214 liters per head.  (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 2 Nov 93 p 2 
AU) 

   NEW BANK GOES INTO OPERATION:  Plzenska Banka a.s. (Plzen Bank) 
went into operation in Plzen on 1 November 1993.  The bank, which 
intends to provide all the standard banking services, has a capital 
stock of 300 million Czech korunas (Kc).  According to Petr Rybar, 
the general director of the bank, Plzenska Banka follows the 
traditions of a bank of the same name that operated in Plzen prior 
to World War II.  Eventually, it wants to set up branches in all the 
major cities of the republic.  (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 2 Nov 93 
p 14 AU) 

   FORMER MINISTER WARNS OF CRITICAL SITUATION IN INDUSTRY: 
Starting the process of bankruptcies would cause an irreversible 
chain reaction in Czech industry, the consequence of which would be 
the collapse of qualified workers' teams, former Czech Minister of 
Engineering and Electrotechnology Miroslav Gregr said on 2 November. 
Speaking at a Czech Social Democratic Party (CSSD) news conference, 
Gregr, who is currently director-general of the joint stock company 
Desta, said that, owing to restrictive government policies, the 
situation in Czech industry had become critical.  He said that 
companies were currently plagued by short-term bank credits as banks 
were unwilling to prolong the terms of their repayment.  Gregr said 
that urgent measures should be adopted to force banks to provide 
industrial enterprises with credits at a reasonable rate of interest 
and terms of repayment especially in dynamically developed fields 
and those with prospects.  He said the role of industry is 
irreplaceable for the Czech economy and it cannot be taken over 
either by tourism, which has been declining recently, or by 
financial services.  (Prague CTK in English 2 Nov 93 AU) 

   RENAULT, KAROSA SET UP JOINT VENTURE:  The French utility vehicle 
manufacturer Renault Vehicules Industriels and the Czech bus 
manufacturer Karosa signed an agreement to set up a joint venture in 
Prague on 2 November.  Renault will initially hold 34 percent of the 
new venture's stock and hopes to acquire 51 percent in the near 
future.  The chief goals of the new company, for which Karosa 
designated its main factory in Vysoke Myto, east Bohemia, are to 
modernize Karosa's current production, quickly integrate Renault 
engines, and jointly design new models to complete the current 
Renault series.  All designs are to be financed from an investment 
plan representing about 200 million French francs over the next five 
years.  Owing to the economic recession on its traditional markets, 
Karosa last year had a turnover of Kc2 billion (about $70 million). 
While its annual production capacity used to be 3,500 vehicles, last 
year it produced only 1,300 buses.  Renault's investment is about 22 
percent higher than would correspond to the nominal value of 
Karosa's shares.  Karosa's book value is Kc522 million, but Renault 
accepted an appraisal that put Karosa's value at Kc640 million. 
(Prague CTK in English 2 Nov 93; Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
3 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   According to "well-informed banking circles in the City of 
London," the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
is interested in a financial participation in the Karosa-Renault 
joint venture, possibly by means of share purchase.  The value of 
the EBRD's "share package" should not exceed the EBRD's credit to 
the Czech SPT Telecom company, that is, 71 million European Currency 
Unit (ECU).  The EBRD has invested some 165 million ECU in the Czech 
Republic to date.  (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 30 Oct 93 p 14 AU) 
RAILROADS SHORT OF FREIGHT CARS:  According to Emanuel Sip, 
general director of Czech Railroads (CD), the CD is short of 
"thousands of freight cars" and can meet only about 80 percent of 
its customers' needs.  In October, for example, coal mines in the 
Sokolov area were short of 5,100 freight cars, in the Most area 
7,178 cars, and in the Ostrava area 3,600 cars.  The shortages are 
caused by the CD's lack of funds for repairs and the resulting 
increase in the number of cars that have to be taken out of 
operation.  Sip admits, however, that "insufficient market analysis" 
and the underestimation of the growth in demand also contributed to 
the shortages.  To alleviate the shortages, the CD is negotiating 
with railroads in Slovakia, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Slovenia on 
lease contracts for freight cars.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 3 Nov 93 p 3 AU) 

   SHELL ENTERS CZECH MARKET:  The Prague City Council approved the 
lease of two city-owned plots of land to the Shell Czechoslovakia 
company at the end of October.  The lease contracts are to run for 
35 years, and the rent will be subject to indexation.  The two gas 
stations that Shell Czechoslovakia will build on the leased plots 
(which are located in Pragure's Fourth and Tenth Districts) will be 
the first project undertaken by the Royal Dutch/Shell concern in the 
Czech Republic.  The British/Dutch concern intends to build 100 gas 
stations on the territory of the Czech Republic, 20 of them in 
Prague, and gain a market share of about 20 percent.  (Prague CESKY 
DENIK in Czech 3 Nov 93 p 12 AU) 

   2,300 AUSTRIAN FIRMS ACTIVE IN REPUBLIC:  Approximately 2,300 
Austrian firms currently have representation in the Czech Republic 
or are involved in business activities here, the Austrian ambassador 
to the Czech Republic, Peter Niesner, said at a press conference 
during a working visit to Ostrava on 3 November.  He added that 
during the first eight months of the year Austria exported goods 
worth 7.2 billion ATS (Austrian schillings) to the Czech Republic. 
Its imports from here were ATS 5.9 billion.  Niesner said Austria 
was interested in further expanding economic relations with the 
Czech Republic.  North Moravia and Silesia could have equally close 
contacts as the border regions of southern Moravia and Bohemia, he 
said, adding that particularly small-and medium-sized businesses 
should make use of the many opportunities.  (Prague CTK in English 3 
Nov 93 AU) 

   COOPERATION WITH BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG:  A joint declaration on 
continued cooperation between the Czech and Baden-Wuerttemberg 
economic ministries in building a Prague-based Center for Support of 
Small and Medium-Sized Companies (SPP) was signed in Prague on 3 
November.  The economic part of the agreement on the two countries' 
cooperation, signed in September 1991, includes support for the SPP. 
Baden-Wuerttemberg invests some 400,000 German marks (DM) a year in 
the two countries' cooperation, Baden-Wuerttemberg Deputy Premier 
and Economic Minister Dieter Spoeri told journalists.  Spoeri said 
that expert aid was sometimes more valuable than investment. 
Pointing out cooperation and integration in North America and 
Southeast Asia, he called similar processes in Europe indispensable 
mainly from the point of competitive ability.  (Prague CTK in 
English 3 Nov 93 AU) 

   TAX STAMP FOR CIGARETTE PACKAGES:  The Czech Government is 
attempting to combat the illegal import of cigarettes into the 
country by requiring all packs of cigarettes to bear an adhesive tax 
stamp as of January 1, 1994.  Deputy Finance Minister Jan Klak said 
the government's tax policy for tobacco products is contained in a 
bill that it is presenting to parliament in mid-November.  The 
government hopes the bill will be passed quickly, he said.  Czech 
and Slovak manufacturers of hard-pack cigarettes for sale in the 
Czech Republic, however, will temporarily have to imprint the boxes 
with the words Intended for Sale in the Czech Republic instead of 
af fixing a sticker.  Ondrej Denkstein, head of the Finance 
Ministry's Consumer Tax department, said the ministry had decided to 
exempt Czech and Slovak producers because the local tobacco industry 
presently did not have the technical means to put stickers on 
cigarette boxes.  The exemption will be revoked, however, in the 
second half of next year. 

   All cigarettes will have to be stamped as of January 1, 1994, and 
an inventory of all stocks must be completed by the end of this 
year.  The legal sale of non-stamped cigarettes will end on February 
28, 1994, and infractions are subject to a fine of up to Kc100 
million (about $3.4 million).  The price of the cigarette stamps 
will not exceed four hellers, and forging them will be punished with 
a maximum sentence of five years.  The stamps will be issued to 
producers and importers within 30 days of being ordered.  They are 
non-transferable, and the owner must guarantee against their damage 
or loss.  Importers can order another batch of stickers after those 
from previous orders have been returned to the Czech Republic.  The 
fine for each missing stamp will be Kc12.50 for producers and Kc30 
for importers.  The 22-by-45-millimeter stickers must be applied to 
the back of cigarette packs, beneath the cellophane, so that it 
folds over the corner.  An office of the Prague Regional Customs 
Office opened in Kutna Hora on 1 November to distribute and register 
stickers for domestic producers and importers.  The Phillip Morris 
Company, which controls the Czech tobacco monopoly Tabak and thus 
nearly 90 percent of the domestic cigarette market, estimates that 
cigarette smuggling may have deprived the state of Kc1-2 billion in 
tax revenues this year.  A total of Kc8 billion is expected to be 
collected.  (Prague CTK in English 3 Nov 93 AU) 

   AERO HOLDING COMPANY PRIVATIZATION:  The general meeting of 
shareholders of the AERO holding company, which associates the 
country's 10 manufacturers of aircraft and aircraft components 
(including Aero Vodochody, Let Kunovice, Moravan Otrokovice, Letov 
Praha, and Motorlet Praha), approved an updated privatization 
project for the holding, Zdenek Burian from AERO's public relations 
department told journalists.  The original privatization project 
provided for the privatization of 49 percent of shares in the first 
wave of coupon privatization, while 48 percent of shares were to 
remain temporarily in the possession of the National Property Fund 
(FNM) and 3 percent were to be earmarked for the restitution fund. 
Because only about 35 percent of AERO's shares were actually sold in 
the first privatization wave (28.7 percent were acquired by 
individual investors and 6.5 percent by investment funds), the 
shareholders' meeting had to modify the privatization project. 
Under the "updated project," Investicni Banka (Investment Bank, IB), 
AERO's main creditor, will become owner of 30 percent of the 
holding's shares, in the form of a debt for equity swap, while the 
FNM's stake will be reduced to 30.2 percent.  This stake will become 
permanent, however, to secure state control over the aircraft 
industry.  The remaining 4.6 percent of shares will be allocated to 
the restitution and differentiation funds.  The general meeting of 
AERO shareholders also elected a new Board of Directors.  Its new 
chairman is Jiri Samek from the lB.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY 
BURZOVNI NOVINY in Czech 4 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   MINISTER ON THIRD PRIVATIZATION WAVE:  Privatization projects for 
companies that will go private in the third privatization wave have 
to be passed to the ministries that founded them by January 1, 1994 
at the latest, Czech Minister for Privatization Jiri Skalicky said 
on 4 November.  At a press conference, Skalicky said that the 
projects would be passed on to the Privatization Ministry by March 
1, 1994.  The coupon method will not be used in the third wave, 
Skalicky said.  He added that several principles for working out the 
projects have changed, particularly as regards appraisal of 
property.  The principles are available at the Ministry for 
Privatization.  The coupon method was used in the first wave of 
privatization, which ended in December 1992, and it is also being 
used in the second wave.  Coupons for the second wave started being 
sold in October.  (Prague CTK in English 4 Nov 93 AU) 

   MINISTER URGES GERMANY TO IMPROVE RIVER TRANSPORT:  Czech 
Minister of Transport Jan Strasky has asked Germany to improve 
navigation on the Labe (Elbe) River on its territory so that the 
Czech Republic may make more effective use of the port of Hamburg, 
leased since 1929 for 100 years.  Addressing an international 
conference on transport routes between Western and Eastern Europe in 
Hamburg on 4 November, Strasky said that increasing freight 
transport along the Labe-Vltava route, which is the Czech Republic's 
natural access route to German ports, depended on improved 
navigation conditions mainly in the section from Usti nad Labem to 
Magdeburg in Germany.  Strasky said the Czech side had prepared a 
project for two weirs on the Czech side but this project can be 
useful only if conditions on the Labe are improved on the German 
side as well.  Strasky told CTK that he has been trying to find out 
whether Germany was willing to invest in its section of the river. 

   The Czech project is being strongly opposed by German 
environmentalists.  Also, river transport priorities in Germany have 
been clearly concentrating on linking the Berlin district with the 
industrial Ruhr region in Germany's western part.  Strasky 
emphasized the importance of modernizing railroad lines between the 
two countries.  Both sides expect the modernization to help increase 
the volume of railroad freight in order to relieve roads 
overburdened mainly in the border districts.  Air transport is 
developing successfully, Strasky said.  Prague has an air link with 
eight German cities.  The Czech Republic would welcome it if German 
airlines companies were interested in links with Brno, south 
Moravia, Ostrava, north Moravia, or Karlovy Vary, west Bohemia, he 
added.  (Prague CTK in English 4 Nov 93 AU) 

   POTENTIAL FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION:  The CEZ (Czech Power- 
Generating Works) a.s. estimates that 270 megawatts of power- 
generating capacity could be saved in the Czech Republic through 
conservation measures by the year 2000.  This would mean aggregate 
savings of up to 5,200 gigawatt hours of electricity for the 1994- 
2000 period.  According to the CEZ, the conservation measures would 
require the investment of Kc1.7 billion.  The company sees 
potentials for energy conservation mainly in industry, which 
consumed 52.5 percent of all energy in the Czech Republic in 1992, 
while households consumed 24.6 percent.  In advanced Western 
countries, households usually consume more energy than industry, the 
CEZ points out.  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 5 Nov 93 p 2 
AU) 

   AUSTRIAN COMPANY BUYS INTO QUARRY:  The National Property Fund 
and the Austrian Steinindustrie Friepess company have concluded a 
contract, under which the Austrian company will purchase 45 percent 
of the 66,000 shares issued by the Prumysl Kamene Pribram (PKP) a.s. 
This was announced by PKP director Vlastimil Uhlir on 4 November. 
In the contract, Steinindustrie Friepess also pledged to invest 18 
million Austrian schillings in the company over the next three 
years, which will allow it to increase its share in PKP to 67 
percent by the end of 1995.  PKP, which has an annual turnover of 
Kc70 million, processes stoneware and granite for use in road 
building.  It controls 18 quarries, 11 of which are currently in 
use.  Together, Steinindustrie Friepess and PKP employ 500 people 
and control 21 quarries, which makes them the largest company in 
their field in Central Europe.  About 14,000 PKP shares will be 
offered to investors in the second wave of coupon privatization. 
(Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 5 Nov 93 p 14; Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in 
Czech 5 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   GOVERNMENT GETS SEAT ON SKODA BOARD:  An extraordinary meeting of 
shareholders of the Skoda automobile factory, held in Mlada Boleslav 
on 5 November, elected Radomir Sabela, deputy minister of trade and 
industry, deputy chairman of the Supervisory Board.  The state, 
which still holds a majority stake in Skoda, will thus be able 
directly to control the implementation of Volkswagen's investment 
plans in the company.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 6 Nov 93 p 
14 AU) 

   BICYCLE MANUFACTURERS DEMAND PROTECTION:  Favorit Rokycany and 
Eska Cheb, two manufacturers of bicycles, have asked for the 
protection of the domestic market against imports of cheap Asian 
bicycles.  Josef Jung, director of Eska Cheb, argues that Chinese 
bicycles can be imported for less than Kc2,000, which is less than 
Eska pays for materials alone.  He also points out that while the 
FRG levies a 50 percent duty on imports of Asian bicycles and 
Denmark a 70 percent duty, Czech importers pay only 10 percent when 
importing complete bicycles or 6 percent for components.  Eska Cheb 
is currently running at 50 percent capacity and Favorit Rokycany has 
even had to suspend production.  Tomas Husak, director of the 
foreign trade section at the Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
asserts, however, that the Czech Republic is bound by GATT rules and 
that it cannot adopt any "protective measures" unless Eska and 
Favorit submit to the ministry evidence that Asian bicycles are 
being imported at dumping prices.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 6 Nov 93 p 14 AU) 

   GERMANY'S QUELLE OPENS MAIL ORDER CENTER:  The German Quelle mail 
order company opened its own distribution center at Brezhrad in east 
Bohemia on 4 November, in the presence of Minister of Economy Karel 
Dyba.  It is the company's first mail order center in the countries 
of Central and Eastern Europe.  The center, built at a cost of DM11 
million, includes a warehouse with a floor space of 11,000 square 
meters.  It employs 330 people who dispatch an average of 12,000 
parcels per day.  Since the establishment of its Czech subsidiary in 
February 1992, Quelle has acquired over 400,000 Czech customers.  It 
expects a turnover of DM5O million in the Czech Republic this year. 
(Prague TELEGRAF in Czech 6 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   SKODA CLAIMS IN SLOVAKIA:  The claims of the Skoda Plzen concern 
in Slovakia have reached the sum of Kc1.1 billion, Jaroslav Hudec, 
press spokesman for the company, told journalists on 5 November. 
The bulk of this sum, Kc850 million, is owed by the state-owned SEP 
power-generating company for equipment manufactured for the Mochovce 
nuclear power station.  Skoda proposes that the debt be repaid by 
deliveries of electricity.  However, this depends on the completion 
of the Mochovce power station, the financing of which has not yet 
been secured.  According to Hudec, SEP also owes Kc500 million to 
the Czech Power-Generating Works, which, together with other SEP 
commitments, "strongly undermines its creditworthiness.'' (Prague 
TELEGRAF in Czech 6 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   NEW HEALTH CARE REGULATIONS TO GO INTO EFFECT IN 1994:  A new 
categorization of medicines and a regulation of their prices, which 
would place pressure on individual pharmacies and their suppliers to 
offer patients the least expensive drugs -- both foreign and 
domestic -- should go into effect next April, said Minister of 
Health Ludek Rubas on 6 November.  After addressing the Third 
Congress of the Czech Medical Chamber in Olomouc, Rubas told 
journalists that a state office to cover individual insurers and to 
define the regulations for them should also start work next year. 
This would mean that the differences between the level of services 
offered by insurance companies to their clients would be removed. 
Rubas said that the state would not prevent new insurance companies 
from going into business, but would set down specific conditions 
that, if not met, would allow the insurers to be shut down.  Rubas 
said that it was necessary speedily to resolve the creation of the 
line between ambulatory and bed arrangements, which would make 
patients' stays in the hospital no longer than necessary.  (Prague 
CTK in English 6 Nov 93 AU) 

   MERCEDES MAY BUILT ASSEMBLY PLANT:  The interest of the German 
car maker Mercedes in investment in the Czech Republic and its 
readiness to hold talks with the Industry and Trade Ministry must be 
assessed positively, Deputy Industry and Trade Minister Radomir 
Sabela told CTK after his talks with Mercedes representatives in 
Prague on 6 November.  Mercedes is looking at three cities -- Brno, 
south Moravia, Olomouc, north Moravia, and Plzen, west Bohemia -- 
for new investment.  The company intends to build an assembly line 
for the production of a new small-sized car model, Sabela said. 
Along with France and Great Britain, the Czech Republic is among the 
countries where Mercedes is considering locating the plant.  Sabela 
told the economic daily HOSPODARSKE NOVINY that the Czech Republic 
would not offer the German company any tax or customs exemptions but 
that "the advantages offered by the Czech Republic are worth more 
than specific money."  He said that Plzen, in particular, offered 
excellent conditions because it has a decent infrastructure, a new 
university, and because the city was ready to make available to 
Mercedes-Benz the site of the former Bory airfield.  The presence in 
the city of the Skoda concern, which could participate in the 
construction of the assembly plant, is also an advantage, Sabela 
said.  The final decision is to be made by mid-December.  (Prague 
CTK in English 6 Nov 93; Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 9 Nov 93 
pp 1, 2 AU) 

   PRAGUE HOSTS BIOTECHNOLOGY CONFERENCE:  The international 
conference "Biotechnology and Business" opened with a ceremonial 
session in Prague on 7 November in the presence of Czech Economic 
Minister Karel Dyba and David Baltimore, Nobel Prize laureate, from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The event, which lasts 
until November 9, is jointly organized by Charles University and New 
York University.  The conference is being attended by 
biotechnologist5 from 21 European and American countries, as well as 
representatives of she biotechnological industry, business, and 
financial circles.  It is a historical opportunity for the research 
and scientific communities of Central and Eastern European countries 
to meet with representatives of business and financial circles from 
free market countries, Joseph Rosenberg, chairman of the Institute 
for International Enterprise, told CTK.  (Prague CTK in English 7 
Nov 93 AU) 

   CRISIS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRY:  The production volume in the textile 
and clothing industry is declining faster than in other industries, 
and the recession is worse than in the EC countries' textile 
industries, according to Jiri Kohoutek, director of the Association 
of the Textile, Clothing, and Leather Working Industry.  In the last 
three years, the production of the textile and clothing industry 
declined by 45 percent.  In 1992, textile sales dropped to 56.7 
percent and clothing sales to 47.8 percent of the 1990 level. 
Textile firms' profits were almost 70 percent lower and clothing 
firms' profits 27 percent lower last year than in 1991.  At the same 
time, the Czech textile firms' high indebtedness makes it impossible 
to restructure them to make them internationally competitive. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 8 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   TOURISM BOOM SUBSIDING:  Almost 54 million tourists visited the 
Czech Republic in the first nine months of the year, 5.5 percent 
more than in the same period last year, according to information 
released by the Czech Statistical Office on 8 November.  Increases 
in the number of tourists grew more slowly from the beginning of the 
year to April.  The number of tourists was in January 45.6 percent 
higher than in the same month last year, while by February it was 
only 14.1 percent higher, and in March, April, and May it was 9.5, 
6.7, and 15.5 percent higher.  The number of tourists in June was 
0.7 percent lower, in July 3.4 percent, and in August 2.9 percent. 
The total number of foreign visitors in September was 6.8 million -- 
0.6 percent fewer than in the same month last year. 

   Only the number of tourists arriving by road increased in the 
first nine months of 1993 compared with the same period last year 
(by 5.9 percent), while the number of those coming by rail fell by 
0.3 percent, and the number of those arriving by air fell by 9.3 
percent.  The largest number of visitors crossed the border from 
Germany.  The figure was 31.7 million in the first nine months and 
the overall growth compared the same period last year was 5.8 
percent.  Around 9.8 million tourists came from Austria, a drop of 
0.7 percent.  The number of Polish visitors grew by 11.5 percent to 
11.5 million.  Around 22.4 million citizens of the Czech and Slovak 
Republics made trips abroad in the surveyed period, which was 6.4 
percent fewer than last year.  The number of foreign trips fell by 
3.9 percent in September.  The data do not include the border with 
the Slovak Republic.  (Prague CTK in English 8 Nov 93 AU) 

   Income from tourism reached almost $911 million, that is, 
approximately Kc27 billion, in the first eight months of the year, 
37.8 percent more than in the same period in 1992.  This was 
equivalent to 10.9 percent of the Czech Republic's export volume in 
this period.  Despite the increase in income from tourism, each of 
the 46.8 million foreigners who visited the Czech Republic in 
January-August 1993 spent only about Kc600, or $20, in the country. 
Only 1.1 million foreign visitors made use of accommodation 
facilities registered in the trade register.  In the same period, 
Czech Republic citizens spent $325 million on trips abroad.  Net 
income from tourism was thus $585 million.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA 
DNES in Czech 8 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   NUMBER OF HOTEL BEDS:  A total of 1,344 accommodation facilities 
with 114,236 beds were registered in the trade register at the end 
of the first half of 1993, of which 202, with a total of 26,190 
beds, were in Prague.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 8 Nov 93 p 
14 AU) 

   SURVEY OF POTENTIAL FOREIGN INVESTORS:  Czechinvest, the Czech 
agency for the promotion of foreign investment, has published the 
results of a survey aimed at ascertaining the interest of potential 
foreign investors in the republic.  A total of 281 foreign companies 
participated in the survey, 166 of which are already represented in 
Central and Eastern Europe.  Asked about the main considerations 
determining their interest in investing in Central and Eastern 
Europe, most respondents (28 percent) cited "economic stability" as 
the most important factor, followed by "the size of the domestic 
market" (18 percent), "low production costs" (16 percent), the 
availability of a skilled labor force (12 percent), "good 
communications" (6 percent), the availability of financial support 
(6 percent), and "return on investment'' (5 percent).   Asked about 
the "least important considerations" for investing in Central and 
Eastern Europe, most respondents cited good communications (38 
percent), return on investment (18 percent), and the size of the 
domestic market (15 percent).  Asked which East European country 
they considered most suitable for the development of their economic 
activities, most foreign companies (35.7 percent) mentioned the 
Czech Republic, followed by Hungary (26.3 percent), Poland (23.5 
percent), Slovakia (9.4 percent), Romania (2.9 percent), and 
Bulgaria (2.2 percent).  (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 9 Nov 
93 p 17 AU) 

   GOLD DEPOSITS:  Experts estimate that there are about 300 tons of 
recoverable gold in rock formations on the territory of the Czech 
Republic.  The best known localities are Vacikov near Pribram, 
Mokrsko in central Bohemia, and Kasperske Hory in west Bohemia. 
According to representatives of the Ministry of Economy, interest of 
foreign firms in Czech gold deposits is growing.  The ministry is 
therefore preparing a competitive tender for the exploration of 
deposits on Czech territory.  (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 9 
Nov 93 pp 1, 2 AU) 

   TRUCK MANUFACTURER COPING WITH RECESSION:  Avia Letnany, a 
manufacturer of light trucks, is successfully coping with the 
problems caused by the worldwide recession in the automobile 
industry, Pavel Chaloupka, assistant general director of the 
company, told journalists on 8 November.  In 1992, Avia sold 11,036 
vehicles, 9,726 of them on the domestic market, and made a profit of 
Kc71.9 million.  Of the 1,580 trucks exported, 32.28 percent went to 
France, 19.37 percent to Egypt, 18.92 percent to Poland, and 17.53 
percent to the republics of the former Soviet Union.  Avia also 
exported trucks to Paraguay and Germany (about 300 vehicles) for the 
first time last year.  Despite a 30 percent drop in sales to 
Slovakia since the beginning of this year, Avia also expects to make 
a profit in 1993.  (Prague TELEGRAF in Czech 9 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   TRADE DEFICIT WITH BRITAIN REACHES 25 MILLION POUNDS:  In the 
first ten months of this year, Czech producers exported goods worth 
173 million pounds to Britain, which exceeds the Czechoslovak 
exports to Britain for the whole of 1992, Britain's Department of 
Trade and Industry told CTK on 9 November.   Even so, the Czech 
Republic is currently running a 25-million-pound deficit in its 
trade with Britain.  Skoda cars dominate Czech exports with 28.5 
million pounds' worth sold, despite a one-and-a-half percent drop in 
sales this year.  (Prague CTK in English 9 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONTRACT WITH U.S. COMPANY CANCELED:  On 9 November, the 
Rectorate of the Prague Academy of Performing Arts (AMU) sent the 
owner of the U.S. firm HN Gorin notice that it was withdrawing from 
the contract concerning the 50-year lease of part of the Lazansky 
Palace, which houses the Cafe Slavia and the Parnas Restaurant, and 
is administered by the AMU.  AMU Rector Jaroslav Vostry said that 
the reason for the withdrawal was that HN Gorin had not paid the 
academy rent in the last period.  A further reason was that Gorin 
had sublet the exclusive Parnas Restaurant to Sanjiv Suri, a 
businessman and restaurateur, without the agreement of the AMU.  HN 
Gorin was bound by the agreement to restore the historic Prague 
cafe, a haunt of students and intellectuals since it opened in the 
1860's, but the contract did not stipulate a deadline.  Cafe Slavia 
has remained closed after HN Gorin signed the lease agreement in 
March 1992.  The Senate of the Academy of Performing Arts (AMU) 
decided that it would put the lease of the Cafe Slavia and the 
adjoining Parnas Restaurant out to tender once more.  The conditions 
of the tender will be announced to interested parties at the AMU in 
Prague on November 30.  (Prague CTK in English 9 Nov 93; Prague CTK 
in English 15 Nov 93; Prague CTK in English 18 Nov 93 AU) 

   EC FUNDS FOR NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS:  The European 
Community (EC) Fund, administered in the Czech Republic by the 
Foundation for the Development of Civic Society under the PHARE 
program (Economic Reconstruction Aid for Poland and Hungary) 
allocated its first grants to Czech nongovernmental organizations, 
Foundation Director Alena Huptychova told CTK on 9 November.  In 
all, 37 grants totalling over Kc5 million ($170,000) have been made 
available, she said.  Twelve information sphere proJects, five 
training schemes for non-governmental organizations' employees, 20 
projects concerning the protection of nature and human rights, 
including those of minorities, and humanitarian aid will receive 
financial assistance from PHARE, Huptychova said.  New requests for 
subsidies will be periodically considered in the future, Huptychova 
added.  Under PHARE, the EC has given the Foundation for the 
Development of Civic Society 2.6 million ECU, which the foundation, 
established in May of this year, will use over a three-year period 
to provide help for flon-governmental organizations.  (Prague CTK in 
English 9 Nov 93 AU) 

   MINERS PROTEST MINE CLOSURE:  Ostrava miners' unions do not agree 
with the intention of Ostrava-Karvinska Mines to close down the Dola 
Odra mine, which employs 2,600 people, by December 31 this year. 
Unionists said at a press conference in Ostrava on 9 November that 
shutting the mine was also at odds with the plans of the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade.  They backed this up with a letter that Industry 
Minister Vladimir Dlouhy had written to the miners' unions on July 
12, 1993, in which he said that the period from July 1st to December 
31, 1993 was designated for the drawing up of a liquidation project 
and a program to help ease the social consequences, not for 
commencing the closure of the mine, which was to start as of January 
1, 1994 and was to be conditional on the approval of the ministry's 
programs by the miners' union.  More than 60 percent of the mine 
workers were counting on being able to work until the end of the 
year, the unionists said, adding that they had no resources 
guaranteed by the state with which to pay benefits to the redundant 
miners.  The unionists said they had prepared several steps towards 
resolving the situation, but declined to specify them, mentioning 
only a meeting called for 10 November between Dola Odra mine workers 
and the general director of Ostrava-Karvinska Mines, Ivan Dzida. 
(Prague CTK in English 9 Nov 93 AU) 

   IMPORTS OF BLOOD DERIVATIVES BANNED:  The Czech Ministry of 
Health banned imports and the use of blood derivatives from three 
foreign firms as of November 5 to prevent the spread of the HIV 
virus, Ministry spokeswoman Marketa Soukupova told CTK on 9 
November.  The ban includes products of the German firm UB Plasma, 
which have been found to be contaminated with HIV, except for the 
albumins, as the process used for their production cancels out any 
possibility of HIV contamination, Soukupova said.  Biotest Pharma, a 
German firm which cooperated with UB Plasma, and the Austrian firm 
Immuno Vienna had also been affected by the ban, she said, adding 
that the ministry is also studying the firms' documentation.  No 
restrictions have been put on the products of the firm Grifois, 
which maintains the practice, in its foreign-based installations, of 
separate processing of Czech blood.  Similarly, the firm Behriwerke 
is unaffected, as its products fully conform to safety guarantees, 
Soukupova said.  The Czech Republic has enough blood derivative- 
producing capacity to cover its needs, Soukupova said.  Reportedly, 
about 600 hemophiliacs currently depend on blood product treatment. 
(Prague CTK in English 9 Nov 93 AU) 

   SLOVAKIA 

   WARNING AGAINST GOVERNMENT INTERFERENCE IN CAPITAL MARKET:  At a 
news conference in Bratislava on 18 November, representative5 of the 
Association of Investment Companies and Investment Funds warned 
against the adoption by the Slovak Parliament of the governments 
sponsored amendment to the Law on Investment Companies and 
Investment Funds.  Under the amendment, investment funds will be 
required to report to the Ministry of Finance 30 days in advance all 
transactions the value of which exceeds 10 percent of the value of 
their portfolio or 5 percent of the value of a single issuer's 
shares.  No such transaction will be allowed to proceed unless the 
Ministry of Finance gives its consent.  The funds' representatives 
warned that the amendment will discourage all foreign investors, as 
decisions on capital markets must be made within minutes and a 30- 
day deadline will "render all intended transactions meaningless." 
They admitted that the "duty to report" planned large-scale 
transactions is to be found in analogous laws in other countries, 
where, however, it is fellow investors who are entitled to know 
about shares changing hands and not a state agency.  Gustav 
Wurmboeck, an Austrian financier who attended the news conference, 
said that if the amendment is passed in its current form, he does 
not know "a single foreign investor who would be willing to invest 
even one dollar in Slovakia."  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 
19 Nov 93 pp 1, 2 AU) 

   NATIONAL PROPERTY FUND'S SHARE OWNERSHIP:  According to L. 
Melcicky, chairman of the National Property Fund (FNM) Executive 
Committee, the FNM currently owns shares with a nominal value of 49 
billion Slovak korunas (Sk).  In only 190 of the 557 privatized 
shareholding companies in Slovakia is the FNM's stake lower than 10 
percent.  In all other shareholding companies, the FNM is the key 
owner or administrator.  In 105 shareholding companies, the FNM 
holds between 51 and 66.6 percent of shares and in 69 companies more 
than two-thirds of all shares.  Melcicky said that the FNM would 
like to sell "entire packages" of some of its stock on the capital 
market or in public tenders.  To do this, it will have to ask the 
Ministry of Privatization or the government for changes in the 
privatization projects.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 19 Nov 
93 p 21 AU) 

   BRATISLAVA-KIEV FLIGHTS INAUGURATED:  Flights on the Kiev- 
Uzhhorod-Bratislava route were inaugurated on 19 November.  There 
will be two round-trip flights per week, on Tuesdays and Fridays, by 
a 45-seat AN-24.  The route is operated jointly by the Zilina-based 
Tradeways company and Air Kiev, a private Ukrainian company. 
(Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 20 Nov 93 p 2; Bratislava NARODNA 
OBRODA in Slovak 20 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   PROBLEMS OF VELKY KRTIS COAL MINE:  Coal mining in the "Dolina" 
mine in Velky Krtis, southern Slovakia, is to be phased out by the 
year 2005.  Within the last four years, production has declined from 
1 million tons to 600,000 tons annually and the number of employees 
has been cut from 2,000 to 1,500.  More than 80 percent of coal from 
the "Dolina" mine is supplied to the Novaky power station.  The 
marketing of coal from Velky Krtis is becoming increasingly 
difficult, however, because of the availability of cheaper and 
higher-quality Czech coal.  It costs Sk900 to extract one ton of 
coal in the "Dolina" mine, which is twice as much as the population 
pays for graded coal.  One-half of production costs is subsidized by 
the state.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 20 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   PAYMENTS AGREEMENT WITH CZECH REPUBLIC TO BE ALTERED:  Changes in 
the payments agreement between Slovakia and the Czech Republic may 
be expected next year, the Slovak Finance Ministry reported on 22 
November.  Settlement of payments, receivables, and liabilities 
arising between commercial entities would, under the expected 
change, be made through the "new bloc," with payments being 
calculated at the relevant ECU rate.  The Finance Ministry is 
recommending that business entities balance as many as possible of 
their claims and liabilities originating before February 8, 1993, 
when the Czechoslovak currency split into two.  The payments 
agreement signed February 4 outlines the payments relationship 
between physical and legal entities in the two republics, having the 
form of clearing in most cases.  (Prague CTK in English 22 Nov 93 
AU) 

   TEN-MONTH FOREIGN TRAVEL DATA:  In the first 10 months of the 
year, 2,646,000 Slovak citizens travelled to Hungary, 2,182,000 to 
Austria, and 1,355,000 to Poland -- the three most popular foreign 
destinations for Slovaks (apart from the Czech Republic, which is 
not included in the statistics).  Over the same period, 5,847,000 
Hungarians, 2,293,000 Austrians, 2,258,000 Poles, and 665,000 
Ukrainians visited Slovakia.  Since the beginning of the year, 
4,404,000 motor vehicles have been cleared at Slovak border 
crossings, 2,242,000 of which came from Hungary and 1,317,000 from 
Austria.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 23 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   MOTOROLA INTERESTED IN TESLA PIESTANY:  The Council of Creditors 
of the Tesla Piestany company, which, after the collapse of the 
eastern markets and the drastic decline of electronics production in 
the Czech Republic and Slovakia, is facing bankruptcy, has adopted a 
recovery program" for the company, at the heart of which is the 
decision to set up a joint venture with the transnational Motorola 
company.  Tesla's domestic creditors and the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) would also become partners in 
the venture.  Motorola is ready to "immediately invest several 
million U.S. dollars" in Tesla Piestany and to guarantee the 
marketing of its entire output of semiconductor components. 

   According to Lubomir Cergel, a Slovak native, of Motorola's 
European Semiconductor Products Group, in the initial phase, 
Motorola intends to launch in Tesla Piestany the assembly of 1.4 
million units of transistors per week.  Eventually, the weekly 
output should reach 5 million transistors.  According to the project 
submitted by Cergel to the Council of Creditors, Motorola and the 
EBRD would like to invest $16.9 million in Tesla Piestany by the end 
of 1995 and to establish in Piestany Motorola's "world center for 
so-called small signals transistors."  Motorola makes the formation 
of the joint venture conditional on the write-off of Tesla's old 
debts, however.  Motorola argues that it cannot accept 
responsibility for past loans that were used to purchase obsolete 
equipment at prices that far exceeded world market prices. 
(Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 23 Nov 93 p 5 AU) 

   SHOPPING CENTER TO SERVE HUNGARIAN, AUSTRIAN CUSTOMERS:  In March 
1994, the Austrian firm Mayreder will start building the Shopping 
Center Bratislava (BCP) in the southern part of Bratislava- 
Petrzalka, in the immediate vicinity of the Austrian and Hungarian 
borders.  The 40,000-square meter shopping center, which will 
accommodate 80 shops, will be completed in the fall of 1996.  The 
investors reckon that the BCP, which will create jobs for about 
1,000 people, will attract customers from nearby Hungary and 
Austria.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 23 Nov 93 p 6 AU) 

   OPPOSITION PARTY TO SUBMIT NEW PRIVATIZATION BILL:  In days to 
come, the opposition Democratic Left Party (SDL) will submit to the 
parliament a new bill on big privatization, which it expects to be 
discussed in January.  As long as power is concentrated in hands of 
some people who decide on passing privatization projects, the 
struggle will rage over the control over the privatization ministry, 
and the politicians will eagerly pursue only their own interests to 
such an extent, which will lead to the collapse of any coalition, 
SDL Chairman Peter Weiss told a press conference on 23 November, 
referring to the newly concluded coalition between the Movement for 
a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and the Slovak National Party (SNS). 
The bill to be submitted by the SDL is not only aimed at preventing 
speculation.  By it, the SDL tried to create conditions for the 
privatization being no longer the subject of continual wild and 
arrogant political struggle, Weiss said.  The bill is to guarantee 
the parliament's control over privatization and the assessment of 
privatization projects by real experts.  Privatization must not be a 
source from which to fill the coffers of political parties, which 
would thus prepare themselves for future elections, Weiss stressed. 
(Prague CTK in English 23 Nov 93 AU) 

   EUROPEAN UNION FUNDS FOR SMALL BUSINESS:  The National Agency for 
the Development of Small and Medium-Sized Businesses will avail 
itself of almost 14 million European Currency Units next year -- 
that is, about Sk500 million.  The funds have been provided by 
countries of the European Union within the framework of the PHARE 
program.  This was announced by J. Brhel, general director of the 
agency, at a news conference in Bratislava on 23 November.  The 
m,,oney will be used to build a "business innovation center" and 
regional consultancy and information centers," as well as for loans 
and loan guarantees for small and medium-sized businesses. 
(Bratislava SMENA in Slovak 24 Nov 93 p 2)  Between 45 and 55 
percent of the 40 million ECUs that Slovakia will receive within the 
framework of the PHARE program in 1993 will be used to develop the 
private sector.  S?me 18 to 22 percent will be used for 
infrastructure projects, the same percentage for "the development of 
human resources," and 10 to 15 percent will be earmarked for "other 
areas," such as the General Technical Assistance Program (GTAF). 
(Bratislava HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Slovak 19 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   TIMBER PRODUCTION SCALED DOWN:  Production of raw timber has been 
reduced from 5.2-5.5 million cubic meters to approximately 4 million 
cubic meters annually, Karol Cajanek, department head at the Slovak 
Ministry of Agriculture, told a TASR correspondent.  Of this amount, 
2.5 million cubic meters come from the state sector and 1.5 million 
cubic meters from the private sector.  Some 1.5 million hectares of 
forests are in state ownership or "in the stage of reprivatization," 
Cajanek said, while 450,000 hectares have already been privatized. 
Cajanek estimates that, eventually, 35-40 percent of Slovak forests 
will remain in state ownership, including privately owned forests, 
the administration of which has been entrusted to the state. 
(Bratislava SLOVENSKY DENNIK in Slovak 24 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   WARNING AGAINST CUTS IN AGRICULTURAL BUDGET:  Cyril Moravcik, 
chairman of the Union of Agricultural Cooperatives, told the daily 
PRAVDA that the Slovak Government's draft budget for 1994 provides 
for only Sk6.8 billion in agricultural subsidies, which represents a 
reduction by 39 percent against 1993.  Moravcik said that farmers 
felt "cheated and disappointed" by the budget because it ran counter 
to the intentions contained in the "Concept and Principles of 
Agrarian Policy," which foresaw a 3-4 percent reduction in 
agricultural subsidies, and to the government's own "Green Report," 
which reckoned with Sk9.4 billion in agricultural subsidies in 1994. 
According to Moravcik, the government was "playing with fire" as 
farmers could no longer be expected to play the role of a "social 
shock absorber" by selling their produce for less than the 
production costs.  Moravcik pointed out that in 1992, when subsidies 
where much higher, 95 out of 100 agricultural cooperatives and state 
farms operated at a loss.  He also noted that, even now, farmers' 
monthly earnings are Sk900 below the national average.  (Bratislava 
PRAVDA in Slovak 24 Nov 93 pp 1, 5 AU) 

   AUSTRIAN SUPERMARKET CHAIN OPENS FIRST SHOP:  The first 
supermarket of the Austrian Billa chain in Slovakia was opened in 
Trnava on 24 November, in the presence of Karl Vlaschek, the owner 
of Billa.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 25 Nov 93 p 3 AU) 

   RECORD TRANSACTION ON SECURITIES EXCHANGE:  On 24 November, for 
the first time since trading at the Bratislava Securities Exchange 
(BCPB) began in April, the volume of trade in a single issuer's 
shares exceeded the sum of Sk1 million.  The record transaction 
involved 1,400 shares of the Biotika Slovenska Lupca a.s., a 
pharmaceutical company.  Since the beginning of November, volume of 
trading at the BCPB has exceeded the sum of Sk30 million. 
(Bratislava SME in Slovak 25 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   FINAL HARVEST RESULTS:  Slovak farmers harvested 2,472,000 tons 
of cereals and 684,000 tons of corn this year.  While there will be 
enough alimentary grain to last until the next harvest, some 357,000 
tons of feed grain will have to be imported.  (Bratislava 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Slovak 25 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   INCREASE IN SAVINGS REPORTED:  Slovak citizens' bank deposits 
increased by Sk1.676 billion in the first nine months of 1993 -- 
from Sk99.382 billion at the end of 1992 to Sk101.058 billion at the 
end of September 1993.  (Bratislava SMENA in Slovak 26 Nov 93 p 2 
AU) 

   CITY TO BECOME SHAREHOLDER IN BANKA SLOVAKIA:  Deputies to the 
Banska Bystrica City Council decided on 25 November that the city 
would become a shareholder in the Slovakia shareholding company, 
which was set up in September 1993 with the aim of establishing the 
Banka Slovakia.  The city's share in the bank, the capital stock of 
which is Sk1 billion, will consist of a building, valued at Sk86 
million, that will house Banka Slovakia's head office.  (Bratislava 
REPUBLIKA in Slovak 26 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH HUNGARY:  Approximately 100 businessmen 
from east Slovakia and Hungary took part in a meeting in Kosice on 
26 November which aimed to update them on legal conditions for 
bilateral economic cooperation.  Officials from the Hungarian 
Ministry for International Business Contacts and Slovak Economics 
Ministry were also present.  Similar actions in the past have 
brought about a marked increase in bilateral cooperation, said 
Ludovit Korotnoky, chairman of the Kosice Regional Office of the 
Chamber for Industry and Commerce.  Some 345 Slovak-Hungarian 
companies and 41 Hungarian companies have registered in Slovakia so 
far.  Hungarian investments in Slovakia have reached some $2.1 
million.  (Prague CTK in English 26 Nov 93 AU) 

   BANK OFFICIAL CRITICIZES STATE SUPPORT FOR BANKRUPT FIRMS: 
Slovak state authorities, which at the beginning of reforms 
refrained from interfering in the restructuring of the economy, are 
currently delaying the implementation of the law on bankruptcy, says 
the general director of the Strategic and Organizing Division of the 
Slovak Vseobecna Uverova Banka (General Credit Bank), Frantisek 
Szikhart.  In an interview carried by the Czech daily HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY on 26 November, Szikhart says that in a normal banking world 
in countries with a market economy such insolvent partners as we are 
cultivating here would long ago have been taken to bankruptcy 
proceedings.  They are able to vegetate due to the state's 
intervention, although many in Slovakia realize that such inactivity 
in the banking world will not contribute toward economic recovery, 
according to Szikhart.  He says that nearly every enterprise owes 
something to somebody, and estimates insolvency in Slovakia at 90 
billion Slovak crowns.  Foreign banks avoid granting direct credits 
for business plans, but they are willing to finance certain needs 
through credits, while requesting guarantees from banks, Szikhart 
explains, adding that bankruptcy proceedings are a solution, though 
for many enterprises only an emergency one.  (Prague CTK in English 
26 Nov 93 AU) 

   STATE FARMS' LOSSES REDUCED:  In the opinion of V. Biros, section 
chief at the Slovak Ministry of Agriculture, "stabilization and 
signs of a turn for the better are gradually making themselves felt 
in the economic development of state farms."  Biros says that, in 
spite of the extraordinary drought this summer, in the first three 
quarters of 1993 state farms in Slovakia reduced their losses by 
Sk439 million, compared with the same period a year ago.  Biros 
attributes the improvement in the state farms' economic condition to 
the increased use of their own intermediary products (seeds, 
livestock, feed) and to the sale of assets.  The improvement will 
not suffice to achieve a positive economic result, however.  Biros 
expects Slovak state farms to take in Sk8.129 billion this year, 
which will fall Sk1.191 billion short of their estimated 
expenditures of Sk9.320.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 26 
Nov 93 p 22 AU) 

   LOW TRADE TURNOVER WITH POLAND:  Stanislav Lautsch-Bendkowski, 
economic councillor at the Polish Embassy in Bratislava, told a 
correspondent of the Bratislava daily PRAVDA that Polish-Slovak 
trade reached a turnover of "only $215 million" in the first nine 
months of 1993.  Poland is Slovakia's seventh most important trading 
partner, after Hungary and Ukraine.  Lautsch-Bendkowski expects 
Polish-Slovak trade to increase "by a minimum of 10 percent" next 
year.  (Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 26 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   SLOVAK-AUSTRIAN AIR TRAFFIC AGREEMENT:  A Slovak-Austrian air 
traffic agreement, which will permit the opening of air links 
between the two countries, was initialed in Vienna on 26 November. 
The possibility of operating flights between Kosice and Vienna is 
being considered.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 27 Nov 93 p 
10 AU) 

   GROWING PROPORTION OF INCOME SPENT ON FOOD:  According to Eva 
Borovska from the Slovak Statistical Office, Slovak households spent 
55.9 percent of their income on food and services in the third 
quarter of 1993, compared with 54.1 percent in the second quarter. 
In the third quarter of the year, Slovak households spent an average 
of Sk1,070 a month per household member on food, beverages, and 
restaurant meals, 15 percent more than in the second quarter, and an 
average of Sk580 a month per household member on services.  Rent and 
communal services represented more than one-half of spending on 
services.  The proportion ranged between 55 percent in farmers' 
households and 69 percent in pensioners' households.  The average 
monthly rent in the third quarter was Sk400.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA 
in Slovak 27 Nov 93 p 4 AU) 

   TRADE MISSION TO SINGAPORE, HONG KONG:  A 15-member group of 
Slovak managers, headed by Peter Mihok, chairman of the Slovak 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, paid a three-day visit to 
Singapore from 24 to 26 November with the aim of presenting Slovakia 
and exploring possibilities of cooperation with local businessmen 
and financial circles.  It was the first Slovak mission of this kind 
to Singapore.  The Slovak managers departed on 26 November for their 
next destination, Hong Kong.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 27 Nov 
93 p 5 AU) 

   MINISTRY CRITICIZES FRAGMENTATION OF CAPITAL MARKET: 
Representative5 of the Slovak Ministry of Finance are dissatisfied 
with the "uncalled for diversification (fragmentation) of trade in 
securities" in Slovakia.  They believe that the existence of three 
different prices for securities -- at the Bratislava Securities 
Exchange (BCPB), the Bratislava Futures Exchange (BOB), and at the 
RM-System electronic market -- is harmful, given the small size of 
the capital market.  R. Vochyan of the BOB proposes the integration 
of the BCPB and the BOB.  Initially, they could form a joint 
umbrella body to coordinate the activity of the two exchanges, 
Vochyan says, before completely merging after about six months. 
BCPB representatives view the prospect of a merger within six months 
"skeptically'' and believe that "the merger will occur much later, 
if it takes place at all."  (Bratislava SMENA in Slovak 27 Nov 93 p 
2 AU) 

   VISA FEE CHANGES SEEN HURTING TOURISM:  According to NARODNA 
OBRODA commentator Jan Blazej, the new law on administrative fees 
recently passed by the Slovak Parliament abolishes the Sk200 short- 
term visa for tourists and raises the price of a regular visa from 
Sk1,000 to Sk1,500.  Although Blazej admits that most European 
visitors no longer require a visa to visit Bratislava, the visa duty 
still applies to the citizens of countries such as Canada, Japan, 
Australia, Korea, and South Africa.  According to Blazej, the 
abolition of the short-term visa has already prompted some foreign 
tour operators to drop Bratislava from their itineraries.  Blazej 
fears that the new ruling will affect, in particular, the three- to 
four-hour Bratislava stopovers of Danube cruise vessels.  He 
suggests that, while neighboring countries are reducing the prices 
of tourist services to attract more foreign visitors, Slovakia is 
"discouraging" foreigners from visiting the country.  (Bratislava 
NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 29 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   INTRODUCTION OF NEW CURRENCY COMPLETED:  A new 500 Slovak koruna 
(Sk) bill, which features a portrait of Ludovit Stur, was put into 
circulation on 15 November.  With the introduction of this banknote, 
the Slovak National Bank has replaced all federal paper money.  The 
old, stamped federal 500-koruna bills will remain valid until 10 
January 1994 and can be exchanged in banks until 31 March 1994. 
(Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 13 Nov 93 p 5; Bratislava REPUBLIKA in 
Slovak 15 Nov 93 p 3 AU) 

   ESTIMATED COST OF ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP:  Lubomira Zimanova, 
state secretary at the Slovak Ministry of Environment, told the 
Slovak news agency TA SR that 55 percent of the Slovak population 
lived in an "unhealthy environment," of which 41 percent lived in an 
extremely harmful" environment.  She estimated the cost of 
eliminating the accumulated environmental problems at Sk120 billion. 
(Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 15 Nov 93 p 3 AU) 

   ECONOMIC FORECAST FOR 1994:  According to a preliminary forecast 
prepared by the Forecasting Institute of the Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, gross national product can be expected to drop by 3-4 
percent in 1994.  The development of unemployment "is not likely to 
be dramatic" next year, and the unemployment rate will probably not 
exceed 17 percent.  State budget revenues should become more even 
next year as problems caused by this year's currency split and the 
introduction of new taxation laws will not repeat themselves.  This 
was announced by Juraj Rencko from the Forecasting Institute's 
Macroeconomic Analysis Section.  The forecast will be published in 
mid-January 1994.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 15 Nov 93 p 
2 AU) 

   FEWER PRIVATE BUSINESSMEN:  Some 284,500 private businessmen were 
active in the Slovak Republic at the end of September 1993, 
according to an analysis prepared by the Slovak Statistical Office. 
The number of private businessmen has thus dropped by 16,1 00, or 
5.4 percent, since the beginning of the year.  According to Finance 
Ministry data, the private sector is responsible for 28.6 percent of 
Slovakia's gross domestic product.  (Bratislava HOSPODARSKE NOVINY 
in Slovak 15 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   CORN, POTATO HARVEST RESULTS:  According to the latest estimates 
of the Slovak Statistical Office, based on data available as of 15 
October, 674,500 tons of grain corn have been harvested in Slovakia 
this year, 1,3,00 tons less than a year ago.  The harvest of late 
potatoes amounted to 807,900 tons, 221,400 tons more than in 1992. 
This year's average per hectare potato harvest, 19.5 tons, exceeded 
last year's average by 6.52 tons.  (Bratislava SLOVENSKY DENNIK in 
Slovak 15 Nov 93 p 9 AU) 

   CORN EXCHANGE BEGINS TO QUOTE PRICES:  On 16 November, the Slovak 
Corn Exchange (SPB) started to publish on a regular basis the prices 
of key agricultural commodities, including wheat, corn, and 
slaughter animals.  The SPB hopes that its price quotations will 
play an important economic role and will help stabilize prices. 
(Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 17 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   AEROFLOT EXPANDS MOSCOW-BRATISLAVA FLIGHTS:  The Slovak Ministry 
of Transportation, Communications, and Public Works announced on 16 
November that Aeroflot would expand the number of Moscow-Bratislava 
Moscow flights.  So far, Aeroflot has been flying to Bratislava on 
Mondays and Thursdays.  As of 23 November, Aeroflot will add a 
Tuesday flight to its schedule.  The permission to operate the extra 
MoscowBratislava-Moscow flight has been granted to Aeroflot until 
31 March 1994.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 17 Nov 93 p 2 
AU) 

   AUSTRIANS ACQUIRE MAJORITY IN SLOVAK BANK:  The Austrian 
Raiffeisenbank will become the majority shareholder in the Slovak 
Tatra Banka.  The Raiffeisenbank had held 45 percent of Tatra's 
capital stock, with the three other major shareholders -- Slovenska 
Statna Poistovna (Slovak State Insurance Company), Slovenska Statna 
Sporitelna (Slovak State Savings Bank), and Vseobecna Uverova Banka 
(General Credit Bank), each holding 11.2 percent of the bank's 
shares.  Two of the three Slovak shareholders have sold their shares 
to the Raiffeisenbank, which, for its part, will sell between 15 and 
20 percent of its stake to the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD).  Even after the EBRD's entry, Raiffeisenbank 
will retain 51 percent of Tatra's shares.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in 
Slovak 17 Nov 93 p 1 AU) 

   SALE OF MILK PROCESSOR TO AUSTRIAN COMPANY CANCELED:  At its 
meeting on 16 November, the Slovak Government canceled government 
resolution No. 486 of 26 May 1992 on the direct sale of 33 percent 
of the shares of the Milex Nitra a.s., a milk processor, to the 
Austrian Schaerdinger Milch A.G.  Under the privatization project 
approved by the former Slovak Government, the Austrian company was 
to pay 86 million korunas for the Milex shares.  Because the 
Austrian partner did not accept the price laid down in the 
government resolution, no contract could be signed.  A new 
privatization project for Milex Nitra will now have to be approved. 
(Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 17 Nov 93 p 5 AU) 

   PUBLIC FAVORS HYDROELECTRIC POWER:  More than half of Slovak 
citizens would prefer hydroelectricity over other forms of energy 
production in the future, according to the results of an opinion 
poll carried out among 1,228 people by the Slovak Statistical 
Office.  Hydroelectric power plants were preferred by 55 percent of 
the respondents, alternative methods of production by 17 percent, 
gas power plants by 7 percent, nuclear power plants by 6 percent, 
thermal power plants by 2 percent, and the import of electrical 
energy from abroad by 2 percent.  Eleven percent of those polled did 
not give an opinion.  According to the Statistical Office, those 
without an opinion on this issue are mainly people over 60 years of 
age (20 percent), high-school graduates (19 percent), supporters of 
the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) (22 percent), women (15 
percent), and those with no interest in environmental protection (34 
percent).  (Prague CTK in English 17 Nov 93 AU) 

   ASSEMBLY OF VW PASSATS:  The Bratislava subsidiary of the German 
Volkswagen (VW) concern will assemble 3,000 VW Passat automobiles 
this year.  They will be marketed in Slovakia, the Czech Republic, 
and elsewhere in Europe.  The number of VW Passats assembled in 
Bratislava will increase to 5,000 in 1994.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in 
Slovak 18 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   SLOVAK BANKS' PROBLEMS:  The Slovak National Bank does not 
provide any refinancing credits and only state treasury bills and 
various forms of bonds are subject to interbank trading in Slovakia, 
L. Kovacik, director of the Kosice branch of the Czech Bohemia Bank, 
told the Prague daily RUDE PRAVO.  The situation of businessmen in 
Slovakia is very complicated, Kovacik said, noting that Bohemia was 
the only bank in Kosice providing credits.  The other banks in 
Kosice "declared a moratorium on credits at the beginning of the 
year or stopped lending money in June or July," Kovacik said. 
However, even from Bohemia only short-term credits are available. 
They carry an interest rate of 23 percent, which Kovacik does not 
consider "exaggerated,'' in view of the expected 30 percent 
inflation this year.  According to Kovacik, "the acquisition of 
primary resources is a big problem" for Slovak banks because "Slovak 
citizens do not trust Slovak banks, which is demonstrated by the 
great demand for Czech korunas." (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 2 Nov 
93 p 9 AU) 

   TELEPHONE SYSTEM MODERNIZATION:  According to Vladimir Ondrovic, 
general director of the Slovenske Telekomunikacie (Slovak 
Telecommunications) state enterprise, there are approximately 
870,000 telephones in Slovakia at present, or about 16.5 per 100 
inhabitants.  Only Bratislava, with 45 telephones per 100 
inhabitants, comes close to the European standard, but only in 
quantity and not in quality.  The number of telephones in Slovakia 
is to double by the year 2000 with the help of foreign credits; all 
the new telephone lines will be digitalized.  On 2 November, the 
Slovenske Telekomunikacie state enterprise signed a 620-million- 
Slovak koruna (Sk) contract with Alcatel SEL TLH Liptovsky Mikulas, 
a joint German-Slovak venture, for the delivery of Alcatel 1,000 S 
12 digitalized telephone exchanges, which will make it possible to 
provide about 83,000 subscribers with good quality telephone 
services.  (Bratislava HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Slovak 3 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   BALANCE OF PAYMENTS DEFICIT WITH CZECH REPUBLIC:  The Slovak 
Republic had a deficit of approximately Sk1.75 billion on its 
clearing account with the Czech Republic at the end of October. 
According to data provided by the Slovak Banking Clearing Center, 
the Slovak Republic's liabilities on the so-called old account, for 
payments preceding the currency split, have reached the sum of 
Sk1.077 billion and its liabilities on the new account, for payments 
after the currency split, the sum of Sk640 million.  (Bratislava SME 
in Slovak 3 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   BRATISLAVA-MUNICH AIR LINK:  Eurowings, a German regional 
airline, started to operate a Bratislava-Munich route on 4 November. 
Flights will operate Monday to Friday, using a 46-seat ATR-42 turbo- 
prop aircraft.  (Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 5 Nov 93 p 2 
AU) 

   INCOME FROM TOURISM:  Income from tourism amounted to $89.3 
million in the first six months of 1993.  This was 1.6 percent of 
Slovakia's gross domestic product and 0.3 percent more than in the 
first half of 1992.  (Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 9 Nov 93 p 1 
AU) 

   STATE PROFITS FROM WITHDRAWAL OF BANKNOTES:  The Slovak National 
Bank made a net profit of Sk1.16 billion from the withdrawal of 
stamped 1,000-koruna bills at the end of October.  The bank had 
issued Sk16.558 billion in stamped 1,000 koruna bills but only 
Sk15.427 billion worth of these bills were returned to it by 5 
November 1993, the set deadline.  The remaining bills are either in 
citizens' mattresses or in foreign banks.  (Bratislava SMENA in 
Slovak 11 Nov 93 p 2 AU) 

   FOREIGN MINISTER VISITS JAPAN:  During their talks with Slovak 
Foreign Minister Jozef Moravcik in Tokyo on 11 November, 
representative5 of the Japanese company Jazaki Corporation confirmed 
their intention to found a joint venture with the Slovak company 
Tesla Prievidza.  Jazaki Corporation ranks among the world's top 
producers of electrical equipment for cars.  Moravcik, who came to 
Japan on November 9 on a four-day official visit, also visited 
Kyoto, where he met with representative5 of the local Chamber for 
Trade and Industry.  At the talks, both sides showed interest in 
broadening economic cooperation and trade between Slovakia and 
Japan.  (Prague CTK in English 11 Nov 93 AU) 

ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/2029z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43175 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000794001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   4 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-003 
<H3> <TI>      SUDAN:  POLITICAL HIGHLIGHTS </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
This     Foreign Media Note summarizes recent political events as 
reported by Sudanese expatriate oppositionists in the 12 December 
1993 AL-ASHIQQA' (Brothers), a weekly page devoted to developments 
in Sudan that appears in Egypt's liberal opposition daily newspaper 
AL-WAFD. 

   Extremist Groups Hold Secret Meeting in Khartoum 

   Unnamed extremist organizations reportedly held a secret 
conference in the northern Khartoum suburb of Kafuri while the 
Popular Arab and Islamic Conference was in session at Khartoum's 
Friendship Hall on 2-4 December.  According to AL-ASHIQQA' sources, 
attendees decided: 

   To "support the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in Algeria as well 
as the FIS's recent decisions to escalate terrorist activities 
against foreigners in Algeria." 

   "To totally support" Shaykh Rached al-Ghannouchi, leader of the 
Tunisian Islamic Movement. 

   "To coordinate activity with Arab Maghreb organizations." 

   "To prepare for the 'Islamic alternative' which will remove the 
ruling regime in Libya." 

   "To support General Muhammad Farah 'Aidid in Somalia in 
overturning the Somali Reconciliation Accord held in Addis Ababa." 

   "To support the holy struggle (al-jihad) in Eritrea and the Oromo 
Liberation Front." 

   Sudanese attendees offered to support the conference resolutions 
"with weapons" and asked Iran "to increase and continue its 
petroleum aid." 

   Some of the "traditional leadership" was said to have "arrived 
secretly and unannounced to participate only in the secret 
conference and not in the meetings at Friendship Hall" and that "for 
secrecy's sake their passport series were replaced at the airport 
with the series belonging to the National Islamic Front (NIF) so 
that news of the arrival of some of the names, whose passports have 
not been stamped for entry, would not leak out." 

   DUP Leader on Civil Unrest, Secession of the South 

   Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) Secretary Muhammad 'Uthman 
'Abdallah, describing a recent strike by merchants in the city of 
Wad al-Madani, said that "for the first time in the history of 
Sudan, businessmen and vendors are opposing and rebelling against 
government authority.  This degree of confrontation, in our 
estimation, was inevitable and encompasses every sector of Sudanese 
society."  'Abdallah went on to say that "the recent bloody 
conflicts in al-'Abyad and Madani where the public announced in the 
capital of al-Jazirah its civil rebellion, merchants closed their 
stores and distributed leaflets declaring a political strike, and 
government security forces randomly arrested a number of citizens 
and merchants, as they (previously) did students at al-Jazirah 
University and the higher secondary schools, all of these uprisings 
are small in size but large in significance.  They are without a 
doubt consolidating even as we speak and flaring up throughout Sudan 
with an aim to finally get rid of the despotic regime." 

   'Abdallah also addressed the issue of southern self- 
determination, equating it with secession which he said is "no 
solution to the problem but rather more complication."  He said, "A 
large degree of sensitivity related to higher national interests has 
surrounded the issue of self-determination.  Therefore, discussion 
of self-determination must be completely responsible, frank, with a 
sense of national awareness and be done in moderation with both its 
opponents and supporters in the context of one Sudan, one people." 
Concurring with Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) Leader John 
Garang on conditions under which a united Sudan could be achieved, 
'Abdallah stressed that the DUP is "not satisfied with simply 
realizing equality.  We demand compensation for the south and its 
people for the oppression and losses they have suf fered over the 
past years.  Balanced economic, social, and geographic development 
must include all of Sudan which has become mostly marginalized."  He 
added that the DUP has "laid down laws and plans guaranteeing this 
balance and fairness, without which there will be no united Sudan." 

   Retired Colonel Under Detention at Biological Weapons Camp 

   "Informed Sudanese sources" reported that NIF security forces 
"are still detaining retired Col. Hasan Sayyid Ahmad at the 
biological weapons camp in Umm Durman."  The colonel was arrested 
more than three months ago without being charged" despite his poor 
health.  After leaving the service, the colonel opened a commercial 
office "joined by a number of currently retired officers whose 
source of income was cut off when they separated from the service 
because they refused to join the NIF's party." 

   Government Raises Airport Departure Tax by 200 Pounds 

   The government has decided to raise country departure fees from 
300 to 500 Sudanese pounds.  The Civil Aviation Authority is sending 
an announcement of this to "all domestic and international airline 
companies to apply this increase immediately."  Since November, the 
authority has raised air travel fees "by 75 percent." 

   (QUESTION AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, AFRICA/LEVANT 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6408) 
ENEAG/03 Jan/POLCHF/TOTF/NEASA Division/PF 03/2130z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43176 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000894001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-002--CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      CHINA: CORRUPTION AIDS PUBLICATION OF VULGAR, POLITICALLY 
SENSITIVE MATERIALS </TI></H3>



</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Recent     articles from PRC, Hong Kong, and Taiwan media have 
reported on corrupt practices in China's flourishing publishing 
industry that have facilitated a proliferation of vulgar and 
pornographic publications as well as the publication of politically 
sensitive materials.  Some entrepreneurs have legitimized their 
publishing activities by purchasing "book numbers" from publishing 
houses, while others simply publish illegally.  Industry spokesmen 
warn that the phenomenon threatens the continued publication of 
high-quality literature. 

   An article in the 6 November issue of the Chinese Writers' 
Association weekly WENYI BAO reported that the number of new books 
and periodicals published in China is growing at an annual rate of 
20 percent but that an increasing number of them are "vulgar" and 
"garbage" materials.  Moreover, the article notes, over 95 percent 
of the "questionable" items have been published through the sale of 
"book numbers," or publishing permits.  Xu Weicheng, executive 
deputy chief of the CPC Propaganda Department, says in the same 
article that a "small number of unlawful persons" have through 
buying book numbers published books that "are seriously wrong 
politically, leak state secrets, damage nationality unity, violate 
foreign policy, and promote feudalistic superstition or 
pornography." 

   Dissident writers have also used this channel to reach readers. 
Ma Shaohua's "Eastern Europe: 1989-93" was published through "buying 
a book number," according to an article in the 29 November Hong Kong 
MING PAO.  A 1 November Hong Kong LIEN-HO PAO article reports that 
Ma's book, which analyzes the failure of communist rule in Eastern 
Europe, was banned in September for "creating chaos among the 
masses." 

   According to an article in the 20 October issue of the Beijing 
daily GUANGMING RIBAO, the State Press and Publication 
Administration's Books Administrative Department director, Yang 
Muzhi, says that purchasing book numbers is "tantamount to 
purchasing publishing rights" granted by the state.  By selling a 
unit or individual outside the publishing industry a book number, he 
notes, publishing houses are enabling the unit or individual to 
print a book for profit.  This is an example of "exchanging power 
for money," Yang continues.  An article in the 2 November Taipei 
LIEN-HO PAO reports that PRC publishing houses receive 2,000 to 
20,000 yuan for a book number. 

   In addition to purchasing book numbers from legitimate publishing 
houses, many entrepreneurs have simply printed books under fake 
publishing house names, according to an article in the 5 November 
issue of the Hong Kong monthly TZU-CHING (BAUHINIA MAGAZINE). 
China's annual publication volume now accounts for one-ninth of the 
total world book production, but "crude and obscene" materials have 
flooded the market.  According to the article, the government 
confiscated 10 million illegal books in 1992, of which 160,000 were 
pornographic. 

   Two major publishers have recently issued warnings on the harmful 
effects of this corruption.  People's Publishing House Director Xue 
Dezhen notes in the 4 November JINRONG SHIBAO that buying and 
selling book numbers enables poor-quality books to be published, 
disturbs publication management, facilitates large-scale tax evasion 
by book sellers, and hinders the publication of good books and 
academic works.  In the same article, Beijing Publishing House 
Director Zhu Shuxin called buying and selling book numbers "suicide 
behavior"; large quantities of low-grade, low-priced books are being 
dumped on the market, he said, while the production of high-quality 
books and books "with vitality" is being "strangled." 

   (AUTHOR: CHINN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
PMB/CD AT (703)733-6406) 
EAG/4JAN94/POLCHF/ECONF/CD JEG 04/1638Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43177 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000000994001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-04JAN94-NORTH KOREA 
<H3> <TI> 
     Kim Il-song Stresses Talks With U.S. On Nuclear Issue </TI></H3>



</HEADER>


<TEXT>
President     Kim Il-song used his annual New Year's address to 
reiterate Pyongyang's interest in dealing mainly with Washington 
on the nuclear issue while minimizing Seoul's involvement in the 
issue.  On the domestic front, Kim reaffirmed the somber economic 
reports that surfaced at last month's party plenum. 
   Apparently attempting to bolster Pyongyang's preference for 
solving the nuclear issue through talks with the United States, 
Kim projected an upbeat assessment of the status of the ongoing 
nuclear talks (Pyongyang radio, 1 January).  Invoking the DPRK- 
U.S. joint statement of last June, he contended that if the two 
sides "abide by and implement the principles" contained in the 
agreement, the nuclear issue can be resolved in a way that is 
"fair" to both sides.  Prefacing his assessment of the nuclear 
issue with a reiteration of Pyongyang's warning against "pressure 
and threat," Kim said that resorting to pressure would result in 
the "collapse" of negotiations. 
   Further underscoring Pyongyang's interest in better relations 
with the United States, Kim's address followed the precedents of 
the past two years by eschewing harsh denunciations of 
Washington.  Instead, Kim's most direct criticism of the United 
States came when he blamed the delay in resolving the nuclear 
issue on what he termed Washington's "persistent" antisocialist 
and anti-DPRK "maneuvering"--relatively mild rebukes by 
Pyongyang's standards. 
   Kim's stance on the nuclear issue reinforces earlier signs of 
North Korean interest in projecting an image of progress in 
ongoing DPRK-U.S. negotiations on the issue.  In the most 
optimistic assessment of prospects for resolving the nuclear 
issue so far, a Foreign Ministry spokesman was cited by the North 
Korean news agency KCNA on 30 December 1993 as claiming a 
"breakthrough" on the nuclear issue at a working-level bilateral 
contact held in New York recently--a contact that the spokesman 
touted as the 18th time working-level officials of both sides met 
since high-level bilateral talks were held in Geneva last July. 
According to the spokesman, the U.S. side removed an unspecified 
"series of stumbling blocks" at the 29 December meeting, thus 
bringing the deadlocked DPRK-U.S. nuclear talks "back on track." 
   South Korea     In contrast to its conciliatory stance toward the 
United States, Kim in his New Year's address was stridently 
critical of South Korea.  Underscoring Pyongyang's unwillingness 
to engage Seoul in a substantive manner, at least for now, Kim 
claimed that beneath the "veneer" of civilian rule the South 
Korean government is no different from "the preceding military 
dictatorial regimes," claiming that "evil laws of anticommunism 
and fascism" enacted under previous governments remain in effect. 
   Kim's harsh portrayal of the South's new civilian government 
appears to reflect Pyongyang's pique at Seoul's rejection of a 
series of initiatives Kim had personally advanced.  For example, 
Kim criticized the South for having ignored his "magnanimous 
proposal" for exchanging special presidential envoys, along with 
his 10-point program for national unification, even though Kim's 
New Year's address itself ignored Seoul's current calls for 
exchanging special envoys. Suggesting, however, that Pyongyang 
has not written off inter-Korean dialogue entirely, Kim fell 
short of refusing further dealings with the ROK government, 
claiming only that South Korean "people and figures of all 
strata" are proclaiming their loss of faith with the current 
South Korean regime. 
   In keeping with Pyongyang's increasingly harsh rhetoric against 
Seoul, North Korean People's Army (KPA) chief of staff Choe Kwang 
also recently sounded a more belligerent note.  In a speech 
commemorating the second anniversary of the appointment of Kim 
Il-song's son, Kim Chong-il, as armed forces supreme commander, 
Choe cited as the KPA's task the reunification of Korea "with the 
gun" (Pyongyang radio, 23 December 1993)--a formulation not 
observed in Pyongyang's public pronouncements in recent years. 
However, in the same speech, Choe seemed to equate "the gun" with 
revolutionary spirit when he used the phrase again to call on the 
KPA to crush enemy challenges with "the gun of revolution."  A 
week later, the party paper Nodong Sinmun seemed to make a 
special effort to suggest that Choe's language was intended to be 
figurative, carrying an article stating that "under no 
circumstances" could Pyongyang "invite self-destruction" through 
"a fratricidal war" (KCNA, 31 December 1993). 
   Gloomy Economic News     Continuing to project a somber economic 
picture, Kim's address toned down his once standard boasts about 
North Korea's economic prowess.  Last year, for instance, he had 
claimed that North Koreans were "free from worry and anxiety 
about food, clothing, and shelter," and that North Korea had no 
unemployed or beggars (Pyongyang radio, 1 January 1993), but this 
year he merely maintained that the people live "happy lives free 
from social and political unrest or worries about livelihood." 
   Underscoring earlier signs of a shift in economic priorities, Kim 
appeared to go out of his way to emphasize the importance of 
foreign trade to the North Korean economy.  He called on the 
nation to develop "foreign markets" and expand production bases 
for export goods.  In another twist of economic priorities, he 
seemed to reverse the traditional emphasis on basic and heavy 
industry by calling for investment of "efforts" into the coal, 
power, and metal sectors "in a bid to develop" agriculture and 
light industry. 
   Implications     Kim's contrasting treatment of Washington and 
Seoul suggests that Pyongyang will continue to press for 
bilateral talks with the United States, while attempting to keep 
inter-Korean dialogue at the minimum level required for the 
resumption of the high-level DPRK-U.S. talks.  Nevertheless, 
Kim's emphasis on foreign trade--something that cannot be fully 
developed without the resolution of the nuclear issue- 
-underscores Pyongyang's apparent desire to get this issue out of 
the way. 
   (AUTHOR:  YIM.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6534.) 
   EAG/BIETZ JEG 04/1904Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43178 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001094001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   5 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-04JAN94-CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      Beijing To Lift Controls on Key Energy Prices </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Reflecting     the determination of party reformers to implement a 
new round of market reforms, Beijing recently signaled its 
intention to remove price controls in selected areas of China's 
heavily subsidized energy sector.  A 23 December Renmin Ribao 
article announced that, pending approval by the State Council, 
the Ministry of Coal Industry will remove "all restrictions on 
coal prices" on 1 January 1994.  Similarly, a 28 December article 
in the English-language paper China Daily stated that the price 
of electricity will be freed "within two to three years."  The 
Renmin Ribao article on coal attempted to allay persistent 
concerns that price liberalization will engender inflation, 
asserting that "drastic" rises in coal prices will not occur in 
1994 and that "stable supply and demand" of coal and "increasing 
coal reserves" will mitigate the inflationary impact of price 
reform.  The article went on to say that state control over the 
production and distribution of coal will also be relaxed so that 
enterprises can "adapt themselves to market demands" and 
"organize production according to market needs."  The China Daily 
article on electricity, on the other hand, blamed "uneconomically 
low prices" for "power shortages that have plagued the country 
for 23 years" and argued that without market-based pricing, power 
production could not keep pace with economic growth.  It quoted a 
power industry official as calling for "new regulations on 
electricity prices" this year.  Despite the freeing of prices on 
coal and electricity, the leadership is moving more cautiously on 
other energy prices.  In an interview with Xinhua publicized on 2 
January, Premier Li Peng warned that even though the oil industry 
"cannot possibly be developed without readjustment of oil 
prices," such a readjustment would "affect the prices of oil 
products" and must be done "step by step and in a very prudent 
manner." 

   The timing of these changes suggests that reformers are moving 
quickly to implement a recent Central Committee plenum decision 
loosening state control over prices in key sectors in order to 
facilitate new market reforms.  A document adopted by the plenum 
stated that "market prices are seldom applied to production 
factors" and vowed that "on the premise of keeping the general 
price level relatively stable" the party will "accelerate the 
marketization of prices" in this area (Renmin Ribao, 17 
November).  Apparently reflecting efforts by reformers to step up 
price reform, the Renmin Ribao article of 23 December confirmed 
that the freeing of coal prices in 1994 was done "ahead of 
schedule."  Until August of last year, PRC media reports 
consistently held that full liberalization of coal prices would 
not occur until 1995.  Concerned with inflation, the party 
leadership has been slow to institute meaningful price reforms in 
coal despite the burden of substantial state subsidies to 
unprofitable coal-producing enterprises hamstrung by low state- 
set prices and tight administrative control.  Initial attempts at 
price reform in this sector reportedly did not come until 
December 1991 (Liaowang, 31 August 1992).  Further measures were 
taken in 1992 and 1993 to increase state purchasing prices and 
reduce the amount of coal purchased by the state at those prices. 
As for electricity prices, the 28 December China Daily article 
stated that they were raised "by a narrow margin" early last year 
but that "the adjustment was far from enough" to spur power 
production or "encourage foreign investment." 

(AUTHOR:  VOSS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 

EAG/BIETZ/DEW 05/0049Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43179 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001194001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   6 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-05JAN94-Russia 
<H3> <TI>       Winners' List Vague on Parties' Strength in New Assembly </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                              While publication of the final list of winners in the 12 December 
Russian legislative elections largely clarifies which individuals 
will be in the new Federal Assembly, it does not provide a firm 
delineation of party strength or a clear picture of the 
legislature's pro-/anti-reform or pro-/anti-Yeltsin orientation. 
The number of seats won by parties among the 225 State Duma seats 
awarded in party list voting is clear now, but the number of 
seats won by parties in the 225  districts is not, since 
relatively few district winners were identified with any party 
and many winners carry different party labels in this list of 
winners than they had in the pre-election list of candidates. 
Vagueness and even changes in party identifications in the list 
of winners underscore the fluidity of the parties and blocs that 
appeared on the ballot. 
                             END SUMMARY 
   Party List 
   The distribution of the 225 State Duma seats awarded on the basis 
of the party preference vote was announced by the Central 
Electoral Commission on 25 December (Interfax)--see box 1--and 
the final list of individual winners on party lists was published 
along with lists of district winners and Federation Council 
winners in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta.  The listing of 
party list winners contained some surprises since some names high 
on the lists had dropped off, usually because the candidates also 
won in a district election and chose to take the district seat, 
allowing candidates further down a party's list to take the party 
list seats.  For most parties, the distribution of seats won in 
the party preference voting was straightforward either because 
the parties had not broken down their party lists into separate 
national and regional sections (Zhirinovskiy's Liberal-Democratic 
Party (LDP), the Democratic Party of Russia (DPR), the Communist 
Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF), and Women of Russia) or 
because they did not win more seats than the number of candidates 
in the national section of their party lists (Agrarian Party, 
Yavlinskiy Bloc). 
   Distribution of party preference seats for Russia's Choice and 
the Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES) was more complicated 
because both had broken their lists into national and regional 
sections and won more seats than they had candidates in the 
national section of their party lists.  PRES had three seats left 
to distribute to its regional candidates after awarding seats to 
the 15 on its national party list.  Councillor to the president 
Sergey Stankevich, listed as No. 89 as a candidate from Moscow 
city, got the first of the three, while candidates from Rostov 
and Bashkortostan got the other two.  The distribution of the 40 
seats won by Russia's Choice was more complicated.  It had 19 
candidates listed in the national section of its party list, but 
Sergey Kovalev, Ella Pamfilova, Andrey Kozyrev, Boris Fedorov, 
and Andrey Makarov won seats in district races and dropped off 
the list, leaving Russia's Choice with 26 seats to distribute to 
candidates from the regional section of its party list.  The 
election rules indicate vaguely that regional seats should be 
distributed in accordance with the size of the vote in various 
regions, but the principles Russia's Choice used to allocate 
seats have not been explained.  Examination of its list shows 
that: 
   --Candidates from the biggest regions received seats--four from 
Moscow city, two each from St. Petersburg and Moscow Oblast, one 
each from Sverdlovsk, Krasnodar, Rostov, Nizhegorod, Kemerovo, 
and several other big oblasts. 
   --Prominent figures, such as ministers Viktor Danilov-Danilyan 
(No. 56), Yevgeniy Sidorov (No. 205), and Boris Saltykov (No. 
103), received seats.  However, no seat was awarded to Deputy 
Premier Yuriy Yarov (No. 63), listed from Chuvashia. 
   --Most of the leaders of Democratic Russia (one of the biggest 
and most vocal parties within the Russia's Choice bloc), Gleb 
Yakunin (No. 188), Anatoliy Shabad (No. 189), Vasiliy Selyunin 
(No. 173), and Nikolay Vorontsov (No. 174)--all of whom lost in 
district races--as well as Ilya Zaslavskiy (No. 88), who did not 
run in a district, received seats.  But Lev Ponomarev (No. 177), 
who lost a race for a district seat in Moscow city, did not 
receive a party seat. 
   There will be further adjustments to the party list winners since 
some on this list may decline their seats.  For example, 
presidential Administration Leader Sergey Filatov and some others 
already have. 

Box 1 
                  Final Official Count of Party List Seats* 
Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP)                 59 
Russia's Choice                                40 
Communist Party of Russian Federation (CPRF)   32 
Agrarian Party of Russia                       21 
Women of Russia                                21 
Yavlinskiy Bloc                                20 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES)       18 
Democratic Party of Russia (DPR)               14 
   *Central Electoral Commission results reported by ITAR-TASS on 25 
December. 


   District Seats 
   While the party list system provides clear and firm figures for 
party strength among the 225 seats elected by proportional 
representation, judging party strength among the 225 seats 
elected by district-is more difficult.  There are still 
conflicting counts (see box 2) and relatively few district 
winners were identified with parties.  The list of winners of 
district seats published in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
identified only 87 of the 219 winners (Six seats are vacant--5 
from Tatarstan and one from Chechnya) with parties, while the 
other 132 are listed as non-party. 
   Moreover, suggesting that party identification is weak and 
changeable, winners were often identified differently in the list 
of winners than they had been in the list of candidates.  In 
fact, of 111 winners identified with a party in either the list 
of candidates or the list of winners, most (64) were identified 
differently in the second list than in the first.  Thus 25 of the 
winners had been identified with Russia's Choice in the list of 
candidates, but only 18 were so identified in the list of 
winners; 16 were identified with the Agrarian Party in the first 
list, but only 12 in the final list; 7 were identified with the 
Yavlinskiy Bloc in the first list, but only 2 in the second list; 
6 were listed with the Civic Union in the first list, but only 1 
in the second.  Even well-known Russia's Choice officials such as 
ministers Ella Pamfilova and Boris Fedorov were listed as 
Russia's Choice in the list of candidates but as non-party in the 
list of winners, while Ambassador to the United States Vladimir 
Lukin, No. 3 on the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin Bloc party list in 
the list of candidates, was listed as non-party in the list of 
district seat winners.  On the other hand, 7 winners were 
identified with the CPRF in the list of winners that had not been 
identified with the CPRF in the list of candidates. 

Box 2 
                  Conflicting Counts of District Seats 
   Only a few counts of seats by parties for district elections have 
been made public and they vary widely from the number of 
identifications in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta list.  The 
most significant variations are in the strength of Russia's 
Choice, while LDP's strength is fairly clear. 
                               District Seats by Party 
   Party            28 Dec*         15 Dec**  16 Dec***  20 Dec**** 
Russia's Choice  18       (29)  27         56    62 
CPRF             16       (17)  12         33    30 
Agrarian         12       (18)  16         26    28 
Yavlinskiy        2        (7)   6         12     9 
Civic Union       1        (7)             18 
LDP               5        (5)   3         11     6 
RDDR              4        (5)              8 
PRES              1        (4)   2          9    12 
Dignity           2        (3)              3 
Women             2        (3)              4     4 
DPR               1        (2)              7     3 
Future of Russia  0        (1)              3 
Other parties    23  (23)***** 


   *Counting the identifications in the list of winners for district 
seats in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta.  In parentheses is a 
combined count including the identifications of these winning 
candidates in the list of candidates in the 30 November 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, thus including those who identified 
themselves with a party in the first list but not in the final 
list. 
   **Izvestiya, 16 December, based on 15 December data from 193 of 
224 districts. 
   ***Interfax, 16 December, data from "various sources." 
   ****ITAR-TASS, 20 December, based on data "from reliable 
government sources." 
   *****No one was identified with minor parties on the first list. 
   Often winners had identified themselves with blocs such as 
Russia's Choice, the Yavlinskiy Bloc, or Civic Union in the pre- 
election list of candidates, but in the list of winners they 
identified themselves with their real parties which were 
constituents of the bloc--for example, Democratic Russia.  Only 
64 of the 87 winners identified with parties were identified with 
the 13 parties and blocs on the ballot, while 23 identified 
themselves with minor parties, some of which had joined Russia's 
Choice, the Yavlinskiy Bloc, PRES, or Civic Union for the 
election.  Thus several Democratic Russia members identified 
themselves as Russia's Choice in the first list but as Democratic 
Russia candidates in the second list, and over a dozen winners 
from various blocs identified themselves with small parties in 
the second list.  Candidates of the Yavlinskiy Bloc in the list 
of candidates were identified with the Social-Democratic Party 
(district No. 72), Democratic Russia (No. 106), Russian 
Ecological Union (No. 132), and Republican Party (No. 135) in the 
list of winners. 
   More startlingly, however, some winners appeared to have switched 
to rival parties.  Yevgeniy Buchenkov in Vladimir district No. 68 
identified himself with the Agrarian Party in the list of 
candidates but with the CPRF in the list of winners, and Tamara 
Tokareva in Sverdlovsk district No. 160 identified herself with 
the Agrarian Party in the first list but with the archrival 
Peasant Party of Russia (a member-party of the Russia's Choice 
bloc) in the second list. 
   Undercounting Party Strength 
   Because many winners were listed as unaffiliated in one list and 
with a party in the other, it appears necessary to count party 
identifications from both the list of winners and the list of 
candidates.  However, even this count produces far fewer party 
seats than the 16 December Interfax or 20 December ITAR-TASS 
counts given in box 2.  The Central Electoral Commission and 
presidential Administration, which have been supplying the media 
with higher estimates of party strength are obviously using 
information from other sources.  And clearly some party totals 
should be higher, since some winners are not identified with a 
party in either list but are easily identified as party members 
or supporters.  Thus Aleksandr Dzasokhov, a former CPSU Politburo 
member running in North Ossetia, is presumably a CPRF member but 
was identified in both lists as unaffiliated. 
   The undercounting of party strength in the list of winners is 
clear from the Moscow city races.  In Moscow city's 15 districts, 
the list of winners identifies only 4 winners as Russia's Choice, 
but 3 others had been identified as Russia's Choice in the list 
of candidates, and a pre-election list of Moscow candidates 
distributed by Interfax identified 4 others who later won as 
being backed by Russia's Choice, indicating that Russia's Choice 
really won 11 of the 15 races.  Russia's Choice lost only four 
contests in Moscow--three to independents and one to Moscow 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Braginskiy, a RDDR candidate (see box 
3). 

Box 3 
                     Winners in Moscow City 
   Russia's Choice did well in Moscow City, with seven winners 
labeled Russia's Choice in one list or another plus 2 Democratic 
Russia (part of Russia's Choice) candidates, and 2 others it 
backed.  Winning candidates were listed differently in the list 
of winners than the list of candidates in 6 of the 15 cases. 
                             Moscow City 
   District  Candidate          Identification               Pro- or 
Anti-RC 
                       List of     Backed      List of 
                       Candidates  by RC**     Winners 
191   Nisnevich        RC          RC          DemRussia     pro 
192   Kovalev          RC          RC          RC            pro 
193   Zadonskiy        RC          RC          DemRussia     pro 
194   Khakamada        no party*    backed as  Econ Freedom  pro 
                                    independent  Party 
195   Mironov          no party*   RC          no party      pro 
196   Volkov           no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
197   Osovtsov         no party*   RC          RC            pro 
198   Zhukov           Dignity      Dignity    Dignity       pro 
199   Gerber           no party*   RC          RC            pro 
200   Vlasov           no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
20l   Braginskiy       RDDR        not backed  RDDR          anti 
202   Tarasov          no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
203   Makarov          RC          RC          RC            pro 
204   Medvedev         no party*   RC          no party      pro 
205   Fedorov          RC          RC          no party      pro 


*Nominated by "group of electors" rather than a party or 
organization. 
   **According to an undated pre-election Interfax list. 
   Total State Duma Seats 
   Both media reports and claims by party leaders about overall 
party strength in the State Duma are considerably higher than 
those cited in the official 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
listing of party list and district winners.  Presidential 
Administration Leader Sergey Filatov claimed 91 for Russia's 
Choice on 16 December (Ostankino TV, 16 December), Deputy Premier 
Anatoliy Chubays claimed 103 for the "pro-Yeltsin bloc" versus 66 
for the LDP (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), PRES leader Konstantin 
Zatulin claimed 28-29 for PRES (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), and CPRF 
leader Gennadiy Zyuganov claimed 50 for the CPRF (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 28 December).  Sovetskaya Rossiya on 28 December 
published a list of 32 CPRF party list deputies and 18 district 
deputies.  When the Russia's Choice faction met on 27 December it 
listed 94 members--43 from Moscow and 51 from provinces- 
-according to Interfax and ITAR-TASS on 28 December. 

Box 4 
                         Total State Duma Seats 
   Party        Rossiyskaya     Filatov      ITAR-TASS 
             Gazeta, 28      16 December  20 December 
             December 
Russia's Choice  58         91            103 
LDP              64         62             66 
CPRF             48         61             62 
Agrarian         33         46             49 
Yavlinskiy       22         33             28 
PRES             19         24             29 
Women            23         22             25 
DPR              15                        17 
Civic Union       7 
RDDR              5 
Dignity           2 


Weakness of Blocs 
   In addition to the unclarity in the size of party factions, some 
blocs appear internally divided and may break up after the 
election.  Reformers in particular displayed disunity before the 
election, forming several rival parties that split the reformist 
vote.  In a bad omen for the fate of reformist legislation, this 
lack of cohesion showed up again in the list of winners--both on 
party lists and in districts.  Among the least cohesive factions, 
the Yavlinskiy Bloc's 27 winners virtually all identified 
themselves in the final list not with the Yavlinskiy Bloc but 
with other parties or no party (five with the Republican Party of 
the Russian Federation (including one identified both with this 
party and the Yavlinskiy Bloc), two with the Social Democratic 
Party of the Russian Federation, one each with Democratic Russia, 
the Russian Ecological Union, and the Russian Christian- 
Democratic Union, and 16 as nonparty.  Of Civic Union's 7 
identified winners, three called themselves nonparty and one each 
identified with the People's Party of Free Russia and the Renewal 
Union.  Of the 69 Russia's Choice winners (judging by 
identifications in either the 30 November or the 28 December 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta list), 14 are identified with Democratic 
Russia, two with the Republican Party of the Russian Federation, 
one each with the Russian Christian Democratic Union and 
Democratic Initiatives Party, and 12 as nonparty.  PRES held 
together better.  Of 22 identified PRES winners, most identified 
themselves with PRES in the final list, while only two linked 
themselves with minor parties (Entrepreneurs for a New Russia and 
a Bashkir party) and 5 as nonparty. 
   Additions and Alterations to List of Winners and Losers in State 
Duma* 
   *Additions and alterations to the list given in the 22 December 
Trends, pages 6-9, which was based on preliminary reports.  There 
will be further changes to the 28 December list of winners 
because some will not claim their seats.  ITAR-TASS on 28 
December reported that presidential Administration Leader Sergey 
Filatov and bank president Petr Aven (former chairman of State 
Committee for Foreign Economic Ties) have already announced they 
prefer their present jobs and will not take up their seats. 
Combining State Duma seats with another fulltime job is banned in 
most cases (see next article). 
   Winners: 
   Pro-Government: 
   Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, minister of environmental protection, 
    won on Russia's Choice list. 
Kirill Ignatyev, first deputy chairman of Ostankino TV, won on 
  Russia's Choice list. 
Andrey Nuykin, reform economist, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Boris Saltykov, minister of science, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Vasiliy Selyunin, reform economist, won on Russia's Choice list, 
  but lost in Moscow city district No. 199 election. 
Anatoliy Shabad, reformer, won on Russia's Choice list, but lost 
  in Moscow Oblast district No. 113 election. 
Yevgeniy Sidorov, culture minister, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Anatoliy Sliva, deputy head of president's State-Legal 
Directorate, 
  won on PRES list but lost in Moscow city district No. 195 
  election. 
Sergey Stankevich, presidential councillor, won on PRES list. 
Gleb Yakunin, Democratic Russia co-leader, won on Russia's Choice 
  list, but lost in Ryazan.district No. 149 election. 
Ilya Zaslavskiy, Democratic Russia co-leader, won on Russia's 
  Choice list. 
Konstantin Zatulin, head of Entrepreneurs for a New Russia, won 
  on PRES list, but lost in Krasnodar district No. 45 election. 
Aleksandr Zaveryukha, deputy premier, won on Agrarian Party list 
  but lost in Orenburg district No. 131 election. 
   delete:  Vladimir Shcherbak, first deputy agriculture minister, 
  was No. 6 on Agrarian Party list but dropped off at some point 
  and was not in the list of winners. 
   Centrists: 
   Yevgeniy Ambartsumov, former Supreme Soviet international affairs 
  committee chairman, won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He earlier 
  appeared to have lost because he was too far down the party 
  list.) 
Vladimir Lukin, ambassador to United States, won in Moscow Oblast 
  district No. 111 election where he was listed as nonparty, not 
  as a candidate from Yavlinskiy's party list. 
Vladimir Lysenko, leader of Republican Party, won on Yavlinskiy 
  list but lost in Moscow city district No. 199. 
Vyacheslav Shostakovskiy, leader of Republican Party, won on 
  Yavlinskiy list. 
   Anti-Yeltsin: 
   Valentin Chikin, editor of Sovetskaya Rossiya, won on CPRF list 
  but lost in Moscow Oblast district No. 110. 
Nikolay Lysenko, chairman of National Republican Party, won in 
  Saratov district No. 158 as unaffiliated. 
Vitaliy Sevastyanov, cosmonaut, won on CPRF list but lost in 
  Krasnodar district No. 45. 
   Delete: Aleksey Ponomarev, former Belgorod Oblast CP first 
  secretary, elected to Federation Council, not State Duma. 
  (Another CP candidate named Aleksey Ponomarev was elected to 
  State Duma from Tambov.) 
   Losers: 
Pro-Yeltsin: 
   Mikhail Maley, head of commission of Security Council, lost in 
  Moscow city district No. 198 as PRES candidate and was too far 
  down the PRES list. 
Lev Ponomarev, Democratic Russia co-leader, lost in Moscow city 
  district No. 196 as Russia's Choice candidate and was too far 
  down Russia's Choice list. 
Yuriy Yarov, deputy premier, was too far down Russia's Choice 
    list. 
   Centrists: 
   delete: 
Yevgeniy Ambartsumov won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He earlier 
  appeared to have lost.) 
Vyacheslav Shostakovskiy won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He 
  earlier appeared to have lost.) 
   Federation Council 
   Party strength appears even weaker in the Federation Council than 
in the State Duma, in part because many candidates won election 
to the Federation Council on the basis of high local office, 
rather than as party adherents.  Of the 171 candidates elected to 
the Federation Council, only 27 were identified with parties. (No 
one was elected from Tatarstan, Chechnya, or Chelyabinsk and only 
one from Yamalo-Nenets, so 7 of the 178 seats were not filled. 
Although the list of winners in the 28 December Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta carried party identifications for Federation Council 
winners, the list of candidates in the 27 November Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta had not done so.)  The CPRF led with 12, while Russia's 
Choice had 6 (plus l Democratic Russia and 1 Peasant Party- 
-parties belonging to Russia's Choice), and one each for the 
Agrarian Party, RDDR, and PRES.  The LDP won none.  The real 
totals are higher since some winners were clearly linked to a 
party, for example: 
   Former Belgorod CP First Secretary Aleksey Ponomarev was elected 
  in Belgorod as nonparty. 
First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko, one of Russia's Choice's 
  leaders, was elected in Kaliningrad as nonparty. 
Kirov Head of Administration Vasiliy Desyatnikov, identified as 
  Russia's Choice by ITAR-TASS on 13 December, was listed as 
  nonparty in the list of winners. 
Former CPSU Secretary Yegor Stroyev was elected in Orel as 
  nonparty. 
August 1991 putsch leader Vasiliy Starodubtsev, head of the 
  Agrarian Union, was elected in Tula as nonparty. 
Yaroslavl's two winners, Anatoliy Lisitsyn and Yelena Mizulina, 
  were identified as Russia's Choice by the 14 December Izvestiya 
  but listed as nonparty in the list of winners. 
   Most Federation Council winners are leading local officials, 
making the Federation Council largely a body of the top local 
leaders.  Those elected include 81 top leaders of their oblasts 
or okrugs--42 heads of administrations, 6 presidents, 1 governor, 
4 presidential representatives, 18 chairmen of Supreme Soviets or 
oblast or okrug soviets, and 10 premiers.  Only 36 such officials 
lost. 
   A substantial number of former people's deputies were elected, 
but will make up only one-quarter of the new body.  The batting 
average of former people's deputies--44 won, 27 lost--was not 
extremely high, considering that many were also prominent local 
- officials. 
   Additions or Alterations to Winners and Losers in Federation 
Council* 
   Winners: 
   Anti-Yeltsin: 
   Aleksey Ponomarev, former CP obkom secretary, elected in Belgorod 
    as nonparty. 
   Losers: 
   Pre-Yeltsin: 
   Nikolay Medvedev, chief of directorate in president's 
    Administration, lost in Mordovia. 
Vyacheslav Volkov, deputy chief of president's Administration, 
    lost in Murmansk. 
   *Preliminary list of Federation Council winners and losers was 
given-in the Trends of 22 December 1993, pages 10-11. 
   Outlook 
   Party strength is likely to remain unclear until the party 
factions organize formally, and it will take even longer before 
the strength of pro-Yeltsin or pro-reform party alliances becomes 
clear.  The apparent lack of cohesion within the electoral blocs- 
-especially the reformers and centrists--may make for shifting 
alliances, particularly in the early days of the legislative 
session.  In addition, the large number of independent 
legislators gives them the deciding edge and their positions will 
probably vary issue by issue. 
Example:  (AUTHOR:  HAHN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH  cka  05/1905z  jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43180 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001294001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   6 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-05JAN94-RUSSIA 
<H3> <TI>     Few Government Officials Need To Switch to New Parliament </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                               Although many government officials were elected to the parliament 
in the 12 December election, few will have to choose between 
keeping their executive branch posts and taking up their 
parliamentary seats.  While State Duma members are not supposed 
to hold other jobs, a temporary exemption allows cabinet members 
to combine government posts with parliamentary seats.  Other 
officials avoided the conflict because they lost in their bids 
for election.  Since the election there has been a rash of 
personnel changes in the government, but these evidently reflect 
primarily President Boris Yeltsin's decision to punish some 
government officials for their handling of the election or for 
splitting the reformist vote. 
                           END SUMMARY 
   To prevent a massive post-election shakeup in the cabinet, the 
original ban on combining parliamentary seats and government 
posts was softened before the election and a supplement to the 
new Constitution provided that cabinet members can also be 
members of the first State Duma.  Although the draft 
Constitution, as published in the 10 November Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 
declared that State Dumadeputies "work on a professional full- 
time basis'1 and "cannot be in state service, hold other paid 
work, except teaching, scientific, and other creative work" 
(Article 97), transitional provisions added to the very end of 
the draft made a temporary exemption for cabinet members, 
declaring that members of this first State Duma "can 
simultaneously be a member of the Government" (cabinet).  There 
was no ban on Federation Council members holding other jobs, 
presumably because the Federation Council was intended to be a 
body that heads of ethnic republics and oblasts could join while 
retaining their local leadership posts. 
   With at least a dozen deputy premiers and ministers (see box) 
elected to the State Duma, there otherwise might have been 
massive changes as cabinet members had to choose between taking 
their parliamentary seats or staying in the cabinet.  Premier 
Viktor Chernomyrdin, First Deputy Premier Oleg Soskovets, and 
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev were among the few prominent 
cabinet members not to run.  First Deputy Premier Vladimir 
Shumeyko was elected to the Federation Council, but membership in 
this body does not preclude holding other central or local posts. 
Box 1 
                   Cabinet Members Who Ran for Parliament 
First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated (although he belongs to Russia's 
  Choice) from Kaliningrad. 
First Deputy Premier Yegor Gaydar--elected to State Duma on 
  party list of Russia's Choice. 
Deputy Premier Anatoliy Chubays--elected to State Duma on party 
  list of Russia's Choice. 
Deputy Premier Boris Fedorov--elected to State Duma as 
  unaffiliated from Moscow city.  (He was also on the party 
  list of Russia's Choice.) 
Deputy Premier Sergey Shakhray--elected to State Duma on party 
  list of Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES). 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Shokhin--elected to State Duma on 
  party list of PRES. 
Deputy Premier Yuriy Yarov--lost in bid for State Duma running 
  on Russia's Choice party list from Chuvash district. 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Zaveryukha--elected to State Duma on 
  Agrarian Party's party list.  (He lost to First Deputy 
  Agriculture Minister and fellow Agrarian Party candidate 
  Aleksey Chernyshev in an Orenburg district race.) 
Minister for Protection of Environment and Natural Resources 
  Viktor Danilov-Danilyan--elected to State Duma on Russia's 
  Choice party ticket.  (He was moved up on the ticket since he 
  had earlier been listed as No. 56 and from Nizhegorod, but in 
  the list of winners is listed No. 28 and from Moscow city.) 
Justice Minister Yuriy Kalmykov--elected to State Duma on PRES 
  party ticket. 
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated in the Ust-Orda Buryat district. 
Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev--elected to State Duma as a 
  Russia's Choice candidate from Murmansk. 
Labor Minister Gennadiy Melikyan--elected to State Duma on PRES 
  party ticket. 
Minister of Social Protection of the Public Ella Pamfilova 
  --elected to State Duma as unaffiliated in Kaluga district. 
  (She also ran as No. 3 on the Russia's Choice party list.) 
Science and Technical Policy Minister Boris Saltykov--elected to 
  State Duma on Russia's Choice ticket.  (He was moved up from 
  No.103, from Novosibirsk, in the list of candidates to No. 39 
  --next to the last available Russia's Choice seat--in the list 
  of winners.) 
Fuel and Power Minister Yuriy Shafranik--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated from Khanty-Mansi. 
Culture Minister Yevgeniy Sidorov--elected to the State Duma on 
  Russia's Choice list, identified as unaffiliated and a regional 
  candidate from Tula.  (He was moved up from No. 205 on the 
  list.) 
end box 
   The exemption for members of the cabinet apparently does not 
apply to deputy ministers, who unlike ministers, cannot combine 
jobs.  Thus, Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy Adamishin, who won 
a seat as No. 12 on the Yavlinskiy Bloc national ticket, 
reportedly decided to decline his seat (Interfax, 29 December), 
although he later was said to be reconsidering after he came 
under discussion as a candidate for speaker of the State Duma 
(Interfax, 30 December).  Others who apparently will have to 
choose include First Deputy Agriculture Minister Aleksey 
Chernyshev, who won in an Orenburg district on the Agrarian Party 
ticket running against his boss, Deputy Premier for agriculture 
Aleksandr Zaveryukha; Deputy Economics Minister Aleksandr 
Pochinok, who ran in a Chelyabinsk district as a Russia's Choice 
candidate and won; and Deputy Justice Minister Mikhail Mityukov, 
who won as a Russia's Choice candidate in Krasnoyarsk.  Two other 
deputy ministers who were running will not face this choice. 
First Deputy Agriculture Minister Vladimir Shcherbak ran as No. 6 
on the Agrarian Party ticket but must have dropped out at some 
point, since he is not included in the list of winners; and 
Deputy Economics Minister Valentin Fedorov ran in a Sakhalin 
district as unaffiliated and lost.  In addition, Ambassador to 
the United States Vladimir Lukin, who won a seat in a Moscow 
Oblast district running as unaffiliated (although he also ran as 
No. 2 on the Yavlinskiy Bloc national ticket), apparently will 
quit his post (Izvestiya, 30 December). 
   Other Officials 
   Non-cabinet officials will clearly have to choose between their 
posts and State Duma seats, but there appear to be few in this 
situation and most organs of government are largely unaffected. 
   President's Administration.  Although a 21 December Segodnya 
article asserted that many leading Administration officials won 
and will fill seats in parliament, in fact no top officials of 
the president's Administration will leave for this reason. 
Administration Leader Sergey Filatov, who ran for the State Duma 
as No. 8 on the Russia's Choice national ticket, was awarded a 
seat but quickly declined, saying he prefers to stay in his post 
(ITAR-TASS, 22 December).  The other Administration leaders ran 
for the Federation Council so they would not have been required 
to choose, but they all lost:  Administration First Deputy Leader 
Krasavchenko, affiliated with the Russian Movement for Democratic 
Reforms, ran from Moscow city; Administration Deputy Leader 
Vyacheslav Volkov ran from Murmansk; and Nikolay Medvedev, head 
of the Administration's Directorate for Work With Territories and 
Presidential Representatives, ran from Mordovia. 
   Security Council.  Security Council Secretary Oleg Lobov did not 
run for parliament.  The only Security Council official to run 
was Mikhail Maley, head of the council's new Interdepartmental 
Commission on Scientific and Technical Ouestions of the Defense 
Industry, who ran on the 'PRES national list in a Moscow city 
district and lost. 
   Federal Information Center.  FIC Chairman Mikhail Poltoranin and 
Deputy Chairman Sergey Yushenkov both ran for the State Duma and 
won.  Poltoranin on 21 December announced they would take up 
their seats and give up their posts (Radio Mayak, 21 December). 
They are not really giving up any post, however, since almost 
simultaneously First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko announced 
that the center was being abolished in a reorganization of media 
bodies (ITAR-TASS, 22 December). 
   State-Legal Directorate (GPU).  The GPU will suffer as a result 
of the election, but only indirectly, because of its leaders' 
ties to Sergey Shakhray's PRES, which ran in competition to 
Gaydar's Russia's Choice, thereby splitting the pro-Yeltsin vote. 
Directorate Chief Aleksandr Kotenkov did not run for parliament 
but lost his post anyway as Yeltsin removed him on 16 December 
(Russian TV, Ostankino TV).  Kotenkov, long close to Shakhray 
(Kotenkov served as Shakhray's deputy while Shakhray was GPU 
chief from late 1991 to mid-1992 and succeeded him as chief (see 
the Trends of 10 June 1992, pages 5-10).  He later also succeeded 
Shakhray as head of the administration for North Ossetia (ITAR- 
TASS, 17 December 1992), publicly claimed to ITAR-TASS (16 
December) that Yeltsin was acting to punish him for helping 
organize Shakhray's party.  After Shakhray set up his party, 
Kotenkov was elected one of its leaders at the party's 17 October 
congress (Interfax, 18 October).  Although he did not run for 
parliament, he led PRES's election campaign (Segodnya, 17 
December).  After being removed, Kotenkov quickly got a new post 
as deputy chairman of the State Committee for Federation and 
Nationality Affairs (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), a committee headed 
by Shakhray.  Kotenkov has been replaced as GPU head by GPU 
deputy head Ruslan Orekhov (ITAR-TASS, 18 December), who has been 
less involved in party politics (Kommersant-Daily, 21 December). 
Orekhov had previously seryed as GPU acting head for several 
months while Kotenkov was trying to bring peace in the north 
Caucasus as head of the administration for North Ossetia. 
   Another GPU leader who may leave his post because of the election 
is Deputy Chief of the GPU Anatoliy Sliva, who won a seat as No. 
8 on the PRES ticket. 
   Presidential Councillors.  Members of Yeltsin's Presidential 
Council are part-time advisers and presumably not affected by the 
limitation, but "councillors" (sovetniki) to the president hold 
full-time jobs and presumably cannot serve simultaneously in the 
State Duma.  Presidential councillors Yekaterina Lakhova (elected 
on the Women of Russia party ticket) and Dmitriy Volkogonov 
(elected on Russia's Choice party ticket) will have to choose and 
presumably will quit as councillors to become deputies, 
especially since the post of councillor seems to be in the 
process of being abolished (see below).  Another councillor- 
-Sergey Stankevich--ran on the PRES party ticket and was awarded 
a seat.  But he lost his councillor's post right after the 
election, even before it was clear whether he had won or lost his 
bid for a seat.  Stankevich said he was resigning, assuming some 
of the blame for the election results (Russian TV, 15 December; 
Ostankino TV, 17 December; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 18 December), 
while some reports said Yeltsin removed him and attributed this 
decision to Stankevich's prominent role in Shakhray's party, 
which competed with Gaydar's Russia's Choice for pro-Yeltsin 
voters (Russian TV, 16 December; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 18 
December).  Stankevich had long appeared to have little influence 
on Yeltsin and his departure will have little effect (Segodnya, 
17 December).  Three other presidential councillors--Aleksandr 
Granberg, Valeriy Burkov, and Eduard Dneprov--were dropped right 
after the election (Russian TV, Ostankino TV, 16 December; ITAR- 
TASS, 17 December), but they had not run for parliament. 
   The probable departure of Volkogonov and Lakhova to take up 
parliamentary seats and the removal of Stankevich and the other 
three councillors virtually eliminates the position of councillor 
to the president--a status which has been declining ever since 
the departure of State Secretary Gennadiy Burbulis (apparently 
the originator of the councillor posts and once supervisor of the 
councillors) in December 1992 and Sergey Filatov's early 1993 
reorganization of Yeltsin's staff.  Aleksey Yablokov, recently 
named head of a Security Council commission, was dropped as a 
councillor by Yeltsin on 30 December (Interfax), leaving only two 
councillors--Yuliy Vorontsov, appointed councillor for questions 
of foreign policy on 8 August 1992 (Vedomosti Syezda Narodnykh 
Deputatov Rossiyskoy Federatsii i Verkhovnogo Soveta Rossiyskoy 
Federatsii, 20 August 1992, page 2529) and sometimes mentioned as 
new ambassador to the United States (Moscow News, 24 September 
1993), and Shamil Tarpishchev, appointed councillor for questions 
of state policy for physical education and sport in September 
1992 (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 26 September 1992). 
   Ostankino TV.  Ostankino television was considerably affected by 
the election outcome, with Chairman Vyacheslav Bragin removed 
immediately after the election (0stankino TV, 17 December). 
Bragin had initially been a Russia's Choice candidate for the 
State Duma but withdrew after being criticized for remaining the 
head of television while running for parliament (Ostankino TV, 18 
November).  Nezavisimaya Gazeta on 19 November claimed that 
Bragin had issued instructions for Ostankino to ignore Shakhray's 
party.  He might have been better off staying in the election and 
giving up his television post since right after the election 
Yeltsin removed him as 0stankino chairman, apparently in 
dissatisfaction with television's handling of the election 
campaign (ITAR-TASS, 16 December).  Bragin's successor as 
Ostankino chairman, Aleksandr Yakovlev (Russian TV, 22 December), 
lost his bid for a State Duma seat on the Russian Movement for 
Democratic Reforms ticket and so faces no conflict of positions. 
   Implications 
   Few personnel changes were forced by the election and those that 
have taken place so far form no single pattern.  Kotenkov and 
Stankevich appear to have been removed at least in part because 
they lined up with Shakhray, thus helping split Yeltsin's team 
and contributing to the reformers' election setback, but Shakhray 
and his ally Shokhin themselves have not been removed as deputy 
premiers, at least not yet.  Bragin was apparently removed 
because of dissatisfaction with television's handling of the 
election, and Poltoranin and Yushenkov left their posts because 
the Federal Information Center was being abolished anyway.  More 
changes will surely come, partly because of maneuverings between 
Yeltsin's lieutenants and struggle over power and policy within 
the cabinet and his presidential team.  The organizing sessions 
of the new parliament also may yield changes as that body elects 
its officials.  If, for example, Shumeyko is elected chairman of 
the Federation Council he would presumably give up his cabinet 
post. 
Example:  (AUTHOR:  HAHN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR C0MMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH cka 05/2120z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43181 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001394001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   6 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-05JAN94-RUSSIA-NATO 
<H3> <TI>      Moscow Blasts NATO Expansion on Eve of Alliance Summit </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                               On the eve of the 10-11 January NATO summit, Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin has strongly reaffirmed his opposition to the 
possible expansion of NATO membership, warning of the possible 
negative consequences of such expansion.  Yeltsin's statement 
comes as the culmination of a campaign by other Russian officials 
to forestall any expansion of NATO that excludes Russia.  This 
campaign has taken pains to counter Baltic and East European 
efforts to press for their countries' early admission to NATO 
based on the strong showing of ultranationalist Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy's Liberal Democratic Party in the 12 December 
Russian legislative elections, with some arguing that Russia will 
have to respond to any appearance of the continuation of Cold-War 
era "bloc politics." 
                           END SUMMARY 
   In a final push to forestall moves at the upcoming NATO summit 
toward an early expansion of NATO membership, Yeltsin press 
secretary Vyacheslav Kostikov issued an "authorized" statement on 
5 January warning of the possible negative consequences of such 
steps and calling on NATO leaders to "dispel" the "impression of 
ambiguity" in their position on the issue.  While the statement 
began with a terse disclaimer expressing "respect" for the 
"acknowledged right of independent states" to "join international 
organizations," it went on to castigate specifically Lithuania's 
"official request to join NATO" and more generally the "haste" of 
"some countries" to join a "military-political alliance." 
Arguing against a "bloc mentality" in an era when the "world's 
major powers" are working toward "dismantling the inheritance of 
the 'Cold War'" and when the military doctrine of the new 
democratic Russia "excludes any kind of aggressive displays," the 
statement criticized the "motives and arguments" of those wishing 
to join NATO as "unconvincing."  It went on to warn that Yeltsin 
is "worried" that NATO expansion will "provoke a negative 
reaction" within Russia, "promote . . . undesirable attitudes" 
among both civilians and the military, and "ultimately could lead 
to military-political destabilization" (ITAR-TASS, 5 January). 
   Other Russian Critics 
   Yeltsin's strong statement follows a spate of recent comments by 
other Russian officials critical of the Baltic and East European 
states for using Zhirinovskiy's election success to argue for 
their quick admission to NATO.  Some of the officials, like 
Yeltsin, have highlighted the potential negative consequences of 
an early expansion of NATO membership to Baltic or East European 
states: 
   --In an interview with the Prague daily Lidove Noviny published 
on 15 December, Yeltsin's foreign policy adviser, Dmitriy 
Ryurikov, claimed that creation of "new lines dividing Europe"--a 
reference to East Europeans joining NATO--would be "insulting to 
Russia" which now has "no political, philosophical, or 
ideological differences" with East Europe or the West.  He also 
noted that Russia "has to react" to any movement by "such a huge 
military bloc toward our border." 
   --An article in the 18 December Izvestiya reported that Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev is "assuming" that the Baltic and East 
European countries will "cite Zhirinovskiy's success" in the 
recent elections to "demand" both the "immediate withdrawal of 
Russian troops" and "rapid acceptance into NATO."  The report 
cited Kozyrev as saying that he "will not allow" foreign 
countries to "exploit the Zhirinovskiy factor" in this way and as 
recommending that the Baltics strive to "deprive Zhirinovskiy of 
his social base" by cooperating with Moscow to "improve the 
position of the Russian-speaking population." 
   --In an interview published in the 23 December Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta, Kozyrev similarly charged that certain "circles," 
including "those European countries which for some reason want to 
join NATO," are "making capital" out of Zhirinovskiy's recent 
electoral success "even though they themselves cannot explain 
what they will get out of" NATO membership.  He promised that 
"Zhirinovskiy's success will not produce any changes" in Russian 
foreign policy. 
   --Defense Minister Pavel Grachev seemed to take a more 
conciliatory tack in a 29 December press conference, reportedly 
saying that Russia would withdraw its troops from Estonia and 
Latvia in 1994 in order to "avoid the Baltics appealing for early 
NATO membership" to counter an alleged  "military threat" from 
Russia.  Grachev claimed not to understand the efforts of East 
European and Baltic countries to "find protection" from a 
"mythical threat from Russia" by joining NATO (Tallinn BNS, 29 
December 1993). 
   --Appearing on an Ostankino television program analyzing the 
election results broadcast on 18 December, First Deputy Foreign 
Minister Anatoliy Adamishin noted that the East European states 
and NATO need to "take other interests into account, including 
Russia's interests" because positioning a "military-political 
bloc" right up against "the borders of Russia" could "bring about 
an undesired reaction."  Adamishin also stressed this theme in an 
interview published in the Italian daily L'Espresso on 26 
December, arguing that if the West "continues [its] policy of 
encirclement," it will "risk having to reckon with a 
Zhirinovskiy." 
   Moscow's Previous Opposition 
   Moscow's strong opposition to any eastward expansion of NATO 
predates the Russian elections.  Yeltsin signaled that such a 
development could be politically explosive after a joint Russian- 
Polish declaration signed by him and Polish President Lech Walesa 
in August, which recognized Poland's right to join the alliance, 
sparked a controversy within Russia over the issue.  A letter 
that Yeltsin sent to Western leaders in September laid out 
Moscow's position and reportedly stressed the domestic 
ramifications of such a move.  According to a text of the letter 
published by the Prague daily Mlada Fronta Dnes (2 December), 
Yeltsin noted that, although Moscow recognized that incorporation 
of East Europe into NATO would not "automatically lead to the 
alliance turning against Russia," the Russian public--"not only 
the opposition, but also moderate circles "--would "undoubtedly 
view this as a new kind of isolation" that "diametrically 
contradicts [Russia's] logical involvement in the Euro-Atlantic 
region."  During a 9 December meeting in Brussels with NATO 
Secretary-General Manfred Woerner, Yeltsin reiterated that Moscow 
"would not like" moves to extend NATO membership to East Europe 
(ITAR-TASS, AFP, 9 December 1993). 
   Throughout the fall, other Russian officials kept up a steady 
drumbeat of public criticism of NATO expansion, giving it high 
visibility as a foreign policy issue to both foreign and domestic 
audiences: 
   --Kozyrev, addressing the U.S. Foreign Policy Association in New 
York, stressed that world stability should not be sought by 
expanding NATO but by transforming the bloc and adapting it to 
peacekeeping efforts (ITAR-TASS, 30 September 1993  Campaigning 
later for election to a single-seat constituency in the military 
stronghold of Murmansk, Kozyrev assured the Commander in Chief of 
the Northern Fleet Oleg Yerofeyev, who noted that NATO members 
were actively operating in the region, that NATO will not 
increase its membership (ITAR-TASS, 27 November 1993  After the 3 
December meeting of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council 
(NACC), Kozyrev claimed that the question of extending NATO 
membership in the near-term had been taken off the agenda of the 
upcoming NATO summit, characterizing the decision as one of the 
most consequential outcomes of the session (ITAR-TASS, 4 December 
1993). 
   --Answering journalists' questions about Moscow's views on the 
possibility of the Baltic states joining NATO, Grachev stressed 
that "Russia does not approve of any expansion of NATO to other 
states, including the Baltics."  Noting that Russia had no right 
to interfere in the affairs of a sovereign state and that it was 
up to the Baltics "to decide what they want to join and why," 
Grachev nevertheless warned that, if they join NATO, Russia "will 
then take the necessary defensive steps" (ITAR-TASS, 22 November 
1993). 
   --Adamishin gave repeated warnings about expanding NATO to the 
foreign press, cautioning a Madrid newspaper, for example, that 
if the East Europeans joined NATO and Russia was left out to 
"feel again like a besieged fortress, isolated behind a cordon 
sanitaire," there could be "considerable consequences in Russian 
domestic politics" (El Pais, 23 October 1993). 
   The Primakov Report 
   The fanfare with which Foreign Intelligence Service (FIS) 
director Yevgeniy Primakov used a 25 November press conference to 
unveil the FIS report, "Prospects for the Expansion of NATO and 
Russia's Interests," which set forth a comprehensive assessment 
of the negative impact of NATO expansion, suggests the depth of 
Moscow's desire to forestall such expansion.  Although Primakov 
acknowledged that "NATO today is not the NATO of the Cold War," 
he stressed that Russia "is far from indifferent to a bloc that 
is expanding its area of responsibility to our borders" and is 
being called upon to become the "sole guarantor of peace and 
stability" for former Warsaw Treaty members.  Drawing from the 
13-page unclassified report, Primakov argued that the real risk 
to Russia from an expansion of NATO lay in the fact that NATO is 
only "slowly" transforming itself from a "political-military 
alliance designed to counter external threats" into a mainly 
political instrument appropriate to the new tasks of the post 
confrontational period."   Contending that the alliance currently 
"is geared toward strategic planning of the worst sort," Primakov 
added that to change its "persistent stereotypical [bloc] 
mentality" will "clearly take a long time" (Radio Rossii, Moscow 
radio, 25 November 1993). 
   Although Primakov dismissed as "speculative" allegations that the 
military's influence over political decisions had recently 
increased in Russia, he implicitly cautioned the West against 
putting Russia in a position where its current relative military 
weakness becomes a domestic issue.  He highlighted a conclusion 
contained in the FIS report that the Russian Government's 
inability to take retaliatory steps if NATO was extended could 
"generate discontent" among those "responsible" for Russia's 
security (Interfax, 25 November 1993).  According to the text of 
the report, such retaliatory measures would be imperative from a 
military standpoint and would include fundamental changes in 
Russian force structure and posture to offset the "immense 
offensive potential" of a NATO expansion to Russian borders.  The 
report concluded, however, that such offsetting measures would 
"undoubtedly" result in "an excessive strain on the state budget 
and ultimately a weakening of Russia's defense capabilities." 
The report warned further that, under such circumstances, target 
deadlines for military reform and modernization might not be met, 
resulting in a "qualitative reduction" of Russia's military 
potential in comparison with the "leading military powers" 
(Perspektivy Rashireniya NATO i Interesy Rossii, 1993).  While 
some newspaper articles suggested that the Foreign Ministry had 
some unspecified disagreements with the FIS over the question of 
NATO expansion (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 26 November 1993; 
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 30 November 1993), Primakov conceded in 
general that "some differences between departments always exist" 
but downplayed any disagreements with the Foreign Ministry 
(Interfax, 25 November 1993). 
   Searching for Partnership and Equality 
   Moscow has signaled its own interest in closer ties to NATO and 
has appeared generally receptive to the Partnership for Peace 
proposal.  However, it has evinced concern that Russia be 
accepted as an equal by the Western powers. 
   --In his September letter, Yeltsin reportedly suggested that "the 
relations between [Russia] and NATO should be several degrees 
warmer than relations between the alliance and East Europe," 
adding that "direct cooperation" between Russia and NATO in 
"advancing peace" could "progress at a much quicker pace" (Mlada 
Fronta Dnes, 2 December 1993).  Summing up the thrust of Yeltsin 
and Grachev's December meeting with Secretary General Woerner, 
Kozyrev described Moscow's attitude toward NATO as seeking "not 
membership, but partnership," and he noted that cooperation 
should be as "broad and specific as possible" (ITAR-TASS, 10 
December 1993). 
   --Although he later claimed it was essentially a Russian idea 
(ITAR-TASS, 4 December 1993), Kozyrev also expressed reservations 
about the Partnership for Peace plan at the NACC session.  Noting 
that it was "a complicated issue" and that "we all have to find 
the appropriate answers," he stressed that "no one has a magic 
solution," and that the scheme must be studied carefully (AFP, 3 
December 1993). 
   --In a 11 November interview with the newspaper Segodnya, Russian 
Ambassador to Belgium and representative to NATO Nikolay 
Afanasyevskiy said Russia needed to clearly define the content 
and political objectives of the partnership and make sure that it 
is not a "preparatory class from which 'A' students will be 
admitted to NATO" but a "genuinely mutual rapprochement" allowing 
"equal cooperation in critical situations." 
   --Prior to Yeltsin's Belgian visit, the Defense Ministry 
newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda cited Russian defense and foreign 
ministry officials as saying any security system which included 
Russia as an 'equal partner" would be "acceptable" (9 December 
1993). 
   Outlook 
   Russia will persist in opposing any expansion of NATO that 
excludes it or appears not to treat it as an equal partner. 
Yeltsin and his team are likely to continue to argue both that 
their democratic credentials make Baltic and East European fears 
unrealistic and that any NATO expansion will only play into the 
hands of Russian ultranationalists like Zhirinovskiy. 
Nevertheless, the presence of a substantial nationalistic faction 
within the new Russian legislature will undoubtedly complicate 
Yeltsin's efforts to assuage the fears of Russia's neighbors who 
are seeking shelter under the NATO umbrella. 
   Box 
                   Zhirinovskiy' s Views 
   Zhirinovskiy has made contradictory statements about NATO: 
   --Commenting on his party's foreign policy priorities immediately 
following the elections, he announced "we are not against NATO 
being joined by East European or other countries" (Interfax, 14 
December 1993). 
   --At a press conference on 21 December, however, Zhirinovskiy 
demanded the breakup of NATO (Asahi Shimbun, 22 December 1993). 
   --In Vienna Zhirinovskiy expressed both views.  He told an 
Austrian television reporter that "we have dissolved the Warsaw 
Pact" and therefore "NATO must also be dissolved,"  but told a 
radio reporter that "if Poland or Hungary would like to be 
included in NATO, okay," it would be "no problem for Russia" (ORF 
TV, 21 December 1993; Osterreich Eins radio, 22 December 1993). 
   End Box 
   Example:  (AUTHOR:  BELLINGER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE 
CALL CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/GSP 06/0037z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43182 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001494001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   6 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-05JAN94-RUSSIA 
<H3> <TI>      Federal Assembly Rules Mark Departure From Supreme Soviet </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                               In an effort to create a new legislature whose governing rules 
work to President Boris Yeltsin's advantage, the Commission on 
Legislative Proposals has been preparing draft rules of procedure 
for the Federation Council and the State Duma.  One of the goals 
of the rules for the Duma is to continue moving Russia toward a 
multiparty system by strengthening the role of party factions and 
improving party accountability.  In addition, the rules enhance 
the role of legislative committees and seek to prevent the 
emergence of a rival political figure like former Supreme Soviet 
Chairman Ruslan .Khasbulatov by having a separate chairman with 
limited functions for each chamber.  It is possible, however, 
that the rules may work to the advantage of the factions that are 
already more cohesive--particularly the Communist and Agrarian 
Parties--rather than helping the more fractious reformers. 
                           END SUMMARY 
   Mikhail Mityukov, the Russia's Choice member heading the 
Commission for Legislative Proposals established by presidential 
edict on 26 September (ITAR-TASS), summed up the draft rules for 
the State Duma with the formula: "a weak chairman and . 
politically strong factions and professionally strong 
parliamentary committees" (Izvestiya, 24 December 1993).  While 
the draft rules for the Federation Council have already been 
finalized, the rules for the Duma--the body most directly 
responsible for drafting and adopting legislation--have 
reportedly engendered more friction in discussions among legal 
specialists, presidential administration and government 
officials, and party representatives (ITAR-TASS, 15 December 
1993).  Recognizing that the separate chambers will have to 
approve the commission's drafts, Mityukov said that he expects 
"fierce debates" because the rules are in effect a "small 
constitution" governing the legislature (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 18 
December 1993).  He even predicted that the deputies will "do all 
they can to overturn" many of the rules' provisions in an attempt 
to "cast off their future fetters" (Izvestiya, 24 December 1993). 
   Strengthening Factions 
   In contrast to the rules for the old Supreme Soviet, which made 
no mention of factions (Vedomosti Syezda Narodnykh Deputatov 
RSFSR i Verkhovnogo Soveta RSFSR, No. 26, 29 November 1990), the 
rules for the Duma prescribe an important role for them. 
Factions are to have "precedence" in nominating candidates for 
leadership positions, potentially giving factions strong 
representation in committees and among the top three leadership 
positions.  Through their representative on the Chamber 
Conference--an executive body with functions similar to those of 
the old Supreme Soviet Presidium (see note 1)--factions will have 
a role in shaping the Duma's agenda (Segodnya, 17 December 1993; 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 18 December 1993).  Factions are also to have 
priority in introducing amendments to texts of laws and are 
supposed to reach an agreed position on every issue before it 
comes up for floor debate (Interfax, 15 November 1993), 
potentially streamlining the amendment process that frequently 
bogged down legislation in the Supreme Soviet. 
   (Note 1)  The Duma's Chamber Conference is to be composed of the 
chairman, his two deputies, all committee chairmen, and the 
leaders of the factions, though the latter are only to have a 
"consultative vote."  Its functions include approving the agenda- 
-with substantial input from the executive branch, according to 
Mityukov (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 16 November 1993)--convening 
extraordinary sessions of the Duma at the request of the 
president, government, or individual faction, and directing draft 
laws to the appropriate committees (Russian TV, 16 December 1993; 
Izvestiya, 24 December 1993). 
   In addition, the rules uphold the notion of party accountability, 
thus continuing the shift toward a strong multiparty system begun 
with the proportional election of half the Duma deputies from 
party lists.  According to media accounts of the rules, a deputy 
elected from a party list must belong to the faction representing 
that party and will be "committed to the faction's political 
program and its decisions" (Segodnya, 17 December 1993).  In an 
apparent effort to prevent deputies from changing their factional 
allegiance, the draft rules reportedly give parties the right to 
recall a party list deputy and replace him with another candidate 
from the party's list, although these procedures may be 
established in a separate, as yet incomplete, draft law on the 
status of deputies (Segodnya, 7 December 1993; Izvestiya, 24 
December 1993; Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 28 December 1993).  The 225 
deputies elected from territorial districts will apparently not 
be subject to such party discipline and evidently can be recalled 
only by a vote or petition from their local constituency 
(Segodnya, 7 December 1993). 
   Indicating support from reformers for efforts to obligate 
deputies to uphold their faction's position--and possibly to 
impose discipline on disunited reformers--the pro-government 
Russia's Choice faction is reportedly considering its own 
proposals on voting by party faction that go even further than 
the Commission's draft, though it is unclear whether these 
proposals would apply to all deputies or only to those in 
Russia's Choice.  The faction has reportedly set up its own 
commission to work out rules of conduct for factions (Kommersant- 
Daily, 25 December 1993) but, characteristically, is divided over 
two competing drafts.  The more stringent one advocated by Boris 
Zolotukhin--who was a deputy chairman of the Commission for 
Legislative Proposals until his recent resignation (Nezavisimaya 
Gazeta, 29 December 1993)--prescribes "unanimous voting by the 
entire faction."  The alternative draft championed by bloc member 
Vladimir Bokser would allow deputies to vote independently "on 
routine matters" but would require a factional "solidarity vote" 
on "especially important issues," though it is not clear how 
"routine" and "important" issues would be defined.  According to 
Kirill Ignatyev, a member of the Russia's Choice commission, 
Zolotukhin's more restrictive document is the "main one" 
(Kommersant-Daily, 25 December 1993). 
   Mixed Views of Rules on Factions 
   Reformers and traditionalists alike have praised the emphasis on 
factions as a way of imposing discipline on the deputies: 
   --  Sergey Filatov, head of the Presidential Administration, has 
said that the rules on factions will make factions more 
"meaningful" and claimed that factional discipline will bring 
about "predictability . . . so that we know exactly what to 
expect when parliament convenes" (Russian TV, 23 December 1993). 
   --  Aleksey Surkov, secretary of the Presidential 
Administration's Control and Oversight Council, has said that as 
a result of factional discipline, a "larger number of deputies 
will uphold not local but all-Russia interests" (Rossiyskiye 
Vesti, 10 December 1993). 
   --  Viktor Zorkaltsev, deputy chairman of the Communist Party 
Central Executive Committee, has said that the rules "contain 
plenty of sensible, correct elements," though it is not clear 
whether he was referring specifically to the rules on factions. 
He indicated, however, that, whatever the rules, the Communist 
faction will "submit to party discipline and will be strictly 
controlled by the leadership" (Izvestiya, 18 December 1993). 
   Other specialists have evinced concern that the Duma's rules will 
undermine the independence of deputies, an issue that could be of 
special concern to unaffiliated deputies elected from single-seat 
constituencies.  Experienced legislator Viktor Sheynis, a 
reformist elected to the Duma from the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin 
bloc who is also a deputy chairman of the Commission for 
Legislative Proposals, has said that the rules' emphasis on 
factions undermines the "rights of deputies" not in factions 
(Segodnya, 17 December 1993).  He has stated that a deputy should 
be "entitled" to switch factional allegiance, but he also 
concedes the need for factions to be able to expel deputies, 
though he argues that "this should not be done lightly" 
(Rossiyskiye Vesti, 4 January).  Vladimir Tumanov, a specialist 
at the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of State and Law, 
has expressed stronger objections to the proposed rule allowing 
parties to expel faction members, saying this procedure violates 
''one of the basic principles of parliamentarianism--the deputy's 
independence" (Izvestiya, 20 October 1993).  As if recognizing 
the advantages of factional membership, even the "independent" 
deputies elected from single-seat constituencies have formed 
their own faction (Interfax, 26 December 1993), though it is 
questionable how unified this group will be. 
   Limited Role for Chambers' Chairmen 
   One of the most obvious aims of the new rules for the Duma and 
the Federation Council is to prevent the emergence of a strong 
legislative rival to Yeltsin.   Each chamber is to have its own 
chairman, and the two chambers have distinct functions that make 
them largely "autonomous" (Izvestiya, 24 December 1993).  While 
the old Supreme Soviet was formally divided into the Council of 
the Republic and the Council of Nationalities, the two chambers 
met jointly once a week and had essentially the same functions. 
In an apparent effort by Yeltsin to keep the new assembly's 
chambers divided, the Duma and the Federation Council are to 
convene in different locations, as stipulated by Yeltsin's 
controversial edict transferring the White House, location of the 
former Supreme Soviet, to the Government and ordering the 
Federation Council to meet in the Russian Press House and the 
Duma to meet in the Moscow City Hall building (ITAR-TASS, 2 
December 1993).  Although the eight party factions, including 
Russia's Choice, have appealed this edict, First Deputy Premier 
Vladimir Shumeyko indicated that Yeltsin does not intend to 
reverse it, and on 3 January the Government began moving into its 
new premises (RIA, 29 December 1993; ITAR-TASS, 3 January). 
   The rules for the Federation Council and the Duma establish 
checks on any possible regional or political biases of the 
chairman.  The chairman of the Federation Council must be 
nominated by at least 15 members of the chamber, and he is to be 
elected for only one year, thus reducing the possibility of the 
chairman creating his own cabal.  To limit the chances that the 
leadership of the Federation Council, which is composed of two 
representatives from each of the Russian Federation components, 
will represent parochial interests too strongly, the rules 
stipulate that the chairman cannot be from the same region as any 
of his deputies.  Finally, the three deputy chairman positions 
are to be filled by one deputy to represent the ethnic republics, 
one for the krays and oblasts, and one for the autonomous 
entities, including Moscow and St. Petersburg (Segodnya, 7 
December 1993).  In the Duma, the chairman and his two deputies 
must belong to different factions (Izvestiya, 24 December 1993); 
it is not clear whether there will be a term limit on the Duma 
chairman. 
   Additional restrictions on the Federation Council and the Duma 
chairmen indicate the administration's efforts to limit their 
influence over the proceedings and the deputies personally--areas 
where Khasbulatov wielded especially effective control.  The 
finalized rules for the Federation Council stipulate that the 
chairman is not to have any special role in determining the 
agenda except on two issues:  elections to fill a vacant deputy 
chairman position and to fill vacancies on the chamber's 
committees (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 28 December 1993).  Moreover, 
while the old rules gave the Supreme Soviet chairman--and all 
members of the Presidium--the right to take the floor at any time 
during debates (Vedomosti Syezda Narodnykh Deputatov RSFSR i 
Verkhovnogo Soveta RSFSR, No. 26, 29 November 1990), the new 
rules apparently remove this advantage.  According to Mityukov, 
the Duma chairman's role "will be reduced only to the chairing of 
sessions" (ITAR-TASS, 15 December 1993).  To prevent what 
Izvestiya called Khasbulatov's "manipulation of the deputies" (24 
December 1993), a special Committee for the Internal Organization 
of the State Duma (the Federation Council is to have a parallel 
committee), rather than the speaker, will be responsible for 
choosing which deputies go abroad on parliamentary delegations 
and for allocating material perks (Radio Rossii, 16 November 
1993; Izvestiya, 24 December 1993).  Despite these apparent 
restrictions, the factions represented in the Duma have been 
jockeying intensely to fill the speaker position with one of 
their own members or a member of a sympathetic faction (see box). 
   Increased Role for Committees 
   The rules aim to streamline the legislative committees and ensure 
that their composition is politically balanced.  In contrast to 
the old Supreme Soviet, which had 19 joint committees of the 
Council of the Republic and the Council of Nationalities and an 
additional nine separate commissions (Vladimir Pribylovskiy, 
Politicheskiye Fraktsii i Deputatskiye Gruppy. Moscow, Panorama, 
May 1992), the Federation Council is to have only eight 
committees, and though the number of committees for the Duma is 
to be somewhat flexible, Mityukov has said that he wants no more 
than 14 committees with "no less" than 25 deputies in each (ITAR- 
TASS, 1 December 1993; Izvestiya, 24 December 1993).  Moreover, 
the chairman and deputy chairman of a committee must belong to 
different factions, or, in the Federation Council, come from 
different regions (ITAR-TASS, 1 December 1993; Segodnya, 7 
December 1993).  In keeping with Yeltsin's efforts to keep the 
two chambers separate, there will be no joint committees except 
in specific cases where joint "conciliatory commissions" are 
needed to resolve differences over legislation (ITAR-TASS, 1 
December 1993).  Temporary commissions may apparently also be 
established for special purposes, and the Communist Party has 
already called for establishing parliamentary commissions to 
investigate the October 3-4 violence as well as the December 1991 
Belovezhskaya Pushcha agreement on the formation of the CIS 
(Sovetskaya Rossiya, 28 December 1993). 
   Comments by Mityukov and Filatov indicate that they are 
attempting to elevate the status of committees by shifting the 
bulk of legislative work to them.  Although the Supreme Soviet 
rules were amended to enhance committee functions (Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta, 25 July 1992), the new rules apparently make committees 
responsible not only for drafting legislation but also for 
holding preliminary debate on bills (Izvestiya, 24 December 
1993), making it likely that bills will stay in committee longer. 
By shifting the focus of legislative work to the committees, 
Mityukov expects to avoid turning "parliamentary sessions into an 
endless discussion of numerous amendments," as happened in the 
Supreme Soviet (ITAR-TASS, 16 December 1993).  In view of this 
heightened role for committees, Filatov has predicted that 
factions will fight for representation on committees more than 
for the Duma chairman's post "because these are the key posts at 
present" (Russian TV, 23 December 1993), although so far the 
faction negotiations for nominating a chairman have been very 
contentious. 
   Beyond the Rules 
   Besides trying to make the new Federal Assembly more manageable 
than the old Supreme Soviet, the Yeltsin Administration may also 
be attempting to gain permanent influence over the Assembly 
through the structure of its apparatus.  In early October Yeltsin 
appointed Vladimir Podoprigora--a reformist deputy from the old 
Supreme Soviet who was originally a candidate to the Duma on the 
Russia's Choice list but was elected to the Federation Council 
from the Udmurt Republic (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 12 November 1993, 
28 December 1993)--as chief of staff for the Federal Assembly 
(ITAR-TASS, 8 October 1993).  In this capacity, Podoprigora 
oversees an array of functions, including registering 
parliamentary documents, maintaining the electronic voting 
systems, running a parliamentary library, a printing and 
editorial department, and a press service (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 27 
November 1993; Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 31 December 1993).  According 
to one critic, "independent expert" M. Speranskiy, the apparatus- 
-which provides support for both chambers, despite their being 
autonomous in almost every other respect--is woefully 
understaffed (537 employees as opposed to the 1,350 employees of 
the old Supreme Soviet, according to the 5 January Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta) in a deliberate ploy to deny needed legal research 
support to deputies.  Moreover, as Speranskiy noted, Podoprigora 
oversees the staffs for the two chambers, but it is not clear "to 
whom the chief of staff is subordinated" (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 31 
December 1993), though for the moment that would appear to be 
Yeltsin.  It is also unclear whether Podoprigora will retain this 
post after the Federal Assembly convenes or if it will choose its 
own chief of staff. 
   Outlook 
   The draft rules clearly represent an attempt to make a distinct 
break with the old Supreme Soviet, particularly the effort to 
reduce the influence of the chambers' chairmen.  However, 
restricting the chairmen's functions may simply shift some 
potential levers of influence to new bodies, such as the Chamber 
Conference or the Committee for the Internal Organization of the 
State Duma (or its Federation Council counterpart).  In addition, 
the effort to strengthen parties by mandating party discipline 
and giving party factions a prominent, formalized role in the 
administration of the Duma and in the legislative process may 
redound more to the benefit of those, usually traditionalist, 
factions that are already relatively cohesive rather than having 
the intended effect of strengthening the more fractious factions, 
usually the more reform-oriented ones.  Whatever the final rules 
are, the Federal Assembly is likely to pose a challenge to 
Yeltsin's reform efforts. 
   (begin box) 
     Box:  Factions Battle It Out for Duma Chairmanship 
   In the first display of the important role factions will play in 
the Duma's decisionmaking, the eight party factions have been 
negotiating in earnest over the nomination of candidates for the 
Duma chairman.  The process formally began on 24 December, when 
Presidential Administration chief Sergey Filatov chaired an 
organizing conference of representatives of all eight factions 
for the first session of the Duma.  According to Nezavisimaya 
Gazeta (28 December 1993), the conference was held in a 
"constructive spirit" and reached an agreement "in principle" 
that the candidate would not be from any of the four large 
factions--Russia's Choice, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 
the Communist Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF), and the 
Agrarian Party.  The newspaper hinted that Women of Russia 
chairman Alevtina Fedulova or Ambassador to the United States 
Vladimir Lukin--elected to the Duma from the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev- 
Lukin bloc--were leading choices.  However, reports of Lukin's 
candidacy appear contradicted by other reports that fellow bloc 
member and First Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy Adamishin may 
be a compromise choice (Radio Rossii, 29 December 1993; Interfax, 
30 December 1993). 
   Despite the reports of agreement at the opening negotiating 
session, subsequent talks among the four largest factions appear 
to have reduced the prospects for a consensus on a small party 
candidate.  According to Russia's Choice member Arkadiy Murashev, 
during talks among the "Big Four," Russia's Choice was "in a 
minority" in advocating that the speaker should represent one of 
the smaller factions.  He claimed that the LDP, CPRF, and the 
Agrarian Party had agreed on the candidacy of Agrarian member 
Ivan Rybkin--.apparently only after Russia's Choice had objected 
to the nomination of Yeltsin foe Vladimir Isakov (Interfax, 28 
December .1993; Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 30 December 1993).  Agrarian 
leader Mikhail Lapshin confirmed that an agreement had been 
reached to choose a speaker from one of the large factions, 
although the factions are reportedly considering nominating 
representatives of the smaller factions for the two deputy 
positions (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 30 December 1993; Moscow radio, 5 
January).  Even so, subsequent meetings of the "Big Four" have 
repeatedly failed to come up with a consensus candidate, although 
Rybkin still appears to be a serious contender (Krasnaya Zvezda, 
Segodnya, 5 January). 
   In response to the apparent backroom dealing of the "Big Four," 
Deputy Premier and Party of Russian Unity and Accord leader 
Sergey Shakhray, who made no secret of his aspirations for the 
chairman's post (Interfax, 17 December 1993), has angrily termed 
their negotiations an "unprincipled deal."  He has argued that 
the faction negotiations for speaker "infringe on the rights of 
deputies who are not members of the four parties," further 
pointing out that only half the deputies were elected on party 
lists (Interfax, 31 December 1993).  With the apparent backing of 
the group of unaffiliated deputies, Shakhray has proposed that 
one of the deputy chairman positions be filled by a faction 
representative and one by a deputy elected from a single-seat 
constituency (ITAR-TASS, 5 January). 
   Faced with the prospect of losing the nomination of chairman to 
the opposition, reformers are apparently hoping to minimize their 
losses by.altering the election process itself.  While the draft 
rules stipulate that the Duma chairman is to be elected by a 
simple majority vote on a secret ballot (Russian TV, 16 December 
1993), the fact that the draft has not yet been finalized--or 
formally adopted--has apparently left Yeltsin sympathizers some 
room for maneuver on the voting procedures through an "interim 
version" of the rules, which is reportedly to be ready by the 
Duma's opening session on 11 January (ITAR-TASS, 4 January). 
Viktor Sheynis, who in addition to his work on the Commission for 
Legislative Proposals also heads a commission responsible for 
drawing up the Duma's agenda and forming its working bodies, has 
outlined three alternative scenarios for voting on the Duma's 
leadership positions.  The first, "traditional," variant provides 
for separate votes on the chairman, the two deputy chairmen, and 
the committee chairmen.  The second alternative, or "small 
package," would require a simultaneous vote on the chairman and 
his two deputies, possibly in the hope that this move would 
prevent the LDP, CPRF, and Agrarian Party from holding the top 
three positions.  Sheynis termed the final alternative, or "large 
package," the "most difficult one," presumably because it would 
call for a simultaneous vote on the chairman and his deputies as 
well as all committee chairmen.  He argued that if this last 
procedure is adopted, the Duma could "get down quickly to 
legislative work" (ITAR-TASS, 4 January). 
   (end box) 
   AUTHOR: O'CONNELL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070. 
ENEAG/PINKASOVIC/GSP 06/0143z DEC 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43183 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001594001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   11 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-004--RUSSIA 
<H3> <TI>      RUSSIA:  ACADEMICIAN DENIES EXISTENCE OF INTERNATIONAL BLACK 
MARKET FOR ORGANS </TI></H3>



</HEADER>


<TEXT>
A     Russian academician has publicly denied a Canadian film's 
charges that he offered human organs for sale.  A Russian press 
report gives detailed explanations why the accusations are medically 
and logistically improbable. 
   In a KOMMERSANT-DAILY article (23 Nov 93), Academician Valeriy 
Shumakov, the director of the Public Health Ministry's Scientific 
Research Institute for Transplantology and Artificial Organs, denies 
a Canadian film's claims that he offered human body parts for 
export.  Shumakov calls the allegations an attempt to discredit 
Russian transplant specialists, who are beginning to attract 
patients from Europe. 
   The film "Body Parts Business," which was broadcast on British 
and Canadian television in November 1993, urges international 
organizations to stop an alleged international black market in human 
body parts.  According to a 25 November 1993 TRUD article, which 
takes its information from a report in the Belgian newspaper LE 
SOIR, the film alleges that organs procured from Russian kidnap 
victims, corpses in Moscow morgues, missing Honduran children, and 
Argentinian psychiatric patients and accident victims are being sold 
for transplantation or cosmetology research. 
   TRUD, seconded by the Moscow newspaper KOMMERSANT-DAILY (23 
November 93), says that the Canadian film describes large-volume 
sales of body parts for hard currency in Russia.  Allegedly one firm 
sold 600 kidneys at 20,000 rubles apiece, and a second company sold 
700 kidneys, hearts, and lungs; 2,000 eyes and 3,000 pairs of 
testicles.  The film reportedly asserts that most of these organs 
are taken from unclaimed corpses in morgues, but some are removed 
from kidnapped Russians by rings of doctors working in well-guarded, 
secret locations.  The contraband organs are reportedly shipped out 
of Sheremetyevo airport under forged documents.  As reported in the 
KOMMERSANT-DAILY article, the BBC broadcast of the film included 
allegations by Bernard Cohen, director of Eurotransplant, 
a Netherlands-based organization that distributes organs to European 
transplant clinics, that Shumakov offered to sell him Russian 
organs. 
   Shumakov, an eminent transplant surgeon, USSR State Prize 
laureate, hero of socialist labor, and academician of the Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, says that the rumor is an attempt by 
"certain forces in the West ... to compromise Russian 
transplantology because the entry of Russian surgeons into the 
international market would inflict significant injury on their 
Western colleagues" (KOMMERSANT-DAILY 23 Nov 93).  Shumakov says 
that his institute collaborated for one year with Eurotransplant at 
Cohen's initiative.  According to Shumakov, "relations became 
complicated" when the German physicians' association protested the 
possibility of a group of German patients undergoing transplant 
surgery in the Russian Federation (KOMMERSANT-DAILY).  DER SPIEGEL 
and other Western publications had previously created a "similar 
scandal," according to Shumakov, who says the negative press reports 
caused a decline in Russian organ donations. 
   In KOMMERSANT-DAILY Shumakov denies charges that he participated 
in kidnappings for the purpose of obtaining organs from the victims. 
He admits that he shipped human body parts abroad but not vital 
organs, not for compensation, and only after failing to find a 
suitable Russian recipient.  He expresses great doubt that such a 
black market could exist, because vital organs taken from morgues 
are unsuitable for transplantation.  Organs must be delivered 
rapidly after removal, and "it would practically be necessary to 
corrupt an entire hospital" to conduct the illegal trade.  Shumakov 
says his institute's only commercial venture is surgery on foreign 
patients which generates hard currency to finance surgery for 
Russian patients. 
   While the TRUD article relates the film's contents without 
analysis, KOMMERSANT-DAILY accompanies its report with a pair of 
side bars that reinforce Shumakov's denials.  In one, Anatoliy 
Sutyko, director of the All-Russian Center for Kidney 
Transplantation states that he has not encountered any violations of 
the law in decades of work in this field and notes that the issue of 
body part thefts did not arise at the Sixth European Congress of the 
Society of Transplantologists, held in October in Greece.  Sutyko 
says that donors are selected in accordance with Russian Federation 
Health Ministry instructions, which require the formation of a 
special committee and prohibit removal of organs before the heart 
stops.  According to Sutyko, creation of a criminal ring would 
require enlisting some 25 physicians from a very small group of 
qualified specialists.  He further asserts that tissue compatibility 
testing, which involves taking lymphocytes from the spleen, 
essentially eliminates the possibility of anonymous organ donations. 
A second sidebar quotes a Moscow official's assertion that the 
Moscow police have discovered no corpses of missing persons with 
organs removed.  It also summarizes the recently enacted Russian 
Federation Law on Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues, which 
prohibits their purchase and sale and requires donor consent. 
   Illegal exports of human body parts from former Soviet republics 
have been reported previously in the Russian media.  According to 
Shumakov, the accusations against him were previously raised on the 
television program "Black Box" and circulated in the press for two 
or three years.  A 27 April 1993 TRUD article reported that the 
Kherson Center for Scientific and Technical Services in Ukraine sent 
655 kilograms of human bones and muscles to Flark Medical, Inc. in 
Miami Beach during a two-month period in 1992.  The exports came to 
light when  Ukrainian customs officials inspected one of the 
enterprise's shipments and found the export license suspicious. 
Issued by Deputy Foreign Economic Relations Minister L. Steshenko in 
1991 for 1000 transplants worth $600,000, the license not only 
lacked the required signatures, originator's name, and specific 
consignee address but also listed a Russian customs office, 
Sheremetyevo.  Legal specialists say the license is invalid because 
human transplants are not subject to licensing under Ukrainian law. 
In the judgement of an oblast public prosecutor's office 
representative, who is quoted in the article, the export scheme was 
apparently developed to take advantage of the lack of a Ukrainian 
law on transplants. 
   Other reports of organ exports from former Soviet republics have 
appeared in the foreign press.  The HONG KONG CHRONICLE alleged that 
Armenians have been smuggling kidneys to Hong Kong (Baku TURAN 25 
Nov 93).  The Poznan newspaper WPROST (23 August 92) claims that the 
Ukrainian "mafia" smuggles transplants to the West via Poland. 
(AUTHOR:  DOBBINS.  FOR QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES BRANCH AT (703) 733-6332. 
GIG/5JAN94/TEPF/TID cka 10/2018z  jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43184 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001694001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-11JAN94-KOREA 
<H3> <TI>      Pyongyang Leaves Door Open for Talks with Seoul </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Pyongyang     media treatment of ROK President Kim Yong-sam's New 
Year press conference suggests that the North is attempting to 
balance its desire to excoriate the South with a need to avoid 
foreclosing inter-Korean dialogue.  Although Pyongyang media 
reacted sharply to Kim's remarks, which were carried live by 
Seoul KBS-1 television on 6 January, Pyongyang's comment was 
remarkable in its failure to address the key question of North- 
South talks--an omission seemingly calculated to allow for 
maneuvering room for the North Korean leadership.  Thus, 
Pyongyang radio on 7 January, for instance, showed its disdain 
for the South Korean leader by calling him a "puppet traitor" and 
"vicious betrayer who does not care about the destiny of the 
nation," but focused its attention on Kim's domestic agenda and 
his remarks on the nuclear issue.  Although the ROK president 
again claimed that inter-Korean dialogue must take place before 
U.S.-DPRK high-level talks could resume, hinted at the 
possibility of economic assistance to the North once the nuclear 
issue is resolved, and rejected any "concessions" to secure an 
inter-Korean summit, monitored Pyongyang media have so far 
steered clear of these topics. 
   In another indication of Pyongyang's effort to leave the door 
open for talks with Seoul, the North Korean news agency KCNA on 8 
January stopped short of rejecting inter-Korean dialogue while 
criticizing recent remarks on this subject by South Korean 
Unification Minister Yi Yong-tok.  KCNA claimed that Yi had 
stated that the South "will not respond unconditionally even if 
the North proposes a North-South dialogue," and depicted his 
reported remarks as a "grave" and "base" attempt to "foil DPRK- 
U.S. talks."  However, it merely contended that Seoul's 
insistence on making inter-Korean dialogue a "precondition" for 
the DPRK-U.S. talks is serving as a "brake" on dialogue between 
Pyongyang and Washington. 
(AUTHOR:  YIM.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENT, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, ASIA 
DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6534.) 
EAG/BIETZ  cka 11/1931z  jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43185 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001794001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   13 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-12JAN94-PLO-U.S. 
<H3> <TI>      Mainstream Radio Blasts U.S. Role in Peace Talks </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Reflecting     both the PLO's frustration over protracted 
negotiations with Israel on implementation of the Gaza-Jericho 
plan and its renewed fears that U.S. policy will ultimately favor 
Israeli interests, Voice of Palestine (VOP) in Yemen recently 
carried the harshest mainstream PLO radio attack on U.S. handling 
of Middle East peace negotiations observed since the signing of 
the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles (DOP) on 13 
September.  In a commentary on 10 January, VOP charged that 
Washington is "shirking its responsibilities" toward 
implementation of the DOP.  US policy, VOP said, "reflects the 
abandonment of responsibilities toward the peace process," and 
has even "at times impeded rather than aided the peace process." 
Reviving longstanding PLO charges of U.S. favoritism toward 
Israel, VOP charged that "allegedly objective U.S. impartiality 
reflects a favorable response to Israeli wishes."  In particular, 
referring to U.S. peace talks coordinators as "the five rabbis," 
the commentary claimed that they sought "more for Israel than it 
wanted for itself."  In addition, the commentary implicitly 
blamed the United States for recent strains in the PLO's 
relations with other Arab participants in the peace process, 
charging that Washington has "sought to preclude any coordination 
among the Arab negotiators." 
   The commentary's appeals for the United States to continue an 
active role in the peace process suggest that the PLO, despite 
the evident disappointment with U.S. diplomacy that contributed 
to its decision to conclude a secret accord with Israel in Oslo, 
still harbors doubts about its own ability to negotiate 
successfully with Israel and will, therefore, continue to look 
outward--primarily to Washington--to bring about a favorable 
conclusion.  The commentary thus warned against what it portrayed 
as a U.S. misinterpretation of the significance of the DOP. 
Perhaps, it suggested, Washington had concluded that the accord 
had resolved Israeli-Palestinian differences "without their 
[U.S.] intervention and without their having to provide any 
guarantees."  But the U.S. role, asserted VOP, "cannot end" with 
the Oslo agreement.  Implicitly urging the United States to press 
Israel for concessions, the commentary argued that "It is 
mistaken . . . to address a major conflict involving peoples' 
rights and the sufferings of successive Arab generations" on the 
basis of a belief that "the strong must emerge as the winner 
because they had the skills required to seize the others' 
territory and rights." 
(AUTHOR: MORTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
PF 12/2056z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43186 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001894001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   13 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSP 94-01--ASIA 
<H3> <TI>      PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC REVIEW -- 12 JANUARY 1994 </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
JAPAN:      Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Research Organizations 
Predict Little Growth in FY94; FEATURE:  MITI Council's Report on 
Capital Investment Trends 

   Financial Issues - FEATURE:  Hyogo Bank Still in Critical 
Condition Despite MOF Support 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - CENTRAL ASIAN REPUBLICS:  EBRD To 
Help Japanese Trading Companies Exploit Gold Resources 

   RUSSIA: Hosokawa Micron To Supply Environmental Equipment to 
Smelter 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  Shortages of Electronic Parts in Southeast Asia; 
Tsubakimoto Opens Office in Thailand; Japanese Business Mission Goes 
to Vietnam 

   Japan-U.S. Economic Relations - FEATURE:  U.S. Officials 
Criticize Japan's Economic Bureaucrats 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE:  Machine Tool Companies 
Continue Retrenchment Steps 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  Articles Assess 
Foreign Semiconductor Market Share Issue; Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Equipment Sales Up Sharply in October; U.S. Replaces 
Japan as Leader in Semiconductor Market Share 

   Telecommunications/Satellites - NEC Trial-Produces Digital Mobile 
Phone for U.S. Market; NTT To Establish Specialized Office for 
Multimedia Activities 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - Planned Overhaul of Corporations 
To Emulate Japanese Groupings; Shenzhen Company Involved in Record 
Equity Transfer Deal; First VCR Plant Begins Production in Dalian; 
Zhejiang Is First Province To Have Complete Mobile Phone Network 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Barclays Bank Arranges $4O-Million 
Telecommunications Loan; Planned Sino-Indonesian Center To Boost 
Exports; Qingdao Attracts Large Amounts of Asia-Pacific Investment; 
Hong Kong Regains Position as World's Biggest Container Port; Hong 
Kong TV Maker Targets Mainland Market for Expansion; Jiangsu 
Economic, Technological Development Zone Attracts Foreigners 

   Taiwan:  Finance Ministry To Remove More Limits on Financial 
Investment; Economic Cooperation Agreement Signed With Turkey; 
Foreign Investment in Stock Market Estimated To Quadruple in 1993; 
Exports to U.S., Hong Kong Outlined; Investment in PRC Climbs; KMT- 
Run Enterprises Will Not Be Allowed To Invest in the PRC; GATT 
Membership To Impact on Automotive Regulations 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Russian Researcher Documents Decline of 
North Korean Economy; South Korea Sees DPRK's 1993 Economic 
Performance as Worst Eve; North Korea Claims Improved Method of 
Producing Riced Corn Flour 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Press Calls for Environmental Awareness; 
FEATURE:  Government Wavers on Mid-Size Airplane Project; FEATURE: 
KEPCO Official Outlines Plans for Nuclear Power; FEATURE:  ROK Firms 
Market Workstations Based on U.S. High-Tech; FEATURE:  Hyundai, 
Samsung Introduce New Combat Vehicles; Magazine Profiles Financially 
Troubled U.S. High-Tech Employees; Samsung Develops ROK's First 
Indigenous Color CRT's; KOTRA Expanding, Automating Commercial 
Intelligence Network; Tariff Reductions on High-Tech Imports 
Extended; KEPCO Wins Contract To Provide Nuclear Technology to 
China; Kodeco Energy To Develop Oil, Gas Facilities in Indonesia; 
Tongbu Group To Expand Overseas Business 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Singapore Top Investor in Non-Gas 
Sector; Non-Gas Exports to Japan Increase 

   LAOS:  Nam Song Water Project With Japan Signed; Exports, Imports 
for 1993 Reported 

   PHILIPPINES:  Finland To Supply Digital Cellular Equipment; 
Investment Board Approves Geothermal, Cement Projects; Volvo To 
Establish Assembly Plant; Investments in Processing Zones Hit $107 
Million in 1993 

   SINGAPORE:  Government Sets Up $6OO-Million Industrial 
Development Fund; Aerospace Industry Reports 6.2-Percent Growth in 
1993 

   THAILAND:  Central Bank Reviews Growth, Balance of Payments; Siam 
Steel To Invest in Three Projects 

   VIETNAM:  FEATURE:  Privatization of State Enterprises Slower 
Than Expected; Air Traffic Control To Receive $26-Million Upgrade; 
Foreign Investment in Agriculture Noted; Increase in Ho Chi Minh 
City Production Reported; Garment Industry Production Noted; French, 
Thai, Local Companies Enter Liquid Gas Venture; Aid From French 
Ministry of Finance Reported; Association Reports Record Output in 
1993; Hanoi's Industrial Production Grows 16.8 Percent; Expansion of 
Hoang Thach Cement Plant Commences; Ayun River, Be River Dammed for 
Irrigation, Electric Projects; Postal Sector's Phone Service Reports 
Increase in Revenues; Foreign Investments in Quang Nam-Da Nang Noted 

   (Pacific Rim Economic Review FBPSP 94-01) 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Research Organizations 
Predict Little Growth in FY94 -- SUMMARY:  According to press 
reports, forecasts made by most private economic research 
organizations for FY94 project that Japan's economy will remain at a 
standstill until the summer of 1994 and then will gradually move 
upward in a very weak recovery.  The average of the predictions for 
FY94's real gross domestic product (GDP) is an increase of 0.6 
percent.  To avoid calls for issuance of deficit financing bonds 
during deliberations on the FY94 budget, government ministries are 
expected to publicize an optimistic outlook of about 2.5 percent 
real GDP growth. 

   Most private economic research organizations predict that Japan's 
economy will remain stagnant until the summer of 1994 and then 
gradually turn upward thanks to a gradual recovery of personal 
consumption after an anticipated income tax cut and a slight 
recovery in exports as the value of the yen stabilizes, according to 
the 21 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  Since the recovery 
is expected to be "very weak," the research organizations anticipate 
that businessmen will be slow to recognize any improvement in 
economic conditions during 1994.  The paper notes that the weak 
recovery will be primarily due to the problem of nonperforming bank 
assets, the uncertain employment situation, and corporate 
restructuring, "all of which may last for most of FY94." 

   The average of real GDP growth rates for FY94 as forecast by 48 
private organizations is 0.6 percent, according to the 30 December 
NIKKEI.  Most forecasts assume a 5-10 trillion yen ($48-92 billion) 
cut in personal income and local taxes, 2-5 trillion yen ($19-48 
billion) in additional public investment, and a cut of 05-1.0 
percent in the official discount rate (ODR). 

   According to the 17 December YOMIURI SHIMBUN, the "most 
pessimistic" forecast is a 0.4 percent decrease in real GDP 
predicted by the Nomura Research Institute (NRI).  NRI predicts that 
Japan's economy will continue having difficulty escaping asset 
deflation caused by the bursting bubble in stock and land prices. 
Unless the government takes "drastic" measures to solve the problem 
of bank nonperforming assets, NRI maintains, "severe" economic 
conditions will continue throughout FY94.  According to the 18 
December YOMIURI, Daiichi Life Insurance predicts a O.3 percent 
decrease in real GDP.  It points to a 3.8 percent decrease in 
capital investment as "a basic reason" for its negative growth 
forecast. 

   The 18 December YOMIURI article notes that even the "most 
optimistic" forecast is only a 1.6 percent real growth rate 
predicted by the Research Institute on the National Economy (RINE), 
followed by growth estimates of 1.4 percent by the Sumitomo Life 
Insurance Research Institute and 1.2 percent by the Nippon Credit 
Bank. 

   Government's Outlook of 2.5 Percent Growth Rate - According to 
the 3O December NIKKEI, the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry (MITI), and the Economic 
Planning Agency (EPA) "will probably agree" on an outlook for a 2.5 
percent growth rate.  The three will start negotiating from mid- 
January on the government's growth outlook for FY94.  Unlike the 
forecasts of private institutions, which reflect actual economic 
conditions, the government's outlook is a "target."  The article 
notes that the MOF wants to set the outlook for real and nominal GDP 
growth rates "at over 2.5 percent and S.O percent respectively." 
The higher the outlook, the higher the estimate for tax revenues the 
MOF can use in compiling a FY94 budget draft.  High estimates will 
allow the MOF to avoid issuing deficit financing bonds.  Moreover, 
the article notes, the MOF is thinking of a scenario that would set 
an outlook of over 2.5 percent for the real growth rate in FY94 and 
more than 3 percent in FY95.  This would pave the way for a 
consumption tax increase the MOF plans to implement from FY95.  The 
article adds that MITI will concur with the MOF's desire for higher 
projections. 

   EPA economists, on the other hand, are determined to resist a 
higher outlook to "defend their credibility as economists," 
according to the 30 December NIKKEI.  The EPA, which was "forced" by 
the MOF and MITI to agree on the "excessively high" 3.3 percent 
growth outlook for FY93, hopes to avoid such an occurrence this 
year.  The EPA's reasons for opposing a higher outlook include the 
average forecast of 0.6 percent made by private research 
organizations and the EPA's own econometric simulations, which 
project a growth rate of "under 1 percent."  The EPA asserts that 
even if additional public investment and income tax cuts are 
implemented, the real growth rate "would barely reach 2 percent." 
If the MOF insists on an outlook higher than the 2 percent, the 
article notes, the EPA is determined to press the MOF for an income 
tax cut larger than the MOF anticipates and for "aggressive" 
government spending. 

   Japan Economic Research Center's Detailed Forecast - The 21 
December NIKKEI carries a detailed forecast compiled by the Japan 
Economic Research Center (JERC), NIKKEI's research arm.  The JERC 
predicts a 0.3 percent real GDP growth rate, assuming a 5 trillion 
yen ($48 billion) income tax cut, 2 trillion yen ($19 billion) in 
additional public investment, and a stable 1.75 percent ODR 
throughout FY94.  It also estimates an average crude oil price of 
$19 per barrel and an exchange rate of 105.47 yen to the dollar 
throughout FY94. 

   The JERC expects growth to be driven by domestic demand in FY94. 
It predicts that domestic demand will increase real GDP by 0.4 
percent, while external demand "will decrease real GDP by 0.1 
percent."  Although nominal wages are expected to increase only by 
1.1 percent, household disposable income will increase by a larger 
percentage thanks to an income tax cut, which will stimulate real 
personal consumption to increase by 1.4 percent.  Housing investment 
will also increase 3 percent thanks to low interest rates. 
According to the JERC, capital investment will start increasing in 
the July-September 1994 quarter, resulting in only a 2.9 percent 
decrease in FY94 compared to the 8 percent decrease in FY93.  Public 
investment will increase by a slight O.3 percent because the FY93 
level is already high. 

   According to the JERC, exports will increase 2.8 percent as the 
exchange rate levels off.  Imports will increase 3.8 percent due to 
the strong yen.  Despite a decreasing trade surplus, the JERC 
expects Japan's current surplus for FY94 to increase to $139.2 
billion, a slight increase from FY93's estimated total of $135 
billion, at an exchange rate of 105.47 yen per dollar.  The reason 
for the slight increase is that while the trade surplus is 
decreasing, the surplus in Japan's transfer account is increasing as 
dividends received from overseas investment increase and interest 
payments made by Japanese banks to foreign banks decrease. 

   NIKKEI Critical of Economists - In an article in the 28 December 
NIKKEI, editorial staff writer Tadahiro Okada criticizes government 
economists for misjudging business conditions and making wrong 
economic forecasts.  Okada is critical of their "mistaken forecasts 
and misjudgments," which, in his view have led the government to 
delay taking appropriate actions the past three years.  According to 
Okada, the government's economic growth outlooks for FY92 and FY93 
were 3.5 percent and 3.3 percent, while the actual figure for FY92 
was 0.7 percent and the figure for FY93 will be minus 0.2 percent. 
Although the previous business cycle actually peaked in April 1991, 
Okada continues, the EPA held on to its view until early 1992 that 
the business cycle was still on a gradual upward trend.  Okada adds 
that the EPA also overestimated the effects of the past three 
economic stimulus packages. 

   Okada also criticizes private economists for being "overly 
optimistic" in their FY93 forecasts.  Most of 53 research 
organizations that made forecasts predicted a growth rate of over 
2.0 percent for FY93, including eight that predicted a growth rate 
exceeding 3.0 percent.  Okada further notes that most organizations 
predicted an exchange rate of around 120 yen to the dollar, when 
sufficient indications" existed that the yen would rise, such as 
Japan's large current surplus and decreasing outflow of long-term 
capital.  Okada concludes his article by urging all economists to 
"reflect and improve their forecasts" by competing each other. 

   FEATURE:  MITI Council's Report on Capital Investment Trends - 
SUMMARY:  A report submitted by the Industrial Structural Council 
warns that the current trend of decreasing research and development 
(R&amp;D) investment as well as lower spending on new product 
development will hinder the restructuring of Japan's industries.  It 
projects a 3.5 percent overall decrease in capital investment in 
FY93 and a 0.1 percent decrease in FY94.  The report also states 
that Japanese companies are shifting their investment from the 
United States and the European Community (EC) to Asia to regain cost 
competitiveness. 

   According to the 2 December issue of TSUSANSHO KOHO (MITI 
BULLETIN), the Industrial Finance Subcommittee of the Industrial 
Structural Council, which is under the Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry (MITI), submitted a report on FY93 private 
capital investment plans to the MITI minister on 26 November.  The 
report warns that the current trend of decreasing R&amp;D investment and 

spending on new product development will hinder the restructuring of 
Japan's industries over the medium and long term.  According to the 
report, in FY93 manufacturing R&amp;D investment will decrease by 19.9 
percent and spending on new product development by 15.6 percent. 
Given these developments, it warns that Japanese companies "will 
have difficulty creating new businesses and new products in the 
future. 

   The report points out that although companies have been 
restructuring to cope with current sluggish business conditions, 
their restructuring appears to concentrate on eliminating 
unprofitable businesses and making existing production procedures 
more efficient.  While it acknowledges that such corporate efforts 
are important, the report warns that this sort of restructuring will 
not help companies survive over the medium and long term.  It 
recommends that restructuring be "offensive" and include "continuous 
R&amp;D investment," through which higher value-added products and new 
businesses will be developed in areas where Japan has a comparative 
advantage.  To make it easier for companies to procure funds for 
such investment, the report recommends deregulation of the corporate 
bond and commercial paper markets. 

   According to the report, private capital investment planned for 
FY93 will decrease by 3.5 percent from FY92's level, for the third 
consecutive yearly decline.  In the manufacturing sector, capital 
investment will decrease 15.1 percent; basic materials industries 
will decrease their capital investment by 15.7 percent and the 
processing and assembly industries by 14.6 percent.  As for the 
nonmanufacturing sector, capital investment will increase by 4.8 
percent, thanks to a large 9.3 percent increase by the electric 
power industry. 

   Analysis of FY93 Overseas Direct Investment Plan - According to 
the report, overseas direct investment planned by Japanese 
corporations in FY93 will decrease by 28.1 percent, the third 
consecutive yearly decline.  Overseas investment by the 
manufacturing sector will decrease by 24.2 percent, because the 
automobile and electronic industries have completed their "initial 
large-scale investment projects."  Investment by the 
nonmanufacturing sector will drop 45.2 percent, primarily because of 
large decreases in investment in the EC and Asia by retailers and 
wholesalers. 

   By area, the nonmanufacturing sector will decrease direct 
investment across the board, while the manufacturing sector will 
decrease its investment in the United States by 41.3 percent and the 
EC by 10.6 percent, but will increase investment in Asia by 61.1 
percent.  The report concludes that Japanese corporations are 
shifting their direct investment from the United States and the EC 
to Asia, where further economic growth is expected, and which can 
enhance the cost competitiveness of Japanese companies. 

   The report points out that Japanese companies are making direct 
investments to regain cost competitiveness in the face of a strong 
yen, rather than to avoid trade friction.  The electronics industry, 
in particular, will focus on China as its future investment 
location. 

   Concerning FY94, according to the report, total capital 
investment planned by Japanese companies will decrease by 0.1 
percent compared to FY93.  Manufacturing sector investment will 
continue decreasing by 10.2 percent--basic material industries will 
decrease by 12.6 percent and processing and assembly industries by 
7.3 percent.  However, investment in the nonmanufacturing sector 
will increase by 3.6 percent. 

   Financial Issues - FEATURE:  Hyogo Bank Still in Critical 
Condition Despite MOF Support -- SUMMARY:  The largest of Japan's 
second-tier regional banks, Hyogo Bank, is requesting further 
interest rate reductions from creditor financial institutions on 
behalf of its affiliated nonbanks, according to Japanese press 
reports.  Only one year has passed since Hyogo's restructuring plans 
were devised in December 1992, but already pressure is mounting to 
revise them. 

   The 31 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN reports that Hyogo Bank 
announced on 30 December its request for an expansion of the 
interest rate reduction and remission policy to all 10 of its 
nonbank affiliates.  Currently, only three affiliates are granted 
the reduction and remission policy.  It also requested an extension 
of the period of "assistance" granted them from the original three 
to 10 years. 

   Specifically, Hyogo asked banks and insurance companies to 
decrease the interest they charge on loans to the nonbanks, 
currently between 3.25 and 5.5 percent, to the official discount 
rate (1.75 percent).  Hyogo also asked the financial institutions 
affiliated with the Central Bank for Agriculture and Forestry, 
nonbanks, and credit unions to decrease the interest rates they 
charge, currently between 4.75 and 5.5 percent, to the current long- 
term prime rate (3.5 percent).  The article states that these 
measures are expected to reduce the amount of interest the 10 
affiliated nonbanks pay annually from the current 64.5 billion yen 
($586.4 million) to 40 billion yen ($363.6 million). 

   MOF's Intervention - The January 1993 SENTAKU reported that after 
being audited by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) in the fall of 1992, 
Hyogo Bank stopped paying dividends.  Its chairman at the time, Hiro 
Hasegawa, resigned in October 1992 and Minoru Yamada, former 
councilor in the Minister's Secretariat at MOF, was installed as 
president.  Katsuhiko Oura, former head of the Bank of Japan (BOJ) 
Sendai Branch, and Kunihiko Otsubo, former loan examiner in the MOF 
Banking Bureau, were dispatched as consultants.  Subsequently, Oura 
was appointed vice president and Otsubo senior managing director, 
according to the 29 June ZAIKAI.  The last MOF "old boy" to be sent 
to Hyogo was the former Banking Bureau Director General, Masateru 
Yoshida, who was installed as president in June 1993, according to 
the 5 November NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN (NIKKEI KINYU).  In addition, it 
was disclosed in December 1992, according to the SENTAKU article, 
that 100 billion yen ($9.09 billion) in assistance loans were 
extended to Hyogo by BOJ, Sumitomo Bank, Industrial Bank of Japan, 
and Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan. 

   Council Established to Facilitate Consolidations - In order to 
ascertain the status of recovery of nonperforming assets and to 
further study restructuring plans, Hyogo Bank has established a 
"business management council" for each of its nonbanks, according to 
the 28 December NIKKEI KINYU.  The council consists of four to five 
Hyogo Bank officials, including Vice President Oura, and the 
presidents and officers in charge of asset recovery at each of the 
nonbanks.  The nonbanks will convene their conferences quarterly so 
they can work together with Hyogo Bank in asset recovery and 
consolidation.  A Hyogo Bank officer says that the conferences will 
enhance understanding about the real status of nonperforming 
assets."  Ascertaining "the real status of nonperforming assets" has 
been difficult in the past because collateral claims on them are 
complicated.  The council is expected to facilitate the 
consolidation of the nonbanks into viable affiliates. 

   Hyogo Still in Critical Condition - A 20 December NIKKEI KINYU 
article reports that while the "consolidation" idea gathered 
momentum in Hyogo Bank's initial restructuring plans a year ago, 
"there is no advantage to consolidation when assets are not being 
recovered as Hyogo wished."  The article reports that 1.69 percent 
of loans receivable as of the end of September 1993 were to bankrupt 
firms alone and that the amount of credit extended to bankrupt firms 
continues to rise.  It goes on to report that while it may seem that 
the "troika" formed by President Yoshida, Vice President Oura, and 
Senior Managing Director Otsubo is working, if one looks at the 
indicators of the Bank's performance, the situation is still 
critical. 

   Some "indicators" the article reports are as follows.  The rate 
of return on loans during the first half of FY93 was the lowest of 
the regional banks in the Kansai area (5.17 percent).  The deposit- 
loan margin of profit dropped 0.98 percentage points compared to 
FY92.  The overall profit margin has also dropped 0.26 percentage 
points.  Furthermore, while net business profits during the first 
half of FY93 were greater than expected, that was because of expense 
cuts.  About half of the 1.8 billion yen in decreased expenses 
during the first half of FY93 was due to payroll cuts.  New hiring 
ceased in FY93; executive bonuses were zero; employee bonuses were 
cut and the rate of pay increases was nearly zero. 

   In addition, 27 branch offices had been sold to affiliated 
companies as of the FY92 financial statements and 18 domestic and 
foreign branch offices are scheduled to undergo consolidation in 
FY93.  Hyogo had intended to sell its headquarters building by the 
end of March 1994, but the market value is reported to be between 3 
and 4 billion yen, much lower than the book value, 10.7 billion yen. 
At that price, the article reports, "the building cannot be sold." 

   There were rumors of a "salvage merger" with Sumitomo Bank, which 
holds 4.99 percent of Hyogo's stock according to the SENTAKU 
article.  But in the 20 December NIKKEI article, the head of 
Sumitomo is quoted as saying, "everything Sumitomo has is going into 
its own restructuring; there is no way it could dispatch personnel 
to Hyogo."  Moreover, President Yoshida is reported in the article 
as saying that he is not considering a merger with Sumitomo.  With 
its roots so deeply implanted in the region, a Hyogo merger would 
cause "the whole region to cave in." 

   Finally, the 20 December NIKKEI KINYU article reports that there 
is an alternative to such a merger, namely, writing off 
nonperforming assets of Hyogo and its nonbanks using public 
financing.  But it cautions that deep-rooted public opposition to 
this makes achieving a consensus difficult.  But without assistance 
one way or the other and an improvement in the business climate, the 
article cautions, Hyogo may be forced to "liquidate." 
   Foreign Trade and Investment - CENTRAL ASIAN REPUBLICS:  EBRD To 
Help Japanese Trading Companies Exploit Gold Resources -- The 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) will provide 
aid for gold refining projects that large Japanese trading companies 
are planning in the former Soviet Central Asian Republics.  Large 
trading companies like Mitsui &amp; Co. and Itochu Corp. are proceeding 

with gold refining and mining projects in three former Soviet 
Republics, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan, which altogether 
contain nearly 1O percent of the world's estimated gold deposits. 
The EBRD has decided to provide assistance in such projects and will 
organize a public-private cooperative to finance them in the spring 
of 1994.  The loan amounts for each of the gold projects are 
expected to be between $100 and $200 million. 

   In addition, because Japanese corporations will participate in 
the mining and refining projects, the EBRD expects syndication of 
the loans for the project to involve Japanese banks as well.  It 
intends to request their participation in loan syndication.  Each 
bank's loan is expected to be around $5 million. 

   Japanese banks are not reversing their cautious stance toward 
financing to Russia.  However, as the EBRD implements a financing 
effort in which  both public and private enterprises cooperate and 
that focuses on the Central Asian Republics, not on Russia, it hopes 
to stimulate renewed financing by Japanese banks in all areas of the 
former Soviet Union, including Russia.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
25 Dec 93 p 2) 

   RUSSIA:  Hosokawa Micron To Supply Environmental Equipment to 
Smelter - Hosokawa Micron, the world's leading manufacturer of 
particle processing equipment, has signed a 1 billion yen ($8.9 
million) contract with a Finnish agency to export environmental 
equipment to a Russian aluminum smelter in Kandalaksha, near the 
border between Finland and Russia.  The equipment reclaims fluoride 
from the refinery's exhaust emissions and reprocesses it for reuse 
in the aluminum refining process.  Hosokawa Micron's German 
subsidiary developed the equipment and is marketing it in Canada and 
Western Europe.  This will be the first emissions-reprocessing 
equipment to be installed in Russia.  The company views Russia and 
Eastern Europe as promising markets. 

   Also, beginning in January 1994, Hosokawa Micron will establish a 
500 million yen ($4.4 million) facility for recycling electric power 
and telephone cables.  The equipment for this facility, which breaks 
up the cable and extracts the original vinyl, aluminum, and copper 
for reuse, was developed by a German company that Hosokawa acquired 
in 1987.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 23 Dec 93 p 10) 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  Shortages of Electronic Parts in Southeast Asia 
- Because of the rapid appreciation of the yen, Japanese 
manufacturers of home electronics products have been moving their 
production bases to Southeast Asia.  As a result, the demand for 
locally procured parts has grown, causing shortages and price 
increases.  According to sources from the Japanese semiconductor 
industry, which has moved into Southeast Asia, the amount of orders 
received in Southeast Asia for semiconductors and electronic parts 
exceeds last year's by 30 to 40 percent.  A private research agency 
forecasts that the semiconductor market in Asia, excluding Japan, 
will be 18 percent of the total world market and be worth about 
$14.3 billion for 1993. 

   Currently, in Southeast Asia there is a severe shortage of 4- 
megabit dynamic random-access memory chips, which are used in 
personal computers.  This has led to a purchase price of around $14 
per chip, 11.3 percent higher than the second quarter of 1992, and 
17 percent higher than the current price in Japan.  Mitsubishi 
Electric Corp.'s Singapore branch is reported to be "unable to meet 
demand."  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 15 Dec 93 p 26) 

   Tsubakimoto Opens Office in Thailand - Tsubakimoto Machinery and 
Engineering Co., Ltd. will open an office in Bangkok, Thailand in 
January 1994.  Thailand has a favorable economic environment with a 
high growth rate, and Japanese companies are continuing to expand 
into Thailand as a production base.  Tsubakimoto plans to supply all 
the machine parts these Japanese subsidiaries may need.  The local 
office, managed by one Japanese and two Thais, will scout out local 
manufacturers who can supply parts; investigate the local market; 
and provide sales, delivery, and service for parts made for 
Thailand. 

   This will be Tsubakimoto's third overseas location, following 
Seoul and Singapore.  In the future, Tsubakimoto is planning to 
strengthen its overseas development, concentrating on Asia.  (Tokyo 
NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 7 Dec 93 p 14) 

   VIETNAM:  Japanese Business Mission Goes to Vietnam - The Tohoku 
Productivity Center, the Tohoku Industrial Engineering (IE) 
Association, and the Miyagi Industrial Association are sponsoring an 
economic exchange mission to Vietnam from 20-27 February 1994.  The 
title of the mission will be "Vietnam Economic Exchange Mission." 
Participants will be executives of 15 to 20 of Tohoku's leading 
enterprises, particularly those dealing with energy and electrical 
machinery.  Masanori Kogo, chair of the Tohoku IE Association and an 
advisor to Tokin Corp., will lead the mission. 

   The goal of the mission is to generate economic exchange through 
on-the-spot observation and consultations.  Participants will 
observe economic and industrial trends, and the investment 
environment under Vietnam's "Doi Moi" renovation policy.  They will 
also check current conditions in Vietnam's special economic zones. 
Locations to be visited include Haiphong's Hon Gai coal mine, which 
produces very high quality coal, an industrial park in Ho Chi Minh 
City, and the cities of Hanoi and Ha Dong.  Consultations with VIPs 
from the State Economic Commission, the State Commission for 
Cooperation and Investment, the Electric Power Supply Public 
Corporation, and the state-operated Petroleum Export Public 
Corporation are planned.  In addition, the mission will meet with 
executives of Japanese enterprises that are already established in 
Vietnam. 

   The Tohoku Productivity Center has previously sponsored missions 
to Thailand and Indonesia, but this is the first it has sponsored to 
Vietnam.  According to the Productivity Center, "In Vietnam, on top 
of low labor costs, the educational level is high, and petroleum, 
natural gas and other resources are plentiful.  During this period 
when the shift to overseas factories is progressing, it makes sense 
to promote exchange."  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 4 Dec 93 p 24) 

   Japan-U.S. Economic Relations - FEATURE:  U.S. Officials 
Criticize Japan's Economic Bureaucrats -- SUMMARY:  Reported 
criticism of Japanese bureaucrats by senior U.S. Government 
officials has "aggravated" the atmosphere in the framework talks 
between the two nations, according to press reports.  One paper 
asserts that U.S. Ambassador Mondale has tried to "ease" U.S. 
positions in the talks so that the February meeting between 
President Clinton and Prime Minister Hosokawa will be successful. 

   The 25 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI) reports that recent 
criticism of Japanese bureaucrats allegedly made by "high-ranking 
White House officials" has caused "friction" between the two 
countries.  U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor and Deputy 
Assistant to the President for Economic Affairs Bowman Cutter have 
"openly criticized" Japanese bureaucrats on two key points, 
according to NIKKEI.  The first is that Japanese bureaucrats have 
"fostered erroneous impressions" in the minds of Japanese Government 
leaders and the Japanese public by relaying  "distorted" versions of 
U.S. proposals put forth during the framework talks.  Second, they 
have criticized Japanese bureaucrats for "preventing" Japan from 
moving ahead with market opening measures, deregulation, and income 
tax reduction measures, NIKKEI reports. 

   The 26 December ASAHI SHIMBUN asserts that at a 23 December 
briefing for foreign journalists, Deputy Assistant to the President 
for Economic Affairs Bowman Cutter stated that "Japanese bureaucrats 
tend to represent the best interests of their ministries rather than 
the views of the prime minister."  According to ASAHI, he stated 
that Japanese bureaucrats have a "higher status" in the current 
U.S.-Japan talks because Prime Minister Hosokawa is "absorbed" with 
the political reform issue.  He reportedly described Japanese 
bureaucrats as "obstacles" because "they have always functioned in 
the same way and cannot keep pace with rapid changes occurring in 
the outside world."  According to the paper, he also criticized 
unnamed bureaucrats for "convincing" the Japanese public that the 
United States, as part of its efforts to introduce "objective 
criteria for trade" is demanding "market share" to open up Japan's 
markets.  He also reportedly stressed that the U.S. side "has never 
once asked for import targets," ASAHI notes. 

   NIKKEI on Reasons for U.S. Criticism - The 25 December NIKKEI 
asserts that "general irritation" over the "difficult" pace of the 
U.S.-Japan framework talks has led to open criticism by U.S. 
officials.  According to the paper, American officials may also have 
been "upset" by what they viewed as international support for 
Japanese allegations that the United States is seeking market shares 
and  managed trade."  These allegations, according to NIKKEI, are 
not necessarily distorted," because initially the Clinton 
administration "repeatedly made statements about adhering to market 
share objectives."  NIKKEI also observes that "remarks by Japanese 
bureaucrats" urging the United States to soften its position toward 
Japan may have "rubbed U.S. officials the wrong way." 

   NIKKEI concludes that the U.S. side has recently "revised" its 
position but that it has been "extremely" concerned that this would 
be interpreted as "caving in to Japan" and would be criticized by 
the U.S. Congress.  Consequently, the U.S. side, recognizing it had 
already scored "minus points" in the framework talks, "went ahead 
anyway" with its public criticism of Japanese bureaucrats, according 
to NIKKEI. 

   Mondale Credited for Shift in U.S. Position - Since mid-December, 
according to the 23 December NIKKEI, the Clinton administration's 
position on Japan has shifted to one which is more acceptable to 
Japan.  NIKKEI asserts, the United States has "relaxed" its position 
by claiming that it will not pursue "market-share objectives" and 
that it "wants to reach an agreement to guide Japan toward opening 
its markets to similar levels of accessibility as the markets of 
other advanced countries," NIKKEI reports. 

   The U.S. position has become more "workable" because of the 
counsel provided by U.S. Ambassador Walter Mondale, according to 
NIKKEI.  "According to several White House officials," Ambassador 
Mondale has been communicating with U.S. officials via telephone and 
cables as well as talking with them during their visits to Japan. 
He has reportedly stressed that "the U.S. side must take into 
consideration the severe circumstances facing Prime Minister 
Hosokawa if they want the U.S.-Japan talks scheduled for February to 
be successful." 

   NIKKEI traces the beginning of the shift in the U.S. position to 
early December, when Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman visited 
Japan.  At that time, while U.S. officials were meeting with the 
Japanese side in Tokyo, Altman was briefed on Japan's political and 
economic conditions by Ambassador Mondale, who reportedly tried to 
convey the message that "you cannot just attack" the Japanese side 
in attempting to solve issues. 

   NIKKEI notes that President Clinton has "batted in three 
consecutive runs" with the NAFTA treaty, the APEC conference in 
Seattle, and the GATT treaty negotiations.  U.S. Trade 
Representative Kantor is "determined" that the U.S.-Japan economic 
talks succeed so that the United States will be able to secure yet 
another advance in its economic diplomacy.  The question remains, 
NIKKEI observes, how the Japanese Government will address the U.S. 
position, which now is more "workable" as a result of the efforts of 
Ambassador Mondale and other U.S. officials who are "eager to 
score." 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE:  Machine Tool Companies 
Continue Retrenchment Steps -- SUMMARY:  The prolonged slump in 
Japan's machine tool industry is forcing companies to continue their 
retrenchment efforts.  Various firms are attempting to cut costs by 
scaling back on outsourcing, furloughing workers, and pushing 
through the "voluntary" retirement of workers. 

   Mori Seiki--According to the 24 December NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN, 
Mori Seiki, a major machine tool (MT) manufacturer, will stop 
contracting out MT parts production at the end of December and 
concentrate this work in-house at its plants in Iga, Mie Prefecture. 
The company notified approximately 25 parts processing 
subcontractors in Osaka, Nara, and Mie Prefecture in mid-November 
that they would no longer receive work.  The volume of work involved 
was not indicated, but Mori Seiki's president stated that "the total 
amount saved will be equal to the personnel expenses of 150 
workers." Mori Seiki has been dealing with some of these 
subcontractors since the firm was founded.  "They are just like 
family," Mori's president stated, "but we must give work to our own 
workers first."  NIKKEI SANGYO observes:  "This move, whereby it 
must cut off its subcontractors to protect its own workers, reveals 
the seriousness of the situation." 

   In the spring of 1993 Mori Seiki completed construction of a 
second plant in Iga which incorporated the latest automated 
production lines, NIKKEI SANGYO notes.  But because of the sales 
slump its utilization rate was only about 50 percent.  Therefore, 
production will be moved from Mori Seiki's Nara plant and 
concentrated at Iga by the summer of 1994, except for special- 
purpose machine tools. 

   Takamatsu Machine Industry--The 3 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
(NIKKEI) reports that Takamatsu Machine Industry (TMI), a 
manufacturer of computer numerically controlled (CNC) lathes, has 
begun lowering its manufacturing costs by cutting back on the 
outsourcing of parts processing and product design, standardizing 
parts, reducing its product line, and furloughing workers.  TMI will 
reassign the rough processing of metal parts to workers at its 
headquarters plant, whose lathe and machining-center assembly work 
was reduced by the slump in sales.  TMI hopes to achieve 2 million 
yen ($18,200) per month in cost reductions this year through these 
moves. 

   TMI's technical development department will assume responsibility 
for the design of all precision parts for lathes and robots from the 
company's MT design office, NIKKEI adds.  In the first half of FY93 
the MT design office contracted out about 4 million yen ($36,400) in 
design work each month.  This will be completely eliminated under 
the new policy.  TMI also decided to furlough workers in the 
production department for two days in December. 

   Okuma--The labor union at Okuma, a major MT manufacturer, has 
agreed to a proposal made by the company for the "voluntary" 
retirement of 380 out of Okuma's 2,200 workers early next year, 
according to the 26 December CHUNICHI SHIMBUN.  The proposal, 
accepted by the union at an emergency meeting held on 25 December, 
calls for an increase in the maximum special bonus from the 
equivalent of 20-months' pay to 24 months in addition to regular 
retirement allowances; an increase in next summer's bonus from the 
equivalent of 1.3-month's wages to 1.5 month's; only the regularly 
scheduled pay raise will be implemented; and the union will not call 
for an increase in base pay during the "spring labor offensive." 

   Toyoda Machine Works--According to the 25 December NIKKEI SANGYO, 
Toyoda Machine Works (TMW) will furlough workers in its MT 
production divisions for six days between January and March 1994. 
Of the 2,500 workers at TMW's main plant and East Kariya plant, both 
located in Kariya City, Aichi Prefecture, about 1,300 in the MT and 
mechatronics production divisions will be affected.  During that 
time TMW will receive a government employment adjustment subsidy. 
The furloughed workers will be on standby status at home and will be 
paid 85 percent of their regular salary.  TMW, after Aichi Steel 
Works, is the second company in the Toyota Group to implement 
furloughs. 

   Nippei Toyama--According to the 18 December NIKKEI, Nippei 
Toyama, a MT manufacturer specializing in transfer machines, will 
furlough 340 workers at its Fujiyama plant in Fukuno-cho, Fujiyama 
Prefecture, and 158 workers at its Yokohama plant for an average of 
10 days between 16 December and the middle of February.  During four 
of the 10 days all plant operations will be halted.  By furloughing 
workers, Nippei expects to reduce personnel costs at the two plants 
by 30 to 40 million yen ($273,000-$364,000).  Also, the company will 
not hire any new workers this spring.  Nippei anticipates its 
current losses for FY93 will be about 3.6 billion yen ($32.7 
million), an increase of about 3 billion yen ($27.3 million) from 
FY92. 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  Articles Assess 
Foreign Semiconductor Market Share Issue -- SUMMARY:  According to 
press reports, the reaction by Japan's semiconductor industry to the 
announcement that the foreign share of Japanese semiconductor sales 
had dropped to 18.5 percent was that the drop was expected.  Reasons 
cited for the decline include the high demand in the United States 
for semiconductors and the effects of yen appreciation.  The foreign 
share might improve in the future with imports of semiconductor 
devices used in cellular telephones and other specialized 
semiconductors. 

   For the third successive quarter in a row the share of foreign 
semiconductors sold on the Japanese market has dropped, this time to 
18.5 percent, well below the 20 percent goal set in the 1991 U.S.- 
Japan Semiconductor Agreement, according to the 21 December NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN.  Although the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry (MITI) and the Electronic Industries Association of Japan 
(EIAJ) were "openly angry" when the Office of the U.S. Trade 
Representative (USTR) prematurely announced the figures, reaction 
within the semiconductor industry to the figures was that "they were 
to be expected."  The article cites several reasons for the drop. 
One is that the U.S. demand for chips used in personal computers has 
expanded, so that U.S.-made chips are going to U.S. consumers, which 
"makes them unavailable for Japanese companies to purchase." 

   According to the 28 December NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI), 
another reason is that although sales of foreign-made semiconductors 
have increased, they have not increased enough to keep the foreign- 
share figure from falling.  The paper notes that according to the 
Foreign Semiconductor Users' Committee (UCOM) of the EIAJ, sales of 
foreign-made semiconductors were up 25 percent in the six-month 
period from April to September 1993 compared to 1992. 

   The 29 December NIKKEI reports that appreciation of the yen has 
also affected purchases.  Because the yen has gained strength 
against the dollar, the volume of chips sold to Japan can increase 
while the dollar value of sales remains the same or perhaps even 
decreases.  The paper also notes that certain types of technically 
advanced semiconductors, such as microprocessing units, which 
constitute a significant portion of semiconductor imports, have 
dropped 20 to 30 percent in price.  This may be why, according to 
the 28 December MAINICHI SHIMBUN, UCOM Chairman Yoshida reacted to 
USTR Mickey Kantor's request for an emergency meeting on 
semiconductors in January by stating: "It is regrettable that the 
third- quarter foreign semiconductor share figure did not reflect 
the [Japanese] users' actual purchases or efforts." 

   Although MITI agreed to the emergency meeting, because either 
side is permitted to call one under the 1991 Semiconductor 
Agreement, MITI has taken the stance that it will oppose any attempt 
to raise the foreign share of the Japanese semiconductor market or 
to establish new numerical targets, according to the 28 December 
NIKKEI. 

   The 21 December NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN observes that although the 
foreign share of the Japanese semiconductor market is not expected 
to suddenly revive, "there is hope for the future."  As demand for 
personal computers in the United States slows, the semiconductors 
used in these computers "will become more available for sale in 
Japan."  The paper notes that imports of semiconductors used in 
telecommunications equipment will probably increase with the 
liberalization of the cellular telephone market in Japan and with 
increased exports of cellular phones to the United States.  Japanese 
imports of programmable logic devices, a specialized type of 
semiconductor, "are also expected to increase." 

   Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment Sales Up Sharply in October 
- Sales of Japanese-made semiconductor manufacturing equipment 
(SME), including exports, rose sharply in October by 41 percent over 
the same month last year to 24.7 billion yen ($225 million), 
according to statistics compiled by the Semiconductor Equipment 
Association of Japan (SEAJ).  This is the sixth consecutive monthly 
increase and the first time in over two and a half years that growth 
over 40 percent has been recorded.  [For previous reporting on SME 
sales, see the 21 April 1993 Pacific Rim Economic Review Vol 2, No 
8] 

   On a segmented basis, sales of domestically produced equipment 
used in the wafer processing stage of production--including steppers 
for which orders from the U.S. and South Korea have been strong- 
-grew by 52.9 percent to 15.3 billion yen ($139 million), accounting 
for over 60 percent of total sales.  Nikon and Canon, the two 
biggest stepper producers, are planning to operate their plants at 
full capacity until the middle of next year.  Overseas sales of 
assembly equipment used in the post-manufacturing process, such as 
bonding equipment, continued to strengthen, and total sales rose 
61.1 percent to 3.9 billion yen ($36 million). 

   The SEAJ also reports that total SME sales in Japan, including 
imported U.S.-made equipment, registered an increase for the first 
time in three months, rising 6.7 percent over October 1992 to 19.6 
billion yen ($178 million).  Japanese semiconductor producers are 
beginning to increase capital investments due to strong and 
sustained demand for advanced memory chips, but also in response to 
massive capital investments recently made by U.S. and Korean 
semiconductor makers such as Intel and Samsung.  (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 25 Dec 93 p 5) 

   U.S. Replaces Japan as Leader in Semiconductor Market Share - 
According to the 14 December YOMIURI SHIMBUN, for the first time in 
eight years the United States has replaced Japan as the leader in 
world semiconductor market share.  The paper, using information from 
the U.S. firm Dataquest, ranks the approximately 160 semiconductor 
companies in the world calculated on actual output for January 
through October 1993 and estimated results for November and 
December.  In 1993, it notes, the U.S. share of the world market was 
41.9 percent, barely exceeding Japan's 41.4 percent. 

   YOMIURI's ranking of the top ten companies are as follows: 

BOT 

Rank Company Name            Sales     Growth from 1992 World Share 
                            billion)    (percentage)    (percentage) 
 1   Intel (U.S.)               7.950        56            9.6 
 2   NEC (Japan)                6.173        27            7.4 
 3   Motorola (U.S.)            5.973        29            7.2 
 4   Toshiba (Japan)            5.754        23            6.9 
 5   Hitachi (Japan)            5.038        31            6.1 
 6   Texas Instruments (U.S.)   4.003        30            4.8 
 7   Samsung Electronics (ROK)  3.047        60            3.7 
 8   Fujitsu (Japan)            2.931        15            3.5 
 9   Mitsubishi Elec. (Japan)   2.804        27            3.4 
10   IBM (U.S.)                 2.510        --           -- 

EOT 

   According to the YOMIURI article, IBM replaced Japan's Matsushita 
Electric Works in tenth place, leaving Japan with only four 
companies in the top ten.  Also, Toshiba, Fujitsu, and Mitsubishi 
Electric all fell one position from 1992.  The 14 December MAINICHI 
SHIMBUN reports that 1993 was the first time a South Korean company 
has made the top ten list.  The 14 December ASAHI SHIMBUN also noted 
that non-Japanese Asian semiconductor companies attained a combined 
7.4 percent share of the world semiconductor market, "which reflects 
the increasing pressure they are putting on Japanese companies." 

   Telecommunications/Satellites - NEC Trial-Produces Digital Mobile 
Phone for U.S. Market -- NEC, a leading manufacturer of 
communications equipment, has trial-produced a digital mobile 
telephone that uses only one IC chip, in contrast to the two or 
three chips required in current telephones.  Using a simple 
algorithm, the mobile phone analyzes incoming signals and provides 
communications without "barriers," such as static interference.  The 
new telephone, which can also be produced in a miniature size, is 
designed to be compatible with U.S. communications systems, but can 
also be used in Japan with "minor alterations."  NEC will initially 
target the U.S. market in designing applications for the mobile 
telephone. 

   The algorithm is based on three applications.  First, the 
telephone is operable in a vehicle moving at high speeds because 
changes in the waveform of digital signals are predictable and 
traceable.  The new telephone can operate in a vehicle moving at a 
maximum speed of 100 km per hour.  Second, fluctuations in reception 
quality when used in a moving vehicle are lessened because the angle 
of the waveform and distance are used as polar coordinates to track 
the position of the waveform, making the signal traceable even when 
it fluctuates considerably.  Third, the static interference caused 
by signals echoing off high-rise buildings and mountains is reduced 
by staggering the timing for tracking signals to allow for a process 
in which all other signals received are compared to the initial 
signal.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 27 Dec 93 p 4) 

   NTT To Establish Specialized Office for Multimedia Activities - 
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) has revealed that it will 
establish a "Multimedia Promotion Office" by merging existing 
corporate offices that currently oversee various aspects of its 
multimedia business activities.  NTT has not yet decided which units 
will be merged into the new office, which is scheduled to open in 
February 1994, but it is considering its Technology Studies Office, 
Imagery Communications Office, and Human Interface Research Center. 

   The new multimedia office will serve as NTT's "observation and 
command tower" for multimedia-related activities and will collect 
data on industry activities domestically and overseas, appraise the 
technical strengths of U.S. and Japanese manufacturers in the 
industry, and examine possible joint development projects.  NTT lags 
behind other Japanese and U.S. computer, electronics, and 
communications companies, which have formed strategic alliances in 
the multimedia service industry, and hopes to use the new office to 
link up with them.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 28 Dec 93 p 8) 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - Planned Overhaul of Corporations 
To Emulate Japanese Groupings -- A pilot project to convert about 55 
PRC conglomerates into Japanese-style corporations like Mitsubishi 
will be coordinated by the State Economic and Trade Commission 
(SETC), the State Planning Commission, and the State Commission for 
Economic Restructuring.  Most of the state enterprises participating 
are on the top 1,000 list.  The move is part of the overall reform 
strategy resulting from November's Third Plenary Session.  SETC 
Minister Wang Zhongyu reportedly dubbed it the "10,000-1,000-100-10 
Project" whereby 10,000 large and medium-sized state enterprises 
will be rejuvenated by the year 2000; of this 10,000, 1,000 will be 
chosen to test the concept of "supervisory boards," while 100 will 
undergo corporate restructuring, and 10 cities will be targeted for 
comprehensive reform of the state sector.  (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA 
MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) in English 30 Dec 93 p 1) Hong Kong 
Bureau 

   Shenzhen Company Involved in Record Equity Transfer Deal - The 
Shenzhen Investment Management Company, an investment arm of the 
Shenzhen Municipal Government, has signed an agreement to transfer 
58.5 million shares which it currently holds in three Shenzhen- 
listed companies to the China Ping An Insurance Company in exchange 
for 67.76 million shares in Ping An.  The transfer, which is worth 
406.5 million yuan, will make the Shenzhen Investment Management 
Company one of the top five shareholders in Ping An.  This is the 
largest equity transfer deal ever in China.  The 58.5 million shares 
comprise 36 million in the real estate developer Shenzhen Wuye 
Development (Group) Co. Ltd., 15 million in the Shenzhen 
Petrochemical (Group) Co. Ltd., and 7.5 million shares in the 
Shenbao Industry Co. Ltd.  After the purchase, Ping An will have a 
10.45 percent stake in Wuye, a 7.71 percent stake in Shenzhen 
Petrochemical and a 6.35 percent stake in Shenbao.  (Beijing CEI 
Database 4 Jan 94) Hong Kong Bureau 

   First VCR Plant Begins Production in Dalian - The country's first 
manufacturer of key video cassette recorder (VCR) components 
formally began production in Dalian City, Liaoning Province, on 28 
December.  The China Hualu Electric Ltd, a shareholding company with 
investment from 10 assembly factories, formed a joint venture with 
Japan's Matsushita Electronics Industries last month.  The Japanese 
partner will invest about $81 million in the Hualu plant which cost 
$277 million to set up.  The plant will use the most advanced 
Matsushita technology and equipment to produce up to 1.8 million 
sets of key VCR components annually. The annual output value is 
expected to be $155 million, generating pretax profits of $26 
million.  The second phase of Hualu will soon be launched to push 
production capacity to 3 to 4 million sets annually by 1995. 
(Beijing CHINA DAILY 29 Dec 93 p 2) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Zhejiang Is First Province To Have Complete Mobile Phone Network 
- Zhejiang has become the first province in China to have a complete 
mobile phone network.  The system serves over 60,000 users in the 
province's 74 counties and cities.  Tu Yonghe, deputy director of 
Zhejiang Posts and Telecommunications Administration, says the 
system capacity will be expanded to satisfy more clients and that 
any Hangzhou resident applying will have a phone installed by 1995. 
Hangzhou, with a population of 1.36 million, has a switchboard which 
can handle 189,200 lines, 131,000 of which have been hooked up. 
About 100,000 applicants have had phones installed this year and 
60,000 are still waiting.  Of the applicants, 60 percent are 
individuals while the rest are work units.  Tu said the province 
plans to expand telephone capacity to 3 million lines, add 20,000 
trunk lines, and build five post offices by the end of 1994. 
(Beijing CHINA DAILY 23 Dec 93 p 3) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Barclays Bank Arranges $40-Million 
Telecommunications Loan -- In a deal brokered by Britain's Barclays 
Bank PLC, the Beijing International Trust and Investment Corporation 
(BITIC) will receive a loan of $40 million from a consortium of 10 
overseas financial firms to build a nationwide telecommunications 
network.  The other lenders are from Bahrain, South Korea, Italy, 
Singapore, Germany, and Austria.  In 1993, BITIC also secured a $25- 
million general purpose loan from Japan's Sumitomo Bank.  Since its 
establishment in 1984, BITIC has acquired loans of over $500 million 
for key construction projects in Beijing.  The telecommunications 
network will use advanced equipment from Motorola and will make use 
of an existing People's Liberation Army General Staff Headquarters 
communications network.  When the network is operational, users of 
cellular phones will have immediate access to information such as 
trading on the Shanghai Securities Exchange.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 
31 Dec 93 p 2) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Planned Sino-Indonesian Center To Boost Exports - China and 
Indonesia plan to build a trade center in Indonesia to boost exports 
from the mainland.  The center will become an ideal place to display 
and sell Chinese goods in Indonesia, said Probosutedjo, chairman of 
the Indonesia-China Advisory Committee of Industry and Commerce. 
Liu Shanzai, assistant minister of foreign trade and economic 
cooperation told Probosutedjo that China hopes the facility will 
improve the after-sales service for machinery and electronics 
products and that it will act as a base for expanding into Southeast 
Asia.  Probosutedjo said he wanted strengthened cooperation with 
China on the construction of power stations, hoping that China could 
provide power generating equipment and technology to help ease 
Indonesia's power shortages.  Liu said Indonesia favored Chinese 
power generating equipment because it is cheaper than that from 
developed countries and that China will try to export more 
equipment.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 23 Dec 93 p 2) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Qingdao Attracts Large Amounts of Asia-Pacific Investment - 
Qingdao, in Shandong Province, has become one of the main cities for 
absorbing investment from Asia-Pacific countries and regions. As of 
November 1993, a total of 2,147 enterprises receiving investments 
from Asia-Pacific countries and regions had been established in 
Qingdao, constituting 95 percent of the total number of foreign- 
funded enterprises in the city.  The investment value was $4.552 
billion, 93.5 percent of total foreign investment, and contracted 
foreign capital $2.908 making up 94.2 percent of the total 
contracted foreign capital.  The city has also obtained loans of 
$86.8 million and $103 million from the Asian Development Bank.  The 
top six Asia-Pacific investors are:  Hong Kong, Taiwan, the United 
States, South Korea, Japan, and Singapore.  The industries involved 
include the food processing, textiles and clothing, machinery 
processing, chemical industry, arts and crafts, plastics, and 
tertiary industries.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1108 GMT 23 Dec 
93) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Hong Kong Regains Position as World's Biggest Container Port - 
Extrapolated statistics show that Hong Kong will will handle a total 
of 9.3 million twenty foot equivalent units (TEU) in 1993, eclipsing 
Singapore, Rotterdam, and Kaohsiung to become the world's biggest 
container port.  Mainland China has made the biggest contribution to 
growth, with the value of goods transited via Hong Kong increasing 
by 33 percent from January to October this year.  Mainland China is 
Hong Kong's biggest transit market and 42 percent of its export 
commodities are shipped abroad via Hong Kong.  Hong Kong's efforts 
to constantly improve its port facilities and cargo-handling 
procedures have also contributed to the success in its shipping 
industry.  Operating procedures have been improved. For instance, 
all incoming and exiting trucks are now supervised and directed by 
computer as a result of the Port Authority's decision to automatize 
and computerize procedures.  This has reduced the time required to 
load and unload a container to less than one hour. 

   The container and shipping industry is very important to Hong 
Kong's economy.  The industry handles 90 percent of the territory's 
total cargo and contributes 15 percent of GDP, providing jobs to 
350,000 people.  In the last five years, Hong Kong's capacity has 
increased 15 percent annually, and its marine cargo is predicted to 
increase from 100 million tonnes per annum at present to 200 million 
tonnes by the turn of the century, increasing by a further 100 
percent by 2011.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1022 GMT 27 Dec 
93) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Hong Kong TV Maker Targets Mainland Market for Expansion - 
Consumer electronics group Kong Wah Holdings has entered into a 
joint venture with the Shannxi-based Caihong Electronic Group to 
exploit the color television market in China.  Kong Wah and Caihong 
will both hold 42.5 percent of the venture, the remainder being held 
by Zhuhai's Tong Fei company.  Kong Wah's initial investment would 
be HK$10 million.  Kong Wah Chairman CK Lam said that, as China's 
largest manufacturer of color picture tubes, Caihong Electronics 
would be able to stabilize the supply of picture tubes to Kong Wah. 
Mr. Lam said the company expected to invest a further HK$2O million 
in the project by the end of next year.  Kong Wah currently has 8 
percent of the mainland market for televisions, but Lam expects this 
to increase to 20 to 25 percent by the end of 1994.  (Hong Kong THE 
STANDARD 23 Dec 93 p 23) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Jiangsu Economic, Technological Development Zone Attracts 
Foreigners - Kunshan Economic and Technological Development Zone, 55 
km west of Shanghai in Jiangsu Province, has exerted great efforts 
to accelerate its economic development.  Some 19 overseas countries 
and regions, including the United States, Japan, Germany, South 
Korea, Singapore, Thailand, Hong Kong, and Taiwan have provided 
investment.  From 1989 to June 1993 the zone sold 91 parcels of land 
covering an area of 3.24 million square meters to foreign investors. 
By last September the zone had 250 enterprises of which the 164 from 
overseas had promised $600 million in investment.  During the past 
eight years the zone has created an industrial output value of $1.26 
billion generating $69 million in profits and taxes, while exports 
have totaled $350 million.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY (BUSINESS WEEKLY) 
2-8 Jan 94 p 4) Hong Kong Bureau 

   Taiwan:  Finance Ministry To Remove More Limits on Financial 
Investment - The Ministry of Finance on 20 December decided to 
abolish the ban on investment in Taiwan's banking sector by overseas 
Chinese and foreigners and to cancel limits on the ratio of share 
ownership which overseas Chinese and foreigners are subject to when 
investing in securities firms, insurance companies, and futures 
trading houses in Taiwan.  To accelerate the development of Taipei 
into an Asia-Pacific financial center, the ministry has also decided 
to abolish limits on foreign cash flow.  According to the decision, 
foreign investors will be allowed to freely remit their capital 
funds and gains earned from investment in Taiwan.  (Taipei CHING-CHI 
JIH-PAO 21 Dec 93 p 1) Okinawa Bureau 

   Economic Cooperation Agreement Signed With Turkey - The Chinese 
National Association of Industry and Commerce and the Turkish 
Association of Foreign Relations on 14 December concluded a 
cooperation agreement in Taipei.  The Republic of China and Turkey 
agreed to promote bilateral economic and trade contacts as well as 
exchanges of personnel and information.  They have also agreed to 
form a Chinese-Turkish Bilateral Commercial Committee and to 
establish the first channel of economic and trade cooperation 
between Taiwanese and Turkish industrial and commercial enterprises. 

   According to statistics by the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the 
volume of trade between Taiwan and Turkey totaled $390 million in 
1992, an increase of 45 percent over 1991.  In the first three 
quarters of this year, bilateral trade rose to $510 million. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 15 Dec 93 p 9) Okinawa Bureau 

   Foreign Investment in Stock Market Estimated To Quadruple in 1993 
- According to the Central Bank of China, more than $700 million in 
foreign capital poured into Taiwan's stock market in December as 
more foreign organizations have been granted approval to invest in 
Taiwan.  It is estimated that the amount of foreign capital invested 
in the stock market here will exceed $1.7 billion this year, four 
times the 1992 figure.  The Central Bank noted the continued inflow 
of foreign capital has caused the New Taiwan dollar to steadily 
appreciate against the U.S. dollar.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 17 
Dec 93 p 1) Okinawa Bureau 

   Exports to U.S., Hong Kong Outlined; Investment in PRC Climbs - 
By the end of November this year, the ratio of Taiwanese exports to 
Hong Kong rose to 21.7 percent, while the ratio of exports to the 
U.S. market dropped from last year's 28.9 percent to 27.6 percent. 
The Ministry of Economic Affairs has predicted that within the next 
three years, Hong Kong may replace the United States as Taiwan's 
largest export market.  Meanwhile, in the first eleven months of 
this year Taiwanese investments in the PRC totaled $1 billion, about 
five times last year's figure of $247 million.  From January to 
November, Taiwan's exports via Hong Kong exceeded $18.5 billion, 
representing an annual increase of 18.5 percent, earning Taiwan a 
trade surplus of $15.3 billion.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 21 Dec 93 
p 1) Okinawa Bureau 

   KMT-Run Enterprises Will Not Be Allowed To Invest in the PRC - At 
a 16 December meeting on Kuomintang-run enterprises, Party Secretary 
General Hsu Shui-te said party-run enterprises will definitely not 
be allowed to invest in the PRC.  Hsu made the remark in response to 
a suggestion that party-run enterprises should be allowed to invest 
in the PRC once Taiwan becomes a GATT member.  (Taipei CHING-CHI 
JIH-PAO 20 Dec 93 p 1) Okinawa Bureau 

   GATT Membership To Impact on Automotive Regulations - Within two 
to three years after joining GATT, Taiwan will completely abolish 
the regulations requiring automobiles manufactured on the island to 
use a certain proportion of locally manufactured parts.  These 
regulations are still enforced to protect the local car industry. 
Meanwhile, Economic Minister Chiang Ping-kun said on 27 December 
that Taiwan will have to open its market to foreign cars after it 
becomes a GATT member, adding that the Republic of China will allow 
four to five years for the car industry to adjust before opening the 
market to foreign cars.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 28 Dec 93 p 2) 
Okinawa Bureau 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Russian Researcher Documents Decline of 
North Korean Economy - SUMMARY:  In a recent assessment of the North 
Korean economy, a Russian Academy of Sciences senior researcher, who 
had lived in North Korea from 1985 through 1991, concluded that the 
North Korean economy has been in serious decline for the past 15 
years. 

   Russian academician Svetlana Serapimovna Suslina, a specialist in 
North and South Korean industrial development, recently wrote that 
despite the limited nature of available North Korean economic data, 
there is enough evidence to document serious economic decline for 
the last 15 years.  The main economic characteristics of the l98Os 
and the l990s have been the shortages of resources, technologies, 
and energy, according to an article Suslina authored in the 11 
November 1993 issue of the South Korean weekly magazine, SISA 
JOURNAL.  In her article, Suslina estimated that industrial 
facilities are currently operating only at between 50-70 percent of 
capacity. 

   Suslina concluded that as economic problems have mounted, North 
Korea's leaders have realized the need for economic cooperation with 
the outside world.  However, with the decrease of raw materials 
imported from the former Soviet Union, joint ventures have been 
faced with serious obstacles.  She estimated that North Korea 
participates in about 200 joint venture companies within and outside 
the country. 

   Suslina outlined the following sketch of the status of North 
Korea's Third Seven-Year plan (1987-1993) as of 1992: 

   Electricity and Energy:  Suslina wrote that North Korea's most 
urgent task is to build hydroelectric power plants.  She said that 
originally Pyongyang had planned to build hydroelectric power plants 
in Daechong and Mt. Kumgang and a thermal power plant in Anju, along 
with two nuclear power plants.  However, according to Suslina, the 
Daechong hydroelectric power plant, which she described as 
potentially the biggest in the country, has been only partially 
completed, and construction work on the Kumgang and Anju power 
plants has not even begun.  She wrote that plans to build additional 
power plants in Namgang, Sopyongyang, Sibiwol, and Haeju have been 
postponed.  The total electricity output for 1992 was "31 billion 
kw/h." 

   Coal Production:  According to Suslina, much effort has been put 
into the expansion of mining facilities in Anju, Sunchon, Dukchon, 
Pukchong, and Kadong, but this attempt proved to be "hardly 
profitable."  She said that the regime had set the goal of producing 
120 million tons of coal per year, but that only 52 million tons 
were produced in 1992. 

   Steel Production:  Suslina wrote that despite the regime's high 
expectations, the Kim Chaek Iron Complex is operating only at one 
third of its total annual production capacity of 5 million tons 
because of shortages of coal and other materials.  She asserted that 
the North Koreans are planning to build a new iron foundry with a 2 
million ton capacity in the Chollima "Industrial Complex," but that 
the completion of the facility is far off.  The declared purpose for 
building the Chollima foundry is to produce 400,000 tons of aluminum 
per year and nonferrous metals for aluminum alloy.  According to 
Suslina, the DPRK planned to produce 1.7 million tons of nonferrous 
metals in 1992, but could only produce 300,000 tons.  She estimated 
total production of cast iron at 3.5 million tons, and iron and 
steel at 4 million tons. 

   Machinery:  According to Suslina, Pyongyang hopes to increase 
production by "2.5 times."  However, she said that the achievement 
of this goal has been hampered by shortages of metals, backward 
production techniques and other factors.  She reported that in 1992 
North Korea produced 20,000 pieces of agricultural equipment and 
15,000 trucks. 

   Agricultural and Marine Production:  Suslina wrote that the 
regime has set a "unrealistic" targets for grain production, 
including rice.  She estimated that total grain production for 1992 
was only 5.5 million tons, including 3 million tons of rice.  She 
opined that factors contributing to the low production figures 
include the lack of adequate irrigation and chemical fertilizer 
supplies, and inadequate mechanization because of fuel shortages. 
She wrote that production for 1993 would fall far short of the goal 
of 7.2 million tons, with actual production reaching only 3.5 
million tons.  For marine production, she said that the regime's 
1993 goal was 11 million tons, but that the actual production would 
reach only 3 million tons. 

   Light Industry:  Suslina wrote that poor conditions in heavy 
industry have also affected the country's light industry.  For 
example, total textile output for 1992 remained only at one third of 
the projected goal of 1.5 billion meters. 

   Housing:  In contrast to other industries, Suslina stated that 
housing construction in North Korea has been booming, particularly 
in Pyongyang, where, she observed, a marked increase of housing 
construction. 

   South Korea Sees DPRK's 1993 Economic Performance as Worst Ever - 
An official South Korean government year-end report on North Korea 
has concluded that the country's economy experienced its "worst 
crisis" in 1993 and would continue negative growth, which has been 
the trend since 1990.  The deterioration of the North's economy is 
attributed to energy and raw material shortages, as well as to 
country's socialist policies. 

   According to the 2 December issue of Seoul's NAEWOE PRESS, North 
Korea's limited economic accomplishments in 1993 centered around 
labor intensive basic industries like railroad construction, 
electrification of railways, housing construction, and clothing and 
textile factories.  North Korea also reportedly set up three joint- 
venture companies in cooperation with the General Association of 
Korean Residents in Japan (Chosen Soren) to produce graphite, 
medicines, and machinery.  The shortage of materials not only 
affected manufacturing but the construction field as well, with many 
construction projects remaining unfinished.  South Korea also 
estimated that the 1993 rice harvest would be down 30 percent from 
1992.  The following is a chronology of projects completed in North 
Korea in 1993.  (Seoul NAEWOE PRESS 2 Dec 93 pp C1-C4) 

BOT 

Date       Project                       Additional Details 

6 Jan.     Expansion of Kim Chaek        Construction begunin 1989 
           Polytechnical Institute       at order of Kim Chong-il; 
                                         15-story main building 

8 Jan.     Ground breaking for Sokdo     Floor space:  5,000 square 
           ice rink in Pyongyang         meters 

18 Jan.    Construction of large-scale 
           floating dock in Nampo 
           shipyard 

11 Feb.    Opening of electric railway   255.5 km 
           between Haesan and Manpo 

13 Feb.    Opening of electric railway    80 km 
           between Pyongsan and Kaesong 

4 Mar.     Opening of Yun I-sang Music    Floor space: 17,000 square 
           Hall in Pyongyang              meters 

3 Apr.     Opening of International Boys  Floor space: 15,O0O square 
           Camp in Songdowon in Wonsan    meters 
           City 

9 Apr.     Opening of Three Revolution    Floor space: 80,000 square 
           Exhibition Hall in Pyongyang   meters 

13  Apr.   Expansion of highway between   40 km 
           Pyongyang and Kangdong 

13  Apr.   Construction of March 4th      Annual production 
           Factory in North Pyongan       capacity: 
           Province                       150,000 pairs of rubber 
                                          shoes 

22  Apr.   Construction of Pukdaechon     360 m 
           suspension bridge 

28  Apr.   Completion of Scientists' Inn  800-room facility 
           in Pyongyang 

25 May     Construction of army-civilian  120 m 
           bridge in Daechon-ri, 
           Pyongyang 

1 Jun.     Opening of Myongshim Joint     Product--graphite; 
           Venture                        Chosen Soren joint venture 

11 Jun.    Construction of waterway       35 km 
           between Sohaegapmoon and 
           Ongjin 

21 Jun.    Construction of hot sauce      Floor space:  6,400 square 
           factory in Kaesong             meters 

Early Jul  Housing construction in        Construction begun in 
           Namsinuiju                     June,1988; 4,000 units 

Late Jul.  Housing construction in        Construction begun in May, 
           Pyongyang                      1992; 16,000 units in 
                                          Unification Road and 
                                          several thousands units in 
                                          Liberation Road 

Late Jul.  Third phase of Pyongyang       12 km between Saemaul Road 
           City electric streetcars       and Hasin Road 
           project 

25 Jul.    Opening of export clothing 
           factories in Daean, Yomju, 
           and Chungsan 

26 Jul.    Opening of export clothing 
           factory in Yonggang, South 
           Pyongan Province 

6 Aug.     Completion of boys camp        7-story building 
           in Hamhung City 

Late Aug.  Construction of electric       5.5 km 
           trolley line between Anju 
           and Sinanju 

Late Aug.  Construction of electric 
           railway between Yongkwang 
           and Sasu 

5 Sep.     Construction of railway        7.5 km 
           between Kowon and Purae 

Early Sep  Opening of Mankyongdae         Products--coats and dress 
           clothing factory in            suits 
           Pyongyang 

13 Sep.    Start-up operation of 
           Nanam Clothing Factory 
           in Chongjin 

7 Oct.     Completion of Pyongyang        Floor space:  33,000 
           cigarette paper factory        square meters 

7 Oct.     Construction of Aekuk          Funded by Chosen Soren 
           preventive medicine 
           manufacturing co. in 
           Pyongyang 

19 Oct.    Expansion of duck feather      Products--clothes and 
           processing factory in          blankets 
           Sunan, South Pyongan 
           Province 

19 Oct.    Expansion of export clothing 
           factory in Chongju, North 
           Pyongan Province 

20 Oct.    Start-up operation of          Products--combines, rice- 
           Kumkang Motor Joint Man-       planters, etc. 
           agement in Wonsan 

EOT 

   North Korea Claims Improved Method of Producing Riced Corn Flour 
- The maize processing research institute of North Korea's Academy 
of Light Industrial Sciences is claiming to have developed an 
improved method of producing riced corn flour.  The new riced corn 
flour is reportedly twice as sticky as that processed by the 
previous method and expands much like white rice.  The institute 
claims that it is currently producing three tons of riced corn flour 
per day and plans to introduce the new method nationwide.  Kim 
Chong-il reportedly congratulated the institute for its achievement. 
(Pyongyang MINJU CHOSON 12 Nov 93 p 1) 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Press Calls for Environmental Awareness - 
SUMMARY:  The ROK press is calling on the South Korean government 
and the country's businesses to formulate a coherent response to 
advanced countries' attempts to develop international environmental 
management standards.  According to the press, the ROK response 
should include analyzing the proposed standards, adopting standards 
for the ROK, and encouraging firms to set up their own environmental 
standards.  The press also notes concerns that environment-related 
standards will become trade barriers as firms in polluting 
industries, which are numerous in, and key to, South Korea's 
economy, try to export to developed countries. The press is also 
voicing criticism that advanced countries intend the proposed 
standards to have just such an effect on trade. 

   The issue of international environmental management standards 
(IEMS) is becoming increasingly visible, according to the 1 December 
SILMUL KYONGJE.  The journal, published by the Korea Institute for 
Industrial Economics and Trade (KIET), notes that leading nations 
have been busily drawing up various regulations concerning 
environmental standards.  The fact that the United States and the EC 
are working actively to internationalize their own environmental 
standards, and that Japan is also actively promoting environmental 
inspection standards, should open up South Korea's eyes to the 
issue, SILMUL comments.  The 22 December CHUGAN MAEGYONG reports 
that the standards being discussed are tentatively called the ISO 
18000 series, on which the EC, in particular, is reportedly hard at 
work.  This series would assess, confirm, and certify the effects 
business activities have on the environment.  Unlike the ISO 
(International Standards Organization) 9000 series, which applies 
only to manufacturers, the 18000 series would apply to both the 
manufacturing and service industries and govern a full range of 
enterprise activities and products.  SILMUL notes that the standards 
would target everything from product R&amp;D to waste disposal, and that 

firms would have to follow strict procedures in producing goods or 
services without harming the environment in order to be awarded this 
certification. 

   According to SILMUL, the ROK government and ROK companies must 
realize the importance of this trend to develop IEMS, and should 
obtain and evaluate, as early as possible, advanced countries' 
environmental standards.  Some experts say that South Korea should 
adopt an IEMS certification system.  SILMUL explains that this would 
allow Korean-owned multinational corporations to have a single 
regulatory system, avoid duplicated certification or labelling 
procedures, and facilitate international transactions.  At the 
company level, firms should improve their abilities to measure the 
environmental impact of their operations and set up their own 
environment-related measures.  CHUGAN reports that the ISO formed an 
Environmental Technology Committee in February 1993 to develop a 
standards system.  In response, four ROK conglomerates and the 
Environmental Preservation Committee have formed five working-level 
teams to look at the issue as well.  Samsung Group's team is looking 
at environmental management and inspection, Hyundai's team will look 
at evaluating environmental efficiency, the Lucky-Goldstar team will 
analyze product life cycles, and Daewoo's team will work on 
environmental terminology and product standardization.  The 
Environmental Preservation Committee will look into the issue of 
environmental labelling.  In addition, all of the teams are tasked 
with looking at developing IEMS for South Korea. 

   While ROK press reports offer suggestions for adopting IEMS, they 
also note increasing concern that IEMS could be used as a new form 
of trade barrier.  According to SILMUL, if the standards drawn up by 
various countries are not brought into international "harmony," they 
may become barriers to international trade.  SILMUL points out that 
some ROK experts criticize moves to set up new international 
standards as attempts to erect "intellectual trade barriers" aimed 
at protecting domestic industries.  For example, if a "developing" 
country such as South Korea cannot obtain IEMS certification for a 
product, exports of this product to developed countries could be 
completely blocked.   These regulations would be applied extensively 
to industries that are heavy polluters, such as the petrochemical 
and software industries, and thus could be used as non-tariff 
barriers in these sectors. 

   CHUGAN is more blunt.  It states that the intent of advanced 
countries is to "set up technical trade barriers against 
underdeveloped countries."  Even the existing ISO 9000 series is 
gradually changing into a defensive tool used to attack products of 
underdeveloped countries and protect domestic industries, CHUGAN 
opines.  The journal notes that with the proposed ISO 18000, 
regardless of how good a product's quality is, its importation could 
be blocked if the product does not meet the IEMS.  The fact that 
nations could refuse imports in this way could greatly change 
international trade, CHUGAN warns.  The 20 December MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN asserts that the efforts of advanced countries to protect the 
environment through strengthening regulations can only lead to 
restricted trade.  The paper repeats experts' warnings that if key 
advanced countries are not satisfied with the results of the Uruguay 
Round, a new "green round" will close in faster than expected. 

   An article in the 21 December MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS) predicts 
that there may be moves to add an environmental clause when the 
final Uruguay Round agreements are signed in April.  MKS claims 
that, while environmental drives may prevent some of the 
environmental destruction accompanying growing world trade, they 
would also restrain developing and underdeveloped countries' entry 
into the global export market.  The paper warns that if this "green 
round" comes to pass, it will become yet another "attack" of 
"stupendous" trade pressure on South Korea.  This is because key ROK 
industries--steel, cement, textiles, automobiles, etc.--all can be 
linked to environmental problems such as acid rain, global warming, 
or destruction of the ozone layer. 

   ROK firms will pay a price whether they meet environmental 
standards or not, according to MKS.  If firms do not meet the 
standards, their exports can be restricted.  If they do meet the 
standards, their production costs are likely to soar, international 
competitiveness will weaken, and their exports will be pushed out of 
the global market.  To add insult to injury, MKS asserts, ROK firms 
will have to import environmental "know-how" from advanced countries 
in order to bring their operations up to the new standards, and thus 
for a time may be dependent on outside technology.  MKS concludes 
that South Korea must begin preparing for the coming changes.  Firms 
must realize the advantage to long-term investments in pollution 
control, and the ROK industrial structure must shift towards non- 
polluting, clean industries.  Finally, because of reduced budgets in 
recent years, the ROK government has held back investment funds for 
environmental R&amp;D.  It must now begin to nurture and attract 
environmental scientists, technicians, and policy experts in order 
to prepare for the future. 

   FEATURE:  Government Wavers on Mid-Size Airplane Project - 
SUMMARY:  Seoul's current plan to subsidize development of a 50- 
passenger aircraft for use by domestic carriers may be shelved in 
favor of a project for a larger plane built with U.S. technology and 
aimed at the Asia-Pacific market, according to ROK press reports. 
The tie-in with a U.S. manufacturer reportedly would neutralize the 
maneuvers of South Korean firms which have signed agreements with 
Chinese and Russian aerospace companies to enhance their eligibility 
for participation in the government-funded project. 

   The South Korean government has been sending mixed signals on the 
type of mid-size commercial aircraft project it is willing to 
subsidize, Seoul newspapers report.  According to the 19 November 
HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN and 24 November CHUGAN MAEGYONG, the ROK's 
Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) announced its intent 
in March 1993 to make South Korea one of the world's ten leading 
aircraft producers.  The plan called for developing a 50 to 100-seat 
mid-size plane by 1998 with a limited range of 1,600 km, paid for 
with 250 billion won ($312.5 million) in public funds.  After the 
program had succeeded and South Korea accumulated experience and its 
own technology, an international partner was to be sought to share 
the risk on larger aircraft projects. 

   During 1993, the ROK's three fixed-wing aircraft manufacturers, 
Samsung Aerospace, Daewoo Heavy Industries, and Korean Air, and two 
newcomers to the industry, Hyundai Precision and Halla Heavy 
Industries, reportedly tried to enhance their elibigility to 
participate in the mid-size aircraft project by signing agreements 
with Chinese, Russian, and other foreign companies for joint 
development of such a plane (See Pacific Rim Economic Review Vol 2 
No 25, 15 Dec 93 pp 29-30 for details).  Samsung envisioned building 
a 50 to 100-passenger aircraft by 1998, a plan which coincides with 
the original government proposal.  Daewoo and Korean Air layed out 
plans to build in tandem a 100 to 130-seat jetliner also by 1998. 
Hyundai aimed at several new models, including building 30 and 150- 
passenger civilian planes by 1995 and 1999, respectively.  Halla was 
also reported as planning a 50-seat aircraft by 1998, according to 
the 30 November MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS).  All five companies were 
and are motivated by the prospect of government subsidies for R&amp;D 
work in a field with potential spin-offs into other high-tech areas, 
and by the government's intent to declare one firm the "designated 
industry manufacturer," CHUGAN MAEGYONG explains. 

   According to the 15 December MKS, MOTIE's original plan for 
commercial aircraft production was influenced by a Korea Aerospace 
Research Institute (KARI) study which recommended a 50-passenger 
turboprop commuter aircraft as the most appropriate design.  The 
plane would have a maximum cruising speed of 523 km/h, a range of 
2,100 km, and both civilian and military applications.  KARI 
anticipated domestic demand for such a plane to reach 110 units by 
the year 2010.  In KARI's opinion, only after successful development 
and sales of the 50-passenger craft should South Korea go on to 
build a larger plane.  The cost of developing the 50-seater was 
estimated at 279 billion won ($348 million), including 254 billion 
won ($317 million) to develop a prototype, flight test it, and gear 
up for production.  KARI reportedly argued that development of a 
larger, 100 plus-passenger airplane would be "difficult," and that 
there was no demand for such an aircraft.  MOTIE similarly asserts 
that with 90 percent of the 100-seat aircraft market controlled by 
Boeing, McDonnell-Douglas, and Airbus, a South Korean entry of the 
same class could not compete. 

   The 15 December MKS further reports KARI's estimate that the 
"domestic aircraft industry is not set up to design, develop, 
produce, and sell aircraft on its own," and that a "consortium" of 
private manufacturers is needed under the "leadership" of one firm 
with less than 50 percent of the project under its control.  KARI 
also recommended that the ROK government or a government-invested 
agency subsidize part of the cost to boost international confidence 
in the project, enhance the consortium's power to negotiate with 
foreign companies, and "encourage understanding" among the members 
of the consortium. 

   KARI's study, the newspaper reports, drew predictable reactions 
from the contenders.  Samsung supports the 50-seat concept, having 
invested in this design.  Daewoo and Korean Air claim there is no 
demand for such a plane, and are pushing their own 100 plus- 
p,,assenger aircraft.  Hyundai, with both sides covered, can 
accomodate" the government's plan.  No party, however, is satisfied 
with the consortium proposal.  Samsung, widely favored to become the 
"designated industry manufacturer," opposes a consortium on grounds 
it will add "unnecessary" administration and complicate assignment 
of responsibility.  The company wants the consortium to be formed 
after a "leading producer" is designated, according to the 21 
December MKS.  Daewoo and Korean Air reject one company "leadership" 
of the consortium, and want the three companies (themselves and 
Samsung) to have equal shares.  Korean Air is also arguing for new 
priorities aimed at building "first for export, and later for 
domestic demand." 

   There are signs the ROK government may now be changing its 
original concept.  Citing an unidentified "government source," the 
17 November HKS reports that an ROK delegation was instructed to 
discuss with China plans for joint production of a 100 to 150- 
passenger aircraft.  The idea allegedly had been floated by China, 
during a visit there by ROK officials, for a project that would 
involve South Korean capital and Chinese aircraft technology.  The 
same source reportedly stated there were "problems" with PRC civil 
aircraft technology, however, and that the ROK would push for a 
three-way agreement with the United States and China instead.  The 
new ROK proposal, according to HKS, is for the United States to 
supply the technology, South Korea to "contribute" capital, 
manufacturing facilities, and personnel, while China provides basic 
technology and a market for the product. 

   The government source went on to state that Seoul will address 
the question of which of the "three" domestic aircraft manufacturers 
will be selected to participate in the project after talks with the 
United States and China move forward.  In a follow-up article on 19 
November, HKS claims this approach "clearly shows the [government's] 
intent of getting a hold over demand for aircraft in the Asia- 
Pacific region," in contrast to the original plan, which put 
priority on the ROK securing its own developmental technology. 
According to HKS, the new governmewnt stance renders the ROK 
companies' private arrangements to enter the market for mid-size 
aircraft "factually impossible." 

   FEATURE:  KEPCO Official Outlines Plans for Nuclear Power - 
SUMMARY:  South Korea's nuclear power industry will double its 
present capacity upon completion in 2001 of eight new reactors, a 
Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) official has recently 
written.  By 2006, nuclear facilities will reportedly generate 
nearly half the country's electrical power.  Steps are being taken 
to secure the ROK's "independence" in this sector by indigenizing 
reactor technology, diversifying fuel suppliers, and developing the 
country's own uranium enrichment facilities. 

   Seoul WONJARYOK SANOP (Atomic Power Industry) publishes in its 
November issue an overview of South Korea's plans for nuclear power 
development by Chong Po-hon, chief of KEPCO's Nuclear Power 
Industrial Group.  The magazine states that in 1992, 5.65 million or 
43.2 percent of the country's total electricity production of 13.10 
million kilowatt hours was nuclear-generated, "the highest rate in 
Asia."  Although only 31.6 percent of the generating capacity is 
nuclear, "high utilization rates of 84.5 percent in 1992, and 88.6 
percent for the first nine months of 1993" for the nine reactors now 
producing electrical power in the ROK helped achieve this ratio. 
The reactors were identified in previous press reports as Kori units 
one through four located on the southern coast near Pusan, the first 
unit of which was completed in 1978; Uljin reactors one and two, on 
the country's east coast; and Yonggwang one and two on the west 
coast - all light water reactors.  Wolsong number one in Kyonggi-do 
became operational in 1983, and is South Korea's only heavy water 
reactor at present. 
   The magazine reports that stricter environmental laws will cause 
South Korea to rely even more on nuclear power in the future. 
According to the article, eight more reactors will be built between 
1995 and 2001 with a total capacity of 7.1 million kilowatts, which 
will "double" present capacity and provide 41.3 percent of the 
anticipated electric power demand (expected to grow by 10 percent 
annually).  They include Yonggwang reactors three (1995) and four; 
the 700,000 kw heavy water Wolsong reactor number two in June 1997, 
and units three and four in 1998 and 1999; and the 1 million kw 
Uljin reactors three and four, also in 1998 and 1999.  The magazine 
does not make particular reference to the eighth new reactor.  A 14 
October 1992 KOREA TIMES article, however, stated that nine new 
reactors were planned by 2001:  two at Uljin, three at Wolsong, two 
at Yonggwang by 1996, and another two at Yonggwang by 2001. 

   Between 2000-2006, six more reactors will be built, three on 
existing sites "and three on new sites to be determined," the 
magazine reports.  The 14 new reactors reportedly are part of a plan 
enacted in November 1993 to build an additional 35.96 million kw of 
electric power capacity between 1993-2006, 12.8 million or 35.6 
percent of which will be nuclear. (Earlier ROK press reporting gave 
this same figure of 12.8 million kilowatts from 14 new reactors 
built in five places.)  The magazine states that by 2006, 47.6 
percent of the country's electricity will be nuclear-generated. 

   Steps are being taken to help the ROK secure "independence" in 
nuclear power technology, the magazine reports, through technology 
transfer from foreign countries and training of indigenous 
personnel.  According to the article, 3,240 technicians were needed 
to build and operate South Korea's nine commercial reactors, and 
1,300 more will be needed by 1996.  Yonggwang reactors three and 
four, the first reactors to be built by domestic contractors on the 
basis of foreign technology, are enabling the ROK to "secure a 
foundation for technological independence." 

   Expertise thus acquired is being used in a joint, government- 
backed program involving elements from industry, academe, and 
research institutes to develop a "next-generation nuclear reactor" 
by 2001, according to the magazine.  Its features will include a 
simpler design allowing it to be operated with a minimum of human 
interference, a higher utilization rate, and a service life of 60 
versus 40 years for present models.  The reactor will be "safer and 
more economical."  Operators will have up to 72 hours to repair 
standard breakdowns.  Core damage probability will be one-tenth that 
of present light water reactors.  The magazine also states that the 
ROK "is working on a three-stage plan to develop a standard design 
that can be used to build a power-generating station directly, 
except for details relating to the site."  This description of a 
"next-generation" reactor agrees with reporting in the 27 October 
1993 Seoul CHUGAN MAEGYONG, which names the project's participants 
as KEPCO, the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), the 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), and the 
Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety. 

   The magazine goes on to report that to secure a safe, economical 
supply of nuclear fuel, South Korea will stop relying "one-sidedly" 
on the United States and diversify its suppliers to include Canada, 
Australia, France, and Russia.  At present, the ROK also depends 
entirely on foreign countries for uranium enrichment.  "After the 
year 2000, domestic needs will exceed one million SWU (separative 
work units), and the quantity of material will be enough to let 
South Korea move on to indigenize the process.  But even then, as 
long as we can procure [enriched uranium] smoothly, there will be no 
need for us to make new efforts on our own."  The magazine states 
"as far as the fuel formation process goes, all the fuel needed for 
light and heavy water reactors is being manufactured domestically." 
Fuel production capacity reportedly will rise to 200 tons annually 
for light water, and 400 tons annually for heavy water reactors by 
June 1997. 

   FEATURE:  ROK Firms Market Workstations Based on U.S. High-Tech - 
SUMMARY:  Hyundai Electronics and Samsung Electronics are both 
marketing "indigenous" high-tech computer workstations equal to the 
best U.S. equipment, according to Seoul press reports.  Hyundai's 
workstations are built around a central processing unit 
"interchangeable" with a chip used in Sun Microsystem's products. 
Samsung's announcement that it will market its own new workstations 
follows by two months a reported agreement to build similar 
equipment for Hewlett-Packard under license. 

   Hyundai Electronics' U.S. subsidiary, a Silicon Valley-based 
company, is reported by the 2 December Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 
(MKS) to have "independently" developed a central processing unit 
(CPU) for computer workstations.  The chip has a processing speed of 
66 MHz and can accept 150 million instructions per second, making it 
the "equal" of Hewlett-Packard's PA-RISC chip and Digital's Alpha 
chip.  According to the newspaper, the unit is "interchangeable" 
(hohwan) with Sun Microsystem's "Spark" CPU used in the latter's own 
workstations. 

   "Field tests" of the unit were to be completed by the end of 
1993, MKS reports, and production is scheduled to begin at Hyundai's 
Kyonggi-do plant in September 1994.  Hyundai plans to use the CPU in 
its own workstations, but will also sell it to other South Korean 
manufacturers.  According to MKS, this is the first "indigenous" CPU 
made for workstations manufactured in the ROK.  By the first half of 
1994, Hyundai Electronics will also have "developed" a 100 MHz chip 
for use in its own products. 

   Meanwhile, the 30 November MKS reports that the same Hyundai 
subsidiary has signed an agreement with Europe's largest 
manufacturer of computer workstations, Italy's Olivetti, to export 
Hyundai's top-of-the-line models throughout Europe.  Dealership 
agreements were also made with Marubeni and Kubota for export to 
Japan, and similar arrangements with "four or five large U.S. 
computer distributors."  According to MKS, Hyundai can now compete 
for workstation sales in the United States directly with U.S. firms 
such as Sun and Hewlett-Packard.  Hyundai's subsidiary reportedly 
sold $30 million in workstations in 1993, and looks forward to sales 
of $100 million in 1994 and $300 million in 1995. 

   Hyundai's moves follow a report in the 11 November MKS that its 
chief South Korean rival, Samsung Electronics, will also market 
advanced 75 and 100 MHz workstations in the first half of 1994.  The 
two units reportedly can perform 31 and 38 million floating point 
operations per second, respectively, and the latter figure is equal 
to the "fastest equipment in the world."  According to this issue of 
the newspaper, both workstations were developed "by South Koreans 
with South Korean technology, with no assistance from the U.S. firm 
Hewlet t-Packard." 

   On 18 September, MKS had reported that Samsung Electronics 
contracted with Hewlett-Packard to build the latter's high- 
performance workstations as OEM equipment for sale in the United 
States.  MKS stated that "only a few companies in the world" such as 
H-P, Sun Microsystems, Digital, and Silicon Graphics have this 
technology, and Samsung "plans to take advantage of this opportunity 
to focus its efforts on acquiring high-performance workstation 
technology, and by indigenizing the parts, launch into its own 
development and production as well." 

   Samsung is identified in the 22 December Seoul CHUGAN MAEGYONG as 
one of several ROK semiconductor manufacturers which target 
financially troubled U.S. employees of "IBM, Apple, Hewlett-Packard" 
and other Silicon Valley-based firms for recruitment.  Image Quest 
Technology, the company's Silicon Valley subsidiary, distinguished 
itself in 1993 by hiring "a large number of specialists in thin film 
technology," the 17 May HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN reported.  The case 
was used as an example of how "South Korean electronics companies 
are expanding their efforts through a variety of means to secure the 
leading technological talent in host countries." 

   FEATURE:  Hyundai, Samsung Introduce New Combat Vehicles - 
SUMMARY:  Two ROK defense contractors are advertising new tracked 
recovery vehicles designed to support battlefield operations. 
Hyundai's entry, based on the K-1 tank chassis, will compete for 
export sales with similar equipment produced by the United States. 
Samsung's vehicle is advertised as having "multiple functions" and 
is pictured undergoing performance trials. 

   Hyundai Precision and Samsung Aerospace, two of South Korea's 
largest defense contractors, are each marketing new tracked combat 
recovery vehicles, according to Seoul press reports and 
advertisements.  Hyundai's entry, the larger of the two, is an 
"armored recovery vehicle" (K-1 ARV), which according to the 21 
December 1993 MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS) has been under development 
since April 1989.  The vehicle reportedly has a 1,200 hp engine, 
crew space for four, and a top speed of 64 km/h.  A rotating crane 
that lifts 25 tons and a main winch that can pull 70 tons "gives it 
both towing and recovery functions in support of field operations." 
MKS reports that a prototype was ready in March 1991, and that the 
vehicle has been undergoing certification tests.  The ARV will 
enhance the fighting power of ROK forces" while contributing to the 
"indigenization" of other high-tech products, the newspaper states. 
Hyundai reportedly will export the vehicle if it can be made cost 
competitive. 

   Hyundai's ARV has been advertised in the South Korean defense 
technology journal KUKBANG KWA KISUL for the past year, along with 
the company's K-1 tank and K-1 ALVB assault bridge-layer with which 
it shares many features.  Korean text accompanying the photo states 
the ARV is "based on technology used in developing the type-88 
tank."  KUKBANG KWA KISUL's August 1992 issue carried an article by 
the director of Hyundai Precision's Technology Research Institute 
introducing the vehicle and comparing it to similar equipment 
available in nine other countries, including the United States' 
M88A1E1.  According t9 the journal, Hyundai's ARV uses the K-1 power 
train and track assembly.  Overall weight is given as 51,000 kg. 

   Samsung's entry, an "armored combat bulldozer," is described in a 
12-page color brochure circulated by Samsung's aerospace subsidiary. 
The vehicle is advertised as having a combat weight of 24,490 kg, a 
295 hp diesel engine, top speed of 45 km/h on land and 4.8 km/h in 
water, a towing capacity of 14,059 kg, and winch capacity of 11,340 
kg.  Samsung claims the vehicle can be used for dozing, scraping, 
grading, and transport in addition to battlefield recovery 
operations.  Both engine and operator are protected by armor.  The 
vehicle reportedly is equipped for smoke-laying and night 
operations.  (The brochure, which uses Samsung's new logo introduced 
just a few months ago, is entirely in Korean and makes no reference 
to the vehicle's export potential.) 

   Magazine Profiles Financially Troubled U.S. High-Tech Employees - 
A recent article in a Seoul business magazine claimed that Silicon 
Valley, home of the high-tech U.S. semiconductor and computer 
industries, is going through hard times.  Once a mecca for America's 
most talented electronics specialists, the magazine reported 
unemployed Ph.D.'s now roam the streets in pursuit of a dwindling 
number of jobs.  Those of the area's high-tech personnel who still 
have jobs "feel they could be fired at any time."  As IBM, Apple, 
Hewlett-Packard and other giants undergo downsizing, and other 
companies leave the Valley in search of cheaper places to do 
business, the number of companies laying off workers to survive is 
rapidly increasing. 

   Those unable to find jobs can lose their homes within months. 
Because of the area's high cost of living, few have been able to 
accumulate enough savings to sustain a job search.  It is estimated 
that only 1 percent of a company's employees have more than $500 in 
cash, meaning that the "people live in fear of receiving separation 
notices." 

   Silicon Valley companies are cutting back expenses, automating, 
demanding long hours from employees, and immersing themselves in R&amp;D 

in a "desperate struggle" to stay in business.  "Ironically, 
America's high-tech competitiveness is being strengthened by such 
agony."  While the U.S. firms fight to survive, South Korean 
companies "such as the Samsung Group periodically take out full page 
ads in the area's newspapers to recruit engineers, and have been 
able to scout out talented personnel for a relatively modest cost." 
(Seoul CHUGAN MAEGYONG 22 Dec 93 pp 76-79) 

   Samsung Develops ROK's First Indigenous Color CRT's - Samsung 
Electron Devices, a subsidiary of the Samsung Group, has built the 
country's first indigenous 15" and 17" color cathode ray tubes 
(CRT's), and will move full-scale into mass production.  The company 
spent 3 billion won ($375 million) and 30 months on development, and 
stands to realize an annual savings of more than 100 billion won 
($125 million) on import costs.  Samsung plans to manufacture 
100,000 sets per month, some of which will be supplied to other ROK 
manufacturers.  Their success will enable South Korea to "completely 
indigenize" commercial color monitors, breaking the "world monopoly" 
Japan has held on these products.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 22 
Dec 93 p 8) 

   Comment:  A report in the 11 December Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN, p 3, calls into question the extent to which Samsung's feat 
was indigenous.  According to the Japanese newspaper, Samsung last 
September bought out the former East German color CRT manufacturer 
WF (now the SEB Co.).  Samsung then signed a joint venture agreement 
with another German company, the color CRT glassmaker FGT, which the 
Tokyo paper claims has given the South Korean firm technology to 
manufacture complete sets. 

   KOTRA Expanding, Automating Commercial Intelligence Network - The 
Korea Trade Promotion Corporation (KOTRA) is building a "trade 
information data system" that links all of its 81 overseas trade 
offices to better promote ROK exports.  The semi-official 
organization will initially spend 3 billion won ($375 million) 
completing the "KOTRA Global Network" by making Los Angeles and 
Singapore the second and third "core cities" of its information 
network after Brussels, which "covers" Europe, Africa, and the 
Middle East.  In conjunction with this, KOTRA is compiling an 
electronic data base by country that includes trade-related 
information, such as local business contacts, which its offices can 
access by on-line computer.  KOTRA has collected several thousand 
"intelligence reports" on trade issues that pertain to different 
countries and hundreds of product and company surveys that will be 
made available to the ROK government and corporations.  KOTRA will 
also finish plans next year for a "Combined Trade Information 
Research Center" to be built in the Kangnam district of the capital. 
(Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 22 Dec 93 p 8) 

   KOTRA's database is one of many information networks maintained 
by South Korean government, government-affiliated, and corporate 
institutes targeted on foreign commerce and technology, according to 
ROK press reports.  The Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
(KIST) reportedly keeps a file on Korean scholars living in Japan to 
facilitate technology transfers to South Korea, the 15 March MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS) stated.  The same paper on 7 May referred to a 
database maintained by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy 
(MOTIE) on foreign commercial, trade, and patents information; it 
also described a new "R&amp;D Information Center" set up by KIST to 
collect foreign S&amp;T information for distribution to ROK consumers. 
On 19 May, MKS reported the Ministry of Science and Technology's own 
efforts to create a database aimed at "effectively utilizing" 
expatriate Koreans "as collectors of S&amp;T information."  Samsung's 
"Overseas Areas Research Institute," which reportedly maintains a 
database of foreign "commercial intelligence," was the subject of 
reporting by two Seoul magazines (see Pacific Rim Economic Review No 
2 Vol 17, 25 Aug 93 pp 22-27).  The same company's "Talented 
Personnel Development Research Institute" was said by the 24 August 
MKS to maintain records "on more than one thousand overseas 
'brains,' primarily doctorate-level personnel living in the United 
States." 

   Tariff Reductions on High-Tech Imports Extended - The temporary 
tariff reduction on imports of some defense and high-tech industrial 
goods, which had been set to expire at the end of 1993, will be 
extended until 1997.  However, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) 
announced that the tariff reduction will by lowered by 5 percentage 
points each year, so that the current reduction rate of 35 percent 
will drop to 20 percent in the final year.  The MOF said that 707 of 
the 1,089 import items that currently receive reduced tariffs will 
automatically receive the reduced rate.  The Ministry of Trade, 
Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) has requested that the remaining 382 
items be excluded from the reduction list, but the MOF has said that 
these items will also receive the tariff reduction if import reports 
are made by 28 February.  (Seoul THE KOREA HERALD 4 Jan 94 p 8) 
Seoul Bureau 

   KEPCO Wins Contract To Provide Nuclear Technology to China - The 
Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) has won a contract to 
provide technological support for the management of a nuclear power 
plant in China's Guandong Province.  The contract was signed in 
China on 20 December by KEPCO President Yi Chong-hun and Zan 
Yunlong, president of the Guangdong Nuclear Power Joint Venture 
Company.  (Seoul THE KOREA HERALD 23 Dec 93 p 8) Seoul Bureau 

   Kodeco Energy To Develop Oil, Gas Facilities in Indonesia - 
Kodeco Energy Company has signed a contract with the Indonesian 
National Petroleum Development Corporation (Pertamina) to develop 
oil and natural gas in Indonesia's Poleng mining area.  Kodeco will 
be in charge of operations and Pertamina will be in charge of 
management.  Kodeco will invest $19.18 million over the next 10 
years to repair old facilities and build new equipment.  Reserves in 
the Poleng mining area, 25 km North of Madura, are estimated at 2.18 
million barrels of oil and 10.95 billion cubic meters (36.5 billion 
cubic feet) of gas.  Kodeco will have a 35-percent share of the gas 
and a 15-percent share of the oil that is developed, with Pertamina 
receiving the remainder.  Kodeco will also provide gas from the 
Poleng mining area to the Indonesian National Electric Power 
Corporation. (Seoul YONHAP 0429 GMT 24 Dec 93) Seoul Bureau 

   Tongbu Group To Expand Overseas Business - Tongbu Group is making 
inroads into overseas markets by setting up plants and developing 
overseas resources.  It has set up strategies to move into China, 
Vietnam, and Australia.  The group has already finished a 
feasibility study on developing a bituminous coal mine in China's 
Heilongjiang Province, and plans to conclude a joint venture 
contract in January.  It is also speeding up plans to set up a 
superphosphate fertilizer plant in Vietnam.  Tongbu is also waiting 
to hear of the results of a bid it made on a bituminous coal mine in 
Australia.  It participated jointly with other ROK businesses on the 
bid.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 4 Jan 94 p 10) Seoul Bureau 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Singapore Top Investor in Non-Gas 
Sector - According to the Indonesian Coordinating Board of 
Investment, Singapore has invested $1.17 billion in 42 non-gas 
sector projects in the first 10 months of 1993.  Cumulatively, 
Singapore ranks fourth in the value of total investments. 
Singapore's major investments are mainly in the electronics 
component industries in Batam Island.  (Jakarta MERDEKA 18 Dec 93 p 
9) Bangkok Bureau 

   Non-Gas Exports to Japan Increase - The National Export Promotion 
Board recently stated that Indonesia's non-gas exports to Japan over 
the last 10 months of 1993 rose by 22.7 percent compared to the same 
period of the previous year--from $3.26 billion to $4.001 billion. 
This is considered a "big increase" because Japan's rise in imports 
of non-gas products from other countries was only 5.23 percent. 
(Jakarta KOMPAS 17 Dec 93 p 2) Bangkok Bureau 

   LAOS:  Nam Song Water Project With Japan Signed - Electricite du 
Laos (EDL) and Japan's Hazama Corporation recently signed an 
agreement for the construction of the Nam Song Project.  The 
project, financed by a $31.5-million loan from the Asian Development 
Bank, involves diverting water from the Nam Song River to the Nam 
Ngum Reservoir to generate electricity.  An annual increase of 137 
million KWH from the present 860 million KWH is expected. 
(Vientiane KPL 0758 GMT 24 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 

   Exports, Imports for 1993 Reported - In 1993 Laos generated $220 
million in revenues from exports, a 4-percent increase over the 
original plan, while imports rose to $385 million, 12 percent higher 
than the previous year.  The Ministry of Commerce attributes this 
change to the rise of Laos as a transshipment point for goods such 
as vehicles, garments, electrical devices, utensils, and livestock, 
and "home-made" exports such as electricity, lead ore, gypsum, 
benzoin, coffee beans, and garments.  (Vientiane KPL 0809 GMT 24 Dec 
93) Bangkok Bureau 

   PHILIPPINES:  Finland To Supply Digital Cellular Equipment - 
Finland's Nokia Telecommunications has won a $30-million contract 
from Globe Telecom to supply digital cellular equipment based on the 
Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM).  The contract is the 
first phase of Globe Telecom's $100-million investment in its 
cellular mobile telephone system.  The remaining $70 million is to 
be used for successive phases.  Nokia will supply the entire GSM 
network infrastructure, including DX200 mobile switching centers, 
GSM base stations, etc.  Nokia will also provide related services 
such as network planning, implementation, commissioning, and 
planning.  (Manila BUSINESS WORLD 21 Dec 93 p 10) Bangkok Bureau 

   Investment Board Approves Geothermal, Cement Projects - The Board 
of Investments (BOI) has approved three major projects worth $500 
million.  These include the 231-MW geothermal plant of Visayas 
Geothermal Power Corp., as well as projects for the Southern Cross 
Cement Corp., and expansion of Rohm Electronics, Philippines.  The 
geothermal plant project will be undertaken by a Dutch company, 
while 40 percent of the cement production venture is backed by 
Japanese investors.  Rohm is a Japan-based electronics company. 
(Manila MANILA BULLETIN 24 Dec 93 p b-1) Bangkok Bureau 

   Volvo To Establish Assembly Plant - The Board of Investments 
(BOI) has approved the construction of an automobile assembly plant 
by Scandinavian Motors Corp., makers of Volvo luxury cars. 
Scandinavian Motors will invest $12 million and begin operations in 
a year.  (Manila THE MANILA CHRONICLE 30 Dec 93 p 11) Bangkok Bureau 

   Investments in Processing Zones Hit $107 Million in 1993 - The 
Export Processing Zone Authority capped its operations in 1993 with 
a 13-percent gain in investments as fresh capital inflows rose to 
$107 million compared with $94 million in the previous year.  The 
bulk of new investments again came from the Asia-Pacific region, 
with the Japanese dominating the investment list at $58 million, up 
from $44 million during the previous year.  Filipino investors 
pumped in $18 million during the period, up from $11.6 million the 
previous year. (Manila PHILIPPINE DAILY INQUIRER 31 Dec 93 p 17) 
Bangkok Bureau 

   SINGAPORE:  Government Sets Up $600-Million Industrial 
Development Fund - Trade and Industry Minister S. Dhanabalan 
announced recently that the Singapore Government has set up a $600- 
million Industrial Development Fund to develop the capabilities of 
Singapore companies on an industry-wide or cluster basis. He said 
the fund will be used to attract high-technology companies to 
Singapore by participating as a risk and cost-sharing partner with 
them; to accelerate development of local enterprises so that they 
will play an increasingly strategic role in developing Singapore's 
manufacturing sector; and for strategic investments with local and 
multinational companies in "good projects in the region."  The fund 
will be managed by the Economic Development Board.  (Singapore THE 
STRAITS TIMES 28 Dec 93 p 1)  Bangkok Bureau 

   Aerospace Industry Reports 6.2-Percent Growth in 1993 - The local 
aerospace sector grew by 6.2 percent and reached an estimated output 
of $900 million, according to Deputy Director Chow Tat Kong of 
Singapore's Economic Development Board.  Mr. Chow attributed the 
relatively good performance to the Asia-Pacific region's emergence 
as the most promising market for the aerospace industry worldwide. 
The sector attracted investment commitments of more than $900 
million in 1993, a 29-percent increase over the previous year. 
(Singapore THE STRAITS TIMES 28 Dec 93 p 35) Bangkok Bureau 

   THAILAND:  Central Bank Reviews Growth, Balance of Payments - 
Thailand's economic growth rate for 1993 is likely to end up between 
8 and 8.2 percent, higher than the 7.5 percent projected because of 
better export performance, according to the Bank of Thailand. 
Central Bank Spokesman Phisit Li-atham said that exports during the 
first 11 months of 1993 rose 13.1 percent and the bank expects 
exports for all of 1993 to grow by 13 percent.  The original 
projection was 11.5 percent.  The increase has been driven mainly by 
a 70-percent jump in the value of exports to Japan, partly because 
of the stronger yen.  -Exports to the United States were up 39 
percent, partly because the U.S. economy is recovering, and because 
Washington has dropped the threat of trade sanctions after receiving 
Thai promises to crack down on copyright violators. If the 1993 
growth rate ends up above 8 percent, projections for 1994--now 
ranging from 7.8 percent to 8.6 percent--may have to be revised. 

   The central bank also reported that Thailand's trade deficit had 
narrowed to $628 million in November from $830 million in October 
and $910 million a year earlier.  However, Thailand's cumulative 
trade deficit in the January to November period widened to an 
estimated $8.16 billion from $7.54 billion in January to November 
1992.  The bank said exports rose 13.1 percent during the first 11 
months to $33.4 billion, while imports rose 12.1 percent, to $41.7 
billion.  It said overall industrial exports increased 17.6 percent 
with plastic product exports and computer chip sales at the top of 
the list.  Electronics, jewelry, and furniture exports also posted a 
robust growth. 
   The current-account deficit grew to about $6.3 billion in the 
first 11 months from $6.2 billion a year earlier.  The balance of 
payments surplus rose sharply to $5.3 billion from $1.6 billion a 
year earlier because of an influx of foreign investment in Thai 
stocks.  The bank said the net inflow of foreign funds into the Thai 
stock market ballooned to $2.4 billion from January to November, 
compared to $440 million in the previous year.  The bank said Thai 
foreign reserves fell slightly to $25.2 billion at the end of 
November.  (Bangkok BANGKOK POST S Jan 94 p 17) Bangkok Bureau 

   Siam Steel To Invest in Three Projects - Siam Steel Group, the 
largest steel furniture and products manufacturer in Thailand, plans 
to invest $84 million in three projects next year.  It will 
manufacture specially coated steel pipes and satellite dishes, and 
establish an industrial estate.  Group president Wanchai 
Khunananthakun said the first project, costing $40 million, would be 
a joint venture with Matsushita Electrical Works, Ltd. of Japan to 
produce Pana Coat, a specially coated steel pipe.  The second 
project, an industrial estate costing $40 million, will be entirely 
funded by the group.  The group will also spend $8 million on 
manufacturing satellite dishes.  (Bangkok BANGKOK POST 27 Dec 93 p 
15) Bangkok Bureau 

   VIETNAM:  FEATURE:  Privatization of State Enterprises Slower 
Than Expected - SUMMARY:  Although Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet once 
again confirmed in a November Cabinet meeting that introduction of 
shareholding at state enterprises is "a major policy of both the 
Party and the State," a Ministry of Finance report reveals that by 
the end of 1993 perhaps only three to five state enterprises will 
have been converted to public shareholding ownership.  The ministry 
reportedly believes this conversion rate is "far too slow." 

   According to the 5 December Hanoi LAO DONG, a recent Finance 
Ministry report states that only 19 state enterprises have signed up 
for privatization more than 16 months after the Council of Ministers 
Chairman (now Prime Minister) announced a decision to continue a 
pilot project to convert some state enterprises into shareholding 
companies in accordance with resolutions of the Party and the 
National Assembly.  Nine firms are from northern provinces, 10 from 
southern provinces and none from the central provinces, with only 
two enterprises fully converted.  They are the Federated Transport 
Agents Company (previously under the Ministry of Communications and 
Transportation) and the Refrigeration Equipment Works Enterprise (Ho 
Chi Minh City).  Some firms have finished estimating their overall 
worth as part of the privatization process and more than 10 are 
reportedly still interested in privatization, but want to ask the 
government to loosen regulations so that their workers can get 
higher salaries after conversion to private ownership.  An earlier 
report in the 11-17 November THOI BAO KINH TE from Ho Chi Minh City, 
perhaps inadvertently, pointed out the small scale of privatization 
activity so far, noting that as of June there are more than 6,000 
state enterprises nationwide. 

   LAO DONG cites various reasons for the slow rate of 
privatization. In many localities few people really understand 
privatization and claim it "strays from the socialist path."  Many 
enterprise officials are confused about the process of starting and 
implementing the conversion to a shareholding system.  Some 
province-level party committees and government administrators are 
reportedly still awaiting separate decisions from the Politburo or 
Party Secretariat on privatization, oblivious to the fact that this 
policy has already been endorsed by the Party's Central Executive 
Committee.  In the meantime, workers' concerns are being felt, with 
many of them expressing fear that their pay will be cut.  In some 
areas, workers reportedly think that conversion to a shareholding 
system simply means divvying up state property and assets to 
individuals, and have raised "unrealistic demands."  According to a 
Finance Ministry report, there have been demands that an enterprise 
be sold to its workers with only a 15-percent downpayment, with the 
rest to be paid back over 10 years. 

   LAO DONG says that there are many reasons why the conversion of 
state enterprises into shareholding companies has been slow, but the 
major factor is that it has been made more or less voluntary. 
Furthermore, detailed and clear regulations and education concerning 
the policy have been lacking.  Many mistakes have also been made in 
calculating the assets of enterprises to be privatized. 

   LAO DONG asserts that the time has come for party and government 
organs at all levels to closely review the privatization program so 
that they can find ways to speed it up and boost the country's 
development. 

   Air Traffic Control To Receive $26-Million Upgrade - The National 
Air Routes Administration Center (Civil Aviation Department) has 
just started construction of a short/long range communications and 
radar control station at Tan Son Nhat airport as the first step in 
building a communications/radar network for the Ho Chi Minh City FIR 
(Flight Information Region).  The communications/radar network will 
consist of three stations:  at Tan Son Nhat airport, on the Son Tra 
peninsula (Da Nang), and at Quy Nhon.  The network stations will be 
equipped with RSM-970 long-range radars (450-km radius), TRAC-2000 
radars with 150-km coverage, and Eurocat-200 signal processing 
centers produced by the French firm Thompson CFS.  These three 
communications/radar stations will relay data to and from the Ho Chi 
Minh City air traffic control center via four satellite ground 
stations at Hanoi, Da Nang, Quy Nhon and Ho Chi Minh City. 

   This project represents an investment of $26 million in equipment 
plus more than $2 million for construction work.  When completed, 
the network will service not only domestic flights, but also flights 
between the Ho Chi Minh City control region and other air control 
centers (ACC) in Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Singapore, Hong Kong, 
Malaysia and the Philippines. 

   In addition to this $26-million network, the National Air Routes 
Administration Center also plans to convert the NDB system (Non- 
Directional Beacons) at Moc Chau, Ninh Binh, and Long Khanh into 
Omnidirectional Radio Range - Distance Measuring Equipment (VOR DME) 
mode, and install other VOR DME stations at Con Son, Dong Hoi, Cat 
Bi, and Phu Bai. 

   The center has also started construction of a new runway lighting 
system AFLS (Automatic Flight Landing System) and a new landing 
system ILS/DME (Instrument Landing System/Distance Measuring 
Equipment) at Da Nang airport.  This will allow aircraft to land 
safely despite poor visibility at night or in bad weather.  These 
two projects will cost nearly $2 million for equipment and more than 
$200,000 for related construction costs. 

   It is estimated that all of the above projects will be basically 
completed in the first quarter of 1994.  (Hanoi LAO DONG 2 Dec 93 pp 
1,2) 

   Foreign Investment in Agriculture Noted - To date, of the 740 
foreign investment projects in Vietnam, some 54 projects capitalized 
at more than $600 million deal with the agricultural sector.  This 
does not include a separate agricultural project in the Red River 
delta funded by the World Bank in the amount of $240 million.  Most 
foreign investment projects in the agricultural sector involve the 
processing of agricultural products and the construction of model 
agricultural factories.  Some 16 projects are under the direct 
management of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry, with 
companies from Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, France, Hong 
Kong, and the Commonwealth of Independent States participating.  (Ho 
Chi Minh City THANH NIEN 28 Nov 93-5 Dec 93 p 3) 

   Increase in Ho Chi Minh City Production Reported - According to 
the Department of Statistics, Ho Chi Minh City's 1993 general 
domestic production increased by 24 percent, or $3.325 billion, over 
the previous year.  The city's net domestic income also increased 
about 30 percent.  Compared to 1992, its industrial production 
increased more than 26 percent, while agricultural production was up 
1 percent, and internal trade, communications, and transport rose 
more than 20 percent.  Its total investment increased by 80 percent, 
or about $891 million, compared to 1992.  (Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 
1100 GMT 2 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau 

   Garment Industry Production Noted - Vietnam's garment exports in 
1993 totaled $300 million, or 36.3 percent more than the previous 
year.  The country has set a target for garment exports of $1.2 
billion in the year 2000 and $3.9 billion in 2005.  For the domestic 
market, it also plans to increase production to 110 million items in 
1995 and 175 million in 2005.  According to the Vietnam Garment 
Manufacture, Import-Export Corporation, the country now has 125 
garment manufacturing and service establishments equipped with 
nearly 40,000 machines, many of them imported from Japan, Germany 
and South Korea.  (Hanoi VNA 1443 GMT 5 Jan 94) Bangkok Bureau 

   French, Thai, Local Companies Enter Liquid Gas Venture - The 
French company Total and the Thai company BBP have entered a venture 
with a Vietnamese company to establish a gas processing plant in Ba 
Ria-Vung Tau. The $50-million plant will produce liquid gas for 
domestic use with an estimated annual capacity of 800,000 tons. 
(Hanoi Voice of Vietnam Network 1000 GMT 18 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 

   Aid From French Ministry of Finance Reported - The French 
Ministry of Finance is granting Vietnam $100 million under the 
framework of the Paris international conference on Vietnam.  France 
ranks second among countries making financial commitments to 
Vietnam.  (Hanoi Voice of Vietnam Network 1000 GMT 18 Dec 93) 
Bangkok Bureau 

   Association Reports Record Output in 1993 - The Vietnam 
Information and Electronics Association has posted a record output 
and turnover for 1993, doubling its previous year's performance. 
The Association of fourteen companies operating nationwide has 
assembled T.V. sets, cassette recorders, computers, and thousands of 
other electronic products for export, with a total turnover of over 
$71 million.  (Hanoi VNA in English 0639 GMT 24 Dec 93) Bangkok 
Bureau 

   Hanoi's Industrial Production Grows 16.8 Percent - Hanoi's 1993 
industrial production grew by 16.8 percent, up 2.6 percent over the 
previous year, according to the Statistics Department.  A sharp 
increase was recorded in footwear--121 percent; garments--34 
percent; metallurgy--42.4 percent; ceramics and glassware--41 
percent; printing--32 percent; and chemicals--30.3 percent.  The 
central state-owned sector marked a steady growth rate while the 
non-state sector showed a growth rate of 20.4 percent.  The success 
was attributed to the rapid expansion of privately owned companies 
and businesses.  (Hanoi VNA 1349 GMT 27 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 

   Expansion of Hoang Thach Cement Plant Commences - The Ministry of 
Construction and the Vietnam Cement Corporation have started 
construction of the second production line of the Hoang Thach cement 
plant in the northern province of Hai Hung.  The $85-million line, 
supplied by Denmark's F. L. Smith Company, has a design capacity of 
1.1 million tons annually, and is expected to be operational by the 
end of 1996.  The first line of the plant, also with a design 
capacity of 1.1 million tons a year, was put into operation in 1983. 
To date it has turned out nearly 6.8 million tons of cement.  (Hanoi 
VNA 0515 GMT 29 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 

   Ayun River, Be River Dammed for Irrigation, Electric Projects - 
The Ayun River was dammed recently as part of an irrigation project 
in Gia Lai Province.  Construction of the $40-million Ayunpa 
irrigation project started in March 1990 and is expected to be 
completed in late 1997.  The main facilities of the project include 
a 40m-high, 342m-long dam, a three-gate spillway with a flow of 
1,456 cubic meters per second, and a 3,700-hectare reservoir.  When 
completed, the project will bring water to 13,500 hectares of two- 
crop rice fields in nine communes of Ayunpa District.  In the first 
stage after the damming of the Ayun river, the project will water 
1,500 hectares of the 1993-1994 spring-winter crop. (Hanoi VNA 0607 
GMT 29 Dec 93) 

   The damming of the Be river for the Thac Mo hydroelectric power 
plant, northeast of Ho Chi Minh City, took place recently.  Water 
from the river will fill a 11,900-hectare reservoir with a capacity 
of 1,2SO to 1,360 million cubic meters to operate two turbines with 
a combined capacity of 150 MW.  The first turbine is expected to 
become operational in June 1994 and the second will be completed by 
the end of next year.  By then, the $156.4 million plant will 
provide 610 million kwh annually.  (Hanoi VNA 0650 GMT 29 Dec 93) 
Bangkok Bureau 

   Postal Sector's Phone Service Reports Increase in Revenues - In 
1993 the postal sector grossed more than $161.8 million, nearly 
doubling its 1992 receipts.  The postal sector assembled 49.64 
percent more telephones over 1992.  At present there are 0.37 
telephones for every 100 people, compared with 0.26 in 1992.  In 
particular, six digital telephone exchanges were recently 
commissioned in the provinces of Tuyen Quang, Ha Giang, Son La, Lai 
Chau, Cao Bang, and Yen Bai.  All 53 provinces and cities throughout 
the country are now linked to international digital networks.  The 
north-south 1,830-km fiber optic cable was commissioned with a 
capacity of 34 megabits, the 140-megabit wide-band microwave from 
Hanoi to Nha Trang was completed, and many narrow-band microwave 2- 
megabit digital interprovincial lines with a total length of 168,000 
km were completed.  Phone services have also reached rural and 
mountain areas.  At present, 221 out of 527 districts and townships 
have digital telephone exchanges.  More than 600 out of 1,000 
villages in the country have 12,680 telephones.  In addition, 
Vietnam owns 1,000 international telephone channels and 32 direct 
links with other countries.  International telephone calls in 1993 
reached 83 million minutes, twice the 1992 total.  The good 
performance in 1993 resulted from the investment of $230 million in 
200 projects, double the previous year's input.  (Hanoi VNA 1351 GMT 
29 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 

   Foreign Investments in Quang Nam-Da Nang Noted - The Central 
Province of Quang Nam-Da Nang has attracted 23 foreign investment 
projects in 1993 with a total capital of $130 million.  Le Quoc 
Khanh, chairman of the provincial people's council, stated that the 
development priority for the province in 1994 would include 
infrastructure, tourism, and promotion of traditional trade.  (Hanoi 
VNA 1000 GMT 29 Dec 93) Bangkok Bureau 
EAG/12JAN94/ECONF/TECHTF/EAST ASIA GROUP/PF 12/2138z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43187 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000001994001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   13 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-12jan94-Russia 
<H3> <TI>      Yeltsin Breaks Up, Takes Firmer Control of Security Organs </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 
                            President Boris Yeltsin has broken up the Ministry of Security 
-the successor to the old KGB--and reduced the remaining parts to 
several "services" directly under presidential control, 
presumably reducing their ability to act independently of or 
contrary to the president in future crises.  The splintered 
security services have been placed under the supervision of a 
young presidential assistant with a strong reformist background 
and no previous ties with security, Yuriy Baturin, who thus 
becomes a key figure in Yeltsin's team. 
                        END SUMMARY 
   In a 21 December edict declaring the "Cheka-OGPU-NKVD-NKGB-MGB 
KGB-MB organs unreformable" and the reorganizations of the KGB in 
recent years only "cosmetic," Yeltsin abolished the Ministry of 
Security and created a smaller Federal Counterintelligence 
Service (Federalnaya Sluzhba Kontrrazvedki) of the Russian 
Federation (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 24 December 1993).  He explained 
in a 22 December news conference that he was disbanding the KGB- 
-"the last bulwark of the former Soviet totalitarian system"--and 
that police surveillance of the people will now end and only the 
counterintelligence functions of the old organization will remain 
(Ostankino TV, 22 December 1993). 
   Sergey Stepashin (see box), whom Yeltsin appointed as the first 
deputy head of the new service, also portrayed the move as a 
drastic change, saying the new service will include only 75,000 
employees, 46 percent less than the Ministry of Security (Radio 
Rossii, 5 january).  At a 10 january news conference, Stepashin 
stated flatly that the new service will not resemble the old 
ministry and "all prerequisites for the revival of political 
surveillance have been destroyed."  The service, according to 
Stepashin, will deal only with operations by foreign intelligence 
services, terrorism, and imports of drugs and weapons, and has 
transferred its Investigations Directorate to the prosecutor's 
office and its Lefortovo prison to the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs (Krasnaya Zvezda, 11 january).  Articles in the 11 
January Komsomolskaya Pravda and Pravda based on Stepashin's 10 
January news conference added that some Ministry of Security 
units have been shif ted to the Federal Agency for Government 
Communications and Information and anti-crime units switched to 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  In a 12 january Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta interview, Stepashin said some ministry directorates will 
be disbanded but the Directorates for Counterintelligence 
Operations, for Counterintelligence Supply for Strategic 
Installations, for Military Counterintelligence, for Economic 
Counterintelligence, and for Combatting Terrorism will be 
maintained with virtually no staff cuts. 
   Golushko Retained 
   The reorganization may not be as drastic as Yeltsin and Stepashin 
indicate, however, since it was entrusted to Minister of Security 
and longtime KGB official Nikolay Golushko.  In a 29 December 
Izvestiya interview, Golushko, who was named director of the new 
service and ordered to prepare a statute outlining the structure 
and powers of the new service, spoke of only a 30 percent staff 
reduction and expressed disapproval of the edict's "harsh" 
evaluation of the ministry.  When asked how many of the 
ministry's non-counterintelligence directorates will be 
abolished, Golushko hinted that there may be little change in the 
existing structure, replying that "virtually all of our 
subdivisions" had worked on counterintelligence.  Yeltsin 
reportedly signed Golushko's statute on the new service on 5 
January.  The newspaper Segodnya, citing "sources close to 
presidential quarters," reported that the statute kept "the very 
same structure" as the ministry, minus the Investigation 
Directorate and one other directorate and made no change in the 
"fundamental nature" of the old ministry (Segodnya, 6 january). 
   Although Golushko was allowed to retain the rank of minister when 
appointed director of the new service, the edict indicated that 
he will be subordinate directly to the office of the president 
(Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 24 December 1993), rather than to Premier 
Viktor Chernomyrdin as part of the cabinet.  A 10 january ITAR- 
TASS report declared that the Ministry of Security had been 
subordinated to both the cabinet and the president, but the new 
service will be subordinated only to the president.  Granting 
Golushko ministerial rank may have been a reward for his 
cooperation in dissolving his ministry, as, no doubt, was 
Yeltsin's promotion of 27 Ministry of Security officers to 
general on the eve of the 21 December edict, which was reported 
by the 29 December Izvestiya.  Other "service" chiefs do not hold 
ministerial rank, according to Yeltsin's 30 September 1992 edict 
"On the System of Central Organs of Federal Executive Power" 
(Vedomosti Syezda Narodnykh Deputatov Rossiyskoy Federatsii i 
Verkhovnogo Soveta Rossiyskoy Federatsii, 15 October 1992, pages 
2936-7).  (See Note 1) 
   (Note 1)  There are a variety of other "services" (sluzhby) in 
the government, some directly under the president, some not, but 
all clearly outside the cabinet.  These include the Federal Tax 
Service, Federal Service for Foreign Currency and Export Control, 
the State Archive Service, the Federal Service of Geodesy and 
Cartography, the Federal Service of Forestry, and the Federal 
Service for Hydrometeorology and Monitoring the Environment. 
Another was added on 22 December, when a Yeltsin edict formed the 
Federal Service for Television and Radio Broadcasting as a 
central organ of federal power to replace the Ministry of Press 
and Information (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 24 December 1993). 
   The new counterintelligence service apparently is intended to 
parallel the Foreign Intelligence Service, which also is directly 
under the office of the president.  The Federal Foreign 
Intelligence Service (Federalnaya Sluzhba Vneshney Razvedki 
Rossii) had been listed as one of the "central organs of federal 
executive power" in a 30 September 1992 Yeltsin edict (Vedomosti, 
15 October 1992, page 2940) but only days later was dropped from 
this category and made "directly subordinate to the president," 
apparently a reduction in status, by a 7 October 1992 edict 
(Vedomosti, 15 October 1992, page 2964).  Foreign intelligence 
service director Yevgeniy Primakov, like the minister of 
security, was designated a Security Council member in a 20 
October 1993 decree defining the Security Council's membership 
(Sobraniye Aktov Prezidenta i Pravitelstva Rossiyskoy Federatsii, 
25 October 1993, pages 4479-80), suggesting that Golushko may 
continue on the Security Council in his new capacity. 
   Breakup of Old KGB Elements 
   With the creation of the counterintelligence service, there now 
appear to be five agencies that have emerged from the old KGB, 
and all apparently are now directly under the office of the 
president. 
   --The foreign intelligence part was taken out of the KGB on 18 
December 1991--after the August coup and the collapse of the 
USSR--and made into the Federal Foreign Intelligence Service of 
the Russian Federation, according to the service's press 
secretary Tatyana Samolis (Interfax, 22 December 1993, Segodnya, 
24 December 1993).  Primakov, who had been named first deputy 
USSR KGB chairman and head of the foreign intelligence service 
part of the USSR KGB in September 1991 (TASS, 30 September 1991), 
was made director of the new Russian foreign intelligence service 
on 26 December 1991 (Vedomosti, 2 january 1992, page 42). 
"Federal" was later dropped from the service's title, and 
Yeltsin's 10 january 1994 edict "On the Structure of Federal 
Organs of Executive Power" listed it as the "Foreign Intelligence 
Service of the Russian Federation" (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 12 
january). 
   --About the same time--on 24 December 1991--some KGB 
communications units were split off and formed into a Federal 
Agency for Government Communications and Information under the 
president (Vedomosti, 2 january 1992, page 38).  Former KGB 
General Aleksandr Starovoytov was appointed to head the agency 
(Segodnya, 30 july 1993).  The KGB's complete control of the 
information flow to USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and the ease 
with which the KGB had cut off Gorbachev's communications in 
August 1991 made clear the need to make communications 
independent of the KGB, according to a 5 March 1992 Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta article.  Yeltsin used his control over this agency in his 
21 September move against the parliament.  Immediately after he 
announced the legislature's dissolution, Yeltsin ordered 
Starovoytov to cut off all parliament's communications 
(Kommersant-Daily, 22 September 1993). 
   --On 17 December 1993 it was reported that Yeltsin had combined 
the Ministry of Security's subdivision for protection of the 
Kremlin and the leadership--the old KGB's 9th Directorate--with 
his presidential guard to form a new federal "presidential 
security service" to provide security for the president (Radio 
Rossii, 17 December 1993).  The service was placed under Major 
General Aleksandr Korzhakov, the longtime head of Yeltsin's 
personal guards (nachalnik lichnoy okhrany prezidenta). 
Korzhakov had met Yeltsin when the KGB 9th Directorate formed a 
guard for then new Politburo candidate member Yeltsin in 1986, 
and Yeltsin and Korzhakov became friends (Moskovskaya Pravda, 4 
July 1992).  Although reportedly signed in November, the 
presidential edict on this new service has not appeared among the 
November edicts published in the Sobraniye and so the new 
service's exact title and status are not yet clear.  However, 
Izvestiya on 11 january gave its title as the "Directorate for 
Protection of the President" (Upravleniye 0khrany Prezidenta) and 
Yeltsin's 10 january edict on government structure listed it as 
the "Main Directorate for Protection of the Russian Federation" 
(Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 12 january). 
   --On 30 December a Yeltsin edict formed the Federal Border 
Service-Central Command of Russian border troops from the border 
guards administration of the Ministry of Security.  It is to have 
"status equivalent to that of a federal ministry and to operate 
in direct subordination to the Russian president and government" 
(ITAR-TASS, 30 December 1993), apparently giving it status 
similar to the new counterintelligence service.  Yeltsin's 10 
January 1994 edict on government structure specified that this 
service is under the president (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 12 january). 
Col. Gen. Andrey Nikolayev was named commander of the border 
troops (ITAR-TASS, 30 December 1993) and, according to the 11 
january Izvestiya, chief of the Federal Border Service 
(Federalnaya Pogranichnaya Sluzhba). 
   Baturin's Appointment 
   Yuriy Baturin, appointed national security assistant 
(pomoshchnik) to the president by Yeltsin on 6 january (Ostankino 
TV, ITAR-TASS, 6 january), will play a major role in supervising 
and coordinating the work of the security services.  The 44-year 
old Baturin told Interfax that Yeltsin had suddenly phoned him 
and told him he needed a "national security aide" and asked him 
to take the job.  Baturin said he would be coordinating the 
activities of security services and everyday decisions "which 
must not encumber the president" and that this function 
encompassed the counterintelligence, foreign intelligence, border 
guards, and government communications services.  He said that 
foreign intelligence head Primakov will report to the president 
weekly but he (Baturin) would also brief Yeltsin on intelligence 
matters.  He said "the president entrusts his national security 
aide with making a decision jointly with the chiefs of these 
services" (Interfax, 7 january). 
   Baturin is a recent addition to Yeltsin's staff and has been an 
outspoken reformer and more independent-minded than Yeltsin's 
other assistants. (See Note 2)  A protege of reformer Georgiy 
Shakhnazarov, Baturin was one of the authors of the liberal Law 
on the Press adopted in 1990.  He joined Yeltsin's Presidential 
Council on 17 March 1993 and became notable for expressing 
independent ideas often at odds with Yeltsin's other aides.  When 
offered a post as presidential assistant in late April, Baturin 
reportedly accepted on condition he could continue to speak out 
publicly (Novaya Yezhednevnaya Gazeta, 7 july 1993).  He has 
often appeared on the controversial television program Itogi 
(Argumenty i Fakty, No. 33, August 1993). 
   (Note 2)  Yeltsin's other assistants have been with him longer 
and stay out of the spotlight.  Viktor Ilyushin, "first assistant 
to the president," has been with Yeltsin since 1977 in 
Sverdlovsk, while Lev Sukhanov has been with him since his days 
in the State Committee for Construction Affairs, where Yeltsin 
went after he was fired as Moscow party chief in late 1987 
(Moskovskiye Novosti, 8 August 1993).  Dmitriy Ryurikov, a career 
diplomat, Iran scholar, and former head of the foreign ministry's 
Middle East department, joined Yeltsin's staff in August 1991 
(Moskovskiye Novosti, 8 August 1993).  Anatoliy Korabelshchikov, 
appointed assistant to the president on 20 july 1991 (Vedomosti, 
1 August 1991, page 1323), is responsible for ties to the cabinet 
(Argumenty i Fakty, No. 33, August 1993). 
   His job was apparently to offer advice to Yeltsin on legal and 
political matters, and Baturin himself titled his post assistant 
"for legal affairs" (Izvestiya, 11 january).  He explained that 
his function was not to draft edicts but to caution the president 
if draft edicts are legally objectionable (Novaya Yezhednevnaya 
Gazeta, 7 july 1993).  Suggesting that Yeltsin places 
considerable trust in him, Baturin, according to the 25 September 
Moskovskiy Komsomolets and Izvestiya, had a hand in drafting 
Yeltsin's 21 September edict dissolving parliament.  He also 
participated in preparing the statute on the new 
counterintelligence service in late December, according to his 
statements in an 11 january Nezavisimaya Gazeta interview. 
   Since his appointment as assistant to Yeltsin, Baturin has 
remained outspoken and has even publicly criticized some of 
Yeltsin's acts.  He recently criticized Yeltsin's edicts creating 
a Federal Service for Television and Radio Broadcasting and a 
Federal Committee for the Press for increasing state control over 
the media.  He claimed that normally as a presidential assistant 
he has an opportunity to influence edicts, but that these media 
edicts were worked out by Yeltsin, Chernomyrdin, and First Deputy 
Premier Vladimir Shumeyko, and he only saw them after the three 
leaders had agreed upon them (Izvestiya, 29 December 1993). 
   Implications 
   By reorganizing the Ministry of Security, Yeltsin appears to be 
making a concerted effort to finally break the political power of 
the old Cheka-KGB and ensure that security functions are firmly 
under presidential control.  The breakup, however, may not 
eliminate all domestic intelligence functions, since Yeltsin 
himself may find it worthwhile to quietly maintain some of these 
activities to aid him against his foes.  By subordinating the new 
security services to the presidential assistant for national 
security and appointing to that post someone with no experience 
as a security official, Yeltsin also seems to be signalling a 
dimunition in the services' status and a less sympathetic 
approach to their interests.  Yeltsin's appointment of Baturin 
appears to make him one of the most powerful figures in the 
presidential staff and a key player in the security field, along 
with Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, Internal Affairs Minister 
Viktor Yerin, and Security Council Secretary Oleg Lobov. 
   box 
                        KGB Reformer Stepashin 
   The 41-year old Stepashin, although a veteran of 22 years in the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, has long been an advocate of 
reforming the KGB.  As chairman of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet's 
Security Committee in early 1991, he insisted on removal of 
communist party influence from the KGB (Radio Rossii, 6 May 1991; 
Russian TV, 15 May 1991).  He was appointed by USSR President 
Mikhail Gorbachev to investigate the role of the KGB in the 
August 1991 coup and to formulate proposals for reforming the 
security services (TASS, 28 August 1991).  He was appointed 
deputy minister of a reorganized RSFSR KGB by Yeltsin in November 
1991 and served in this post until October 1992 (Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta, 13 October 1992).  For more detail, see the Trends of 22 
May 1991, pages 13-15; and 11 December 1991, pages 17-23. 
   end box 
(AUTHOR:  HAHN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/PF 12/2200z Jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43188 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002094001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   13 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-12JAN94-JAPAN-U.S. 
<H3> <TI>      Japanese Government Appears Divided on Framework Talks </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 

                                 Japanese press reporting over the past few weeks suggests that 
Tokyo is divided over its strategy for the Japan-U.S. framework 
talks and over its assessment of the U.S. position in the talks. 
In the absence of any clear direction from Japan's political 
leadership, elements of the Japanese bureaucracy that reportedly 
favor a hard-line approach appear at present to have the upper 
hand.  However, there appear to be some sections of the 
bureaucracy that are arguing for a more conciliatory approach. 
Some Japanese press reports suggest that, as the deadline for 
concluding the negotiations nears, the hard-liners may be forced 
to modify their stand somewhat in order to avoid scuttling the 
talks and souring Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's summit with 
President Clinton on 11 February. 

                           END SUMMARY 

   The Japanese Government appears to have developed no clear 
strategy for resolving the current impasse in the U.S.-Japan 
framework negotiations, in part because the sections of the 
Japanese bureaucracy responsible for conducting the talks seem to 
be divided over what approach to take.  On the one hand, one 
group appears to favor continuing to take a hard-line in the 
talks, categorically rejecting any U.S. demands to establish 
objective criteria to measure Japanese trade performance.  This 
group also appears to be insisting that the talks address 
measures that Japan wants the United States to take to improve 
its competitiveness, and to be refusing to consider setting any 
guidelines for imports in specific industrial sectors.  This 
position, which appears to be held primarily in the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI) and the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF), has received wide coverage in the statements made 
by key Japanese officials in the Japanese press. 

   -- In an interview in the 27 December-3 January issue of the 
English-language Nikkei Weekly, targeted at a foreign audience, 
MITI Vice Minister for International Affairs Sozaburo Okamatsu 
rejected a U.S. suggestion that imports into Japan should be 
measured against the level of imports in other G-7 countries. 
Using a familiar Japanese argument, Okamatsu asserted that Japan 
could not be measured against other G-7 countries because the 
foundations of its economy were different, requiring the country 
to "import natural resources and export manufactured goods," in 
contrast to other G-7 countries that  have greater natural 
resources.  He also insisted that the talks should address steps 
the United States should take to improve its competitiveness as 
much as measures Japan should take to increase imports.  "Mutual 
efforts should be the starting point of the framework talks," he 
said, adding that Washington seemed to be "concerned only with 
pressing Japan rather than concentrating on the lack of effort by 
U.S. industry." 

   -- The 11 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun quoted an unidentified 
MITI official as stating, in connection with the framework talks, 
that "criteria that can lead to agreeing on targets cannot be 
accepted." 

   -- An 11 January Kyodo report quoted MITI Minister Hiroshi 
Kumagai as rejecting any effort to set guidelines for imports in 
various sectors, saying that Japan "cannot practice managed trade 
or allow administrative guidance alone to reduce the surplus with 
the United States by using double standards at home and abroad." 
Kumagai reportedly argued that to do so would run counter to the 
Hosokawa government's efforts to "create transparency" in 
Japanese markets. 

   -- According to the 28 November Nihon Keizai Shimbun, as far back 
as the fall of 1993, MITI and MOF became concerned that the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) might be too inclined to make 
concessions to the United States.  According to the paper, MITI 
and MOF therefore agreed to coordinate their positions in the 
talks, to staunchly reject any U.S. demands to set objective 
criteria to measure Japan's trade performance, and to resist any 
pressure to present compromise proposals to the Prime Minister 
unless the United States dropped its demands. 

   A major concern of those advocating a tough stand against the 
United States, particularly on the issue of objective criteria, 
appears to be that the United States might invoke sanctions 
against Japan if the criteria are not met.  In his interview with 
the 27 December-3 January Nikkei Weekly, MITI Vice Minister 
Okamatsu voiced this concern by  commenting that "it remains 
unclear whether Washington would use unilateral sanctions against 
Japan" if Japan failed to meet any of the objective criteria 
Washington is calling for. 

   At the same time, however, Japanese press reporting has suggested 
that there are some elements of the Japanese bureaucracy--mainly 
within MOFA--that maintain Japan should be more flexible and make 
some concessions to the United States.  In late December, in the 
wake of reports in the Japanese press that Washington might be 
softening its position, various MOFA officials began to signal in 
comments to the press that they believed Japan's large trade 
surplus placed Tokyo in a weak position in the negotiations, and 
would eventually force the country to compromise with the United 
States. 

   -- According to the 25 December Nihon Keizai Shimbun, an 
unidentified senior MOFA official told the paper on 24 December 
that "fundamentally, the United States will be making demands on 
Japan at the Japanese-U.S. framework talks because Japan has a 
huge trade surplus with the United States."  The official 
reportedly added that, for the negotiations to succeed, Japan 
would therefore have to "make further compromises." 

   -- Similarly, the 27 December Asahi Shimbun, in a report sourced 
to an unnamed senior MOFA official, stated that although Tokyo 
plans to continue to reject numerical targets for specific trade 
sectors, it "understands that it is necessary on the 
macroeconomic level to show some degree of a positive stance 
toward U.S. demands for expansion of Japan's domestic demand and 
reduction of its trade surplus." 

   -- The 4 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun also reported conciliatory 
statements by an unidentified senior MOFA official, quoting him 
as saying that Japan would be "required to make more concessions" 
in the talks than the United States because of its trade surplus. 

   Another official possibly advocating a more conciliatory approach 
is Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Hatoyama.  The 12 January 
Asahi Shimbun quoted him as telling U.S. Under Secretary of State 
Joan Spero that he believed "it is possible for Japan and the 
United States to hold talks to work out something that is 
acceptable to both sides." 

   None of these reports indicated what compromises the officials 
quoted have in mind. 

   Divisions over Assessment of U.S. Position 

   The bureaucracy also appears to be divided in its assessment of 
the U.S. position in the talks.  Some sections of the Japanese 
bureaucracy appear to have interpreted remarks reportedly made by 
President Clinton at the APEC Summit and by U.S. Trade 
Representative Mickey Kantor in a 20 December letter to Nihon 
Keizai Shimbun as indicating that the United States has softened 
its stance on the issue of setting objective criteria for 
measuring Japan's trade performance.  For example, the 19 
December Mainichi Shimbun quoted an unidentified Japanese source 
close to the framework negotiations as stating that President 
Clinton indicated during talks with Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa in Seattle in November that the U.S. would back off the 
concept of numerical targets.  The paper also cited the same 
source as saying that an unidentified senior U.S. embassy 
official had also told the Japanese Government that Washington 
would abandon numerical targets in favor of some other type of 
objective criteria to measure Japanese trade performance.  The 20 
December Nihon Keizai Shimbun, possibly reflecting thinking of 
the paper's sources in the bureaucracy, described the wording of 
Ambassador Kantor's letter as "slightly toned down" on the issue 
of objective criteria and noted that Kantor did not discuss the 
issue of setting a target for reducing Japan's trade surplus. 

   At the same time, however, other sections of the bureaucracy have 
voiced skepticism that the United States has backed off from its 
demands for the setting of numerical targets.  According to the 
22 December Asahi Shimbun, an unidentified senior MOFA official 
described reported U.S. statements that Washington was not 
seeking numerical targets as a "feint."  The official reportedly 
added that "the substance of U.S. policy--attaching more 
importance to trade results than to the market opening processes, 
and pressing Japan to raise the share of foreign goods on the 
Japanese market to levels comparable with other G-7 countries- 
-remains unchanged."  Similarly, the 23 December Nihon Keizai 
Shimbun quoted an unnamed MOFA source as stating that reported 
U.S. calls for Japan to increase the Japanese market share of 
imports to levels similar to the share of imports in other G-7 
countries was "as bad as setting numerical targets."  The 29 
December Yomiuri Shimbun reported that some MITI officials were 
also concerned that the objective criteria demanded by the United 
States "could actually turn out to be new targets."  According to 
the 12 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun, unidentified sources in MITI 
responded to a U.S. Government report on the U.S. position in the 
talks, "In Search of a New Partnership," by commenting that "a 
careful reading" of the report showed that Washington remained 
"preoccupied with numerical targets." 

   At present, both schools of thinking about the current U.S. 
strategy appear to be agreed on one point--that the best way to 
deal with the United States is to continue to take a hard line. 
Bureaucrats who apparently think that the United States has 
backed off from its demands on objective criteria appear to 
believe that the United States may eventually make even further 
concessions in order to conclude the talks.  A 20 December Kyodo 
report quoted an unidentified Japanese Government source as 
stating that Washington's reported decision to back off numerical 
targets would provide a "solution" to the framework negotiations. 

   Similarly, bureaucrats who believe that the United States has not 
changed its position appear to be arguing that Japan should 
redouble its efforts in the face of what they expect will be 
increased pressure from Washington.  The 4 January Nihon Keizai 
Shimbun quoted an unnamed top MITI official as stating that Tokyo 
would "reject" any criteria that resembled numerical targets, 
regardless of how they were described or packaged.  The official 
commented that it was "unclear" whether there is any difference 
between what the United States means by such terms as "standards" 
and "indicators" on the one hand and "targets" on the other. 

   U.S. Position on Hosokawa 

   A third area of disagreement appears to be in the Japanese 
Government's assessment of the U.S. stance toward the ruling 
coalition government.  Some officials appear to believe that 
Washington will eventually compromise because it does not want to 
jeopardize the coalition by pushing Prime Minister Hosokawa into 
a corner.   For example, the 23 December Asahi Shimbun reported 
that the United States might be softening its position on 
objective criteria because of its concerns for the Prime 
Minister's "difficult" position.  Similarly, the 23 December 
Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported that U.S. Ambassador Walter Mondale 
had strongly advocated that the United States take a more 
conciliatory approach to Japan in order to avoid exacerbating 
Hosokawa's problems. 

   Other officials, however, appear to believe that Washington may 
be prepared to get tough with Hosokawa at the February summit. 
The 7 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun quoted unidentified "close 
aides" to the prime minister as stating that they were concerned 
that Washington's patience might be running out and that 
President Clinton might be "asking for results" at the February 
summit.  Such views appear also to have some currency in MOFA, 
where some officials apparently advocate a more conciliatory 
approach to the framework talks.  According to the 31 December 
Tokyo Shimbun, at the end of December, MOFA issued a position 
paper on Japan's foreign policy in which it warned that the off- 
year election in the United States in November would force 
President Clinton to seek progress in talks with Japan which he 
could present to U.S. voters.  The paper concluded that Prime 
Minister Hosokawa would therefore probably face pressure to take 
"concrete steps" to reduce the trade imbalance. 

   Confusion in the Bureaucracy 

   Infighting within the bureaucracy may also be contributing to the 
lack of movement in Japan's framework strategy.  The 1 January 
Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported that progress on the talks may have 
been disrupted by an internal power struggle in MITI that led to 
the resignation of the Director General of the Industrial Policy 
Bureau, Masahisa Naito.  The paper stated that MITI was obliged 
to cancel meetings between Naito and U.S. negotiators aimed at 
resolving some of the issues under dispute in the talks after 
Naito was charged with abusing his office. 

   Outlook 

   Tokyo will probably continue to take a hard-line stance in 
upcoming sessions of the framework negotiations in the absence of 
any internal political pressure to take a more flexible approach 
to the negotiations.  Prime Minister Hosokawa and other key 
political leaders are currently preoccupied with getting the 
coalition government's political reform package through the upper 
house of the Diet and with putting together a package of measures 
to stimulate the floundering Japanese economy.  Until these 
issues are resolved, few of the key leaders are likely to devote 
much attention to the framework talks.  Once the political reform 
bill and the economic stimulus package are out of the way, 
however, the coalition is likely to face some political pressure 
to break the impasse in the framework talks.  If the political 
reform bills pass and the government draws up and passes a 
stimulus package, the opposition Liberal Democratic Party may 
turn to criticism of the coalition's handling of Japan-U.S. 
relations and the framework talks in an effort to discredit the 
government.  To prevent this, and also to avoid souring the 
atmosphere at the February summit, Prime Minister Hosokawa and 
other political leaders may put pressure on the bureaucracy to 
reach face-saving compromises with the United States on key 
issues in the talks. 

   (AUTHOR:  BOUNDS.  OUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (7O3)-733-6534.) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43189 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002194001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-006--SOUTH AFRICA 
<H3> <TI>      SOUTH AFRICA: ECONOMIC NEWS, NO. 1 </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
This     Foreign Media Note is the first of a series focusing on 
economic reporting from the English-language South African press. 
Issue No. 1 includes information on reactions to the African 
National Congress's (ANC) economic policies, the budget deficit, 
foreign investment prospects, and economic indicators. 

   Mixed Reactions to ANC's Interventionist Economic Policies 

   Addressing thefirst Pretoria/Witwatersrand (PWV) "people's forum" 
at the Johannesburg College of Education, which attracted a mixed 
audience of about 500, including some high-profile business leaders, 
Nelson Mandela appealed for support for the ANC's reconstruction and 
development program.  Mandela indicated that this would require 
greatly increased government expenditure and intervention in the 
economy.  He called upon white businessmen not to emigrate but to 
contribute to economic reconstruction and join the "democratic 
forces in building a new South Africa."  However, his repeated 
message to whites, "Stay, we need you," has not removed skepticism 
over the policies the ANC intends to pursue once in power. 
According to Johannesburg daily THE STAR, "Mandela's acknowledgment 
that there had to be massive growth in government spending also sent 
shivers down many a spine." (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 26 Nov 93; 
Johannesburg THE STAR 29 Nov 93) 

   BUSINESS DAY Comments on ANC Economic Policies 

   "Nelson Mandela's regular appeals to skilled white South Africans 
not to emigrate, and to business to invest for a better future, 
should be heeded. Most importantly, they should be heeded by ANC 
economic planners, whose policies will have more influence than a 
million fine words or appeals." (29 Nov 93) 

   "If we decide to reinvent the wheel of central planning or of 
excessive government regulation of the economy, foreign investors 
will not only turn their backs on our foolishness but are likely to 
tar our neighbors with the same brush... .Expedient promises by 
representatives of parties likely to hold power could cause immense 
damage to our investment prospects." (2 Dec 93) 

   "At present, economic expectations are high--many underprivileged 
people have been led to believe that April 27 will be followed by 
plentiful jobs, housing and economic opportunities.  It is almost 
inevitable that these expectations will be fueled by political 
speeches in the run-up to election. 

   Growth that will lead to strong consumer spending and the belief 
that the new order is delivering benefits cannot be conjured up that 
quickly ... We should recall that we need an annual real growth rate 
of about 5 percent if the formal sector of the economy is merely to 
find jobs for school leavers, and 8 percent if formal sector 
employment is to reduce unemployment levels. These levels will be 
achieved only through a national economic consensus that there can 
be no room for arcane economic experiments; that we have to be 
conventional and in step with other successful nations. .. .The ANC 
is not so politically naive as to believe the regime of 
nationalization and socialism being proposed by some of its left- 
wing economic advisors can work in today's world."  (19 Nov 93) 

   Opinion Survey Measures Views on Nationalization 

   "Naive" or not, supporters of the ANC/South African Communist 
Party (SACP) and Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) continue to find the 
nationalization of basic goods and services desirable.  An opinion 
survey undertaken between July and mid-October 1993 by the Center 
for International and Comparative Politics at Stellenbosch 
University found 50 percent of ANC/SACP supporters and 80 percent of 
PAC supporters in favor of such nationalization. Furthermore: 

   The majority of PAC (64 percent) and ANC (62 percent) supporters 
agreed companies had a duty to fill top positions with blacks. 

   46 percent of ANC/SACP supporters and 63 percent of PAC 
supporters were against limiting the state's role in the economy. 

   100 percent of PAC supporters, 64 percent of ANC/SACP supporters 
and 57 percent of Inkatha Freedom Party supporters were in favor of 
price controls.  Conservative Party (CP) supporters were equally 
divided, while the majority of Democratic Party (DP) and National 
Party (NP) supporters were opposed. 

   The majority of ANC/SACP and PAC supporters were against limiting 
the power of trade unions but CP, NP, and Inkatha supporters were 
for it. 

   The majority of DP, NP, and CP supporters found minimum wages 
undesirable, while ANC/SACP supporters (74 percent) and PAC 
supporters (72 percent) were in favor. Inkatha supporters were 
divided. 

   The majority of respondents of all parties supported linking 
wage and productivity increases, and maximum business, labor and 
state consensus. 

   Supporters of the PAC (72 percent), Inkatha (66 percent) and 
ANC/SACP (58 percent) expected an increase in free enterprise.  CP 
supporters anticipated a decrease, NP supporters were ambivalent, 
and DP supporters undecided. (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 16 Nov 93) 

   Merg Report on The Reserve Bank 

   The coordinator of the ANC's Macroeconomic Research Group (Merg), 
Velly Pillay, gave notice that Merg would call for the political 
control of the Reserve Bank.  Kevin Davie, in the 28 November 
edition of the SUNDAY TIMES-BUSINESS TIMES, reported the following 
Chapter Eight of the final draft of the Merg report, a chapter on 
banking and finance: 

   "Here we shudder as we read that 'instead of becoming 
increasingly independent, the Reserve Bank should be more firmly 
under political control.'  Having sweated blood to get the inflation 
rate below 10 percent, we take note that 'a target band around 12 
percent a year should be considered initially.'  There may be 
grounds for nationalizing some banks, 'but normal regulation of 
banking activities (which should be increased) can often be obtained 
without it.'  While elsewhere in the report it is recommended that 
the new Government should not introduce a wealth tax, chapter eight 
says a general wealth tax should be introduced.  A changed JSE 
(Johannesburg Stock Exchange) is also envisaged.  'The JSE 
illustrates that the market-orientation approach to meeting capital 
needs is inappropriate.'  There is no case for abolishing marketable 
securities tax (partly responsible for the JSE's poor liquidity): 
'Indeed there are grounds for increasing it.'  Measures will be 
taken to establish compulsory funds that are able to purchase 
majority or controlling stakes in quoted companies including mining 
finance houses, mine and financial institutions.  The development 
and venture capital boards should be strengthened along with 
measures to encourage 'the issue of new securities (with minimum 
returns partly guaranteed).'  A Capital Issues Commission will be 
established under the Ministry of Finance to consider company plans 
for new issues and to authorize them, to 'prevent excess demand for 
capital creating disorderly market conditions and generating 
excessive interest charges.' The commission will also 'ensure that 
companies raising capital conform with national policy on ethnic and 
gender employment practice and other policies.  Capital institutions 
should be subject to prescribed asset requirements under which a 
percentage of their assets have to be placed in eligible 
securities.'  This 'will enable the government to raise funds 
through domestic bond issues at relatively low interest rates.' 
Chapter eight has all the hallmarks of an author who thinks the 
authorities know better than markets.  Could it be that Mr. Pillay, 
an advisor to Beijing's Bank of China, is too schooled in 
authoritarianism to trust democratic market forces?"  (Johannesburg 
SUNDAY TIMES-BUSINESS TIMES 20 Nov 93) 

   Budget Deficit:  Below Year-End Forecast 

   According to a report in BUSINESS DAY, the "government looks set 
to end the fiscal year with the deficit below budget, after final 
spending figures were tabled in Parliament.  The small overrun on 
budgeted spending--less than 1 billion Rand (R1bn)--would be offset 
by the extra R1bn in revenue, officials said.  This suggested the 
deficit would be lower than the budgeted R25.3bn.  Earlier this year 
economists predicted a deficit of R30bn.  The total estimated 
expenditure in the Budget was R114.2bn while the revised expenditure 
would be R115.2bn.  The increase in expenditure was due to funds 
being made available for capital projects associated with the sale 
of state land (R50mn), the sale of strategic oil reserves to finance 
drought relief and job creation (R724mn), and R451 mm in 
overexpenditure.  From this total of R1.2bn should be subtracted 
expenditure which had not materialized, mainly the R224mn in 
unrealized retrenchment costs.  The R451 mm overexpenditure was 
mainly the result of the South African Police increasing staff by 
7,500 members to combat violence (R249mn) and the re-employment of 
health service personnel (R144mn)."  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 1 
Dec 93) 

   Debt to Increase Next Year 

   "Government's debt will be pushed closer to the danger level of 
60 percent of GDP next year when homeland debts are taken onto the 
books and pension funds are topped up by issuing stock.  In terms of 
the interim constitution, all debts and liabilities other than those 
linked to property "shall vest in the national government."  This 
means that the state debt will rise by billions at a stroke--with 
the last estimate of homelands' (including Transkei, Bophuthatswana, 
Venda, and Ciskei states) debt put at R14bn.  Adding to the debt 
mountain will be stock issued to address pension fund deficits.  It 
is understood that almost R7bn in stock will be issued to state 
pension funds to bring funding to a more acceptable level.  Sources 
said government had placed a limit of R8bn for its guarantees on the 
homeland overdrafts, and speculation was that the level was fast 
being approached.  Government's interest bill, at R22bn for the 
present fiscal year, amounted to more than 26 percent of the Budget 
from about 15 percent in 1992/93.  By contrast, total capital 
expenditure was less than 8 percent of the Budget."  (Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Foreign Investment: Number of Western Firms Up 

   According to the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) 
based in Washington, there are now 28 more American and 70 non- 
American multinational companies with direct investment or employees 
in South Africa than a year ago.  The IRRC counts a total of 717 
multinationals with direct investment or employees in South Africa, 
168 of them German and 164 British.  The IRRC distinguishes between 
these companies which have a direct investment in South Africa and 
those which have "non-equity" links, such as licensing and 
distribution agreements, with South African companies.  The increase 
in U.S. companies with equity links has been much greater over the 
last year, 189 more companies bring the present total to 445.  Among 
non-U.S. companies, the net increase has been 126 over the last 
year, bringing the total to 429.  The greater increase in non-equity 
involvement reflects "wariness" about South Africa.  The IRRC notes 
that many U.S. companies not in South Africa have shown an interest 
in the country but remain wary because of the political situation. 
(Johannesburg THE STAR 1 Dec 93) 

   U.S. Trade Visit 'One of Many' 

   BUSINESS DAY reports a "rush of trade visits to South Africa." 
It tops the list with a report on the visit of the 50-strong 
American mission under U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, which 
included representatives from IBM, Apple, Lehman Brothers, Arco 
Chemical Company, Time Warner, Africa Electrification Foundation, 
Alliance Corporate Finance, Bridge Housing Corporation, the Export- 
Import Bank, the Trade and Development Agency, and government 
representatives dealing with trade, development, and foreign 
affairs.  Trade delegations from Malta and Australia were expected 
the following week along with a 30-man delegation from the Russian 
Federation whose focus on joint ventures between Eskom and Russian 
companies will follow up on the trade agreement recently signed 
between Russia and South Africa.  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 
93) 

   U.S. Investment Initiatives 

   THE STAR reported that "the United States will classify South 
Africa as one of the world's top 10 emerging markets, bringing 
incalculable benefits in investment trade." According to THE STAR, 
U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown declared that it is the 
Administration's intention "particularly to support black 
entrepreneurs and black leaders."  Brown listed 11 developments that 
would begin the process of revitalizing South Africa's economy and 
speeding up black economic empowerment: 

   The signing of an Overseas Private Investment Corporation 
agreement to encourage and support US investment in South Africa. 

   An Economic Cooperation Initiative focusing on South Africa. 

   Work by Exim Bank on a Nedcor Bank request for $63 million to 
purchase Boeing aircraft, which if approved would bring Exim's total 
investment in South Africa since February 1992 to $253 million. 

   The opening of an International Business Advocacy Center. 

   A U.S. National Export strategy to reduce controls in key high- 
tech sectors, plus the creation of one-stop shops to house key 
government agencies under one roof whose expertise would be 
available to South Africa. 

   A promise to review tax and tariff barriers to U.S. goods. 

   A promise to match up U.S. and South African companies eager to 
do business with each other. 

   A promise to discuss a bilateral tax treaty with the South 
African government. 

   A promise to encourage emerging black-owned businesses. 

   The announcement that New Africa Advisors, a black asset 
management firm, had created a $2 billion investment fund and that 
others among the US delegation had similar plans to direct 
investment towards South Africa. 

   The appointment of a senior economic diplomat to signal Clinton's 
strong commitment to South Africa.  (Johannesburg THE STAR 29 Nov 
93) 

   Economic Indicators Reported: 

   Manufacturing 

   "Stronger signs of recovery have emerged in the manufacturing 
sector in the second half of the year.  Central Statistical Service 
figures show the index of physical manufacturing production up 3.6 
percent on a seasonally adjusted basis in the three months to August 
compared to the same period last year.  This was an improvement on 
the second quarter when output volumes eased 1.9 percent. 
Economists said production in most of the 28 major manufacturing 
groups appeared to be returning to more normal levels after output 
was hampered in the previous quarter by stayaways in the wake of the 
assassination of SACP leader Chris Hani.  The strongest recovery 
occurred in wood and wood products; printing and publishing; 
petroleum and coal; electrical machinery; motor vehicles, parts and 
accessories and professional and scientific equipment Econometrix 
economist Tony Twine said a turnaround in manufacturing in the 
second half was expected due to an improvement in third quarter GDP 
figures.  The GDP data indicated the manufacturing sector grew at a 
seasonally adjusted annualized rate of 5.5 percent in the three 
months to September after slumping 0.2 percent in the second 
quarter.  He warned the current recovery was weaker than it appeared 
since it was coming off a very low 1992 base where second-half 
production had fallen after the breakdown in Codesa and the 
Boipatong massacre."  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Inflation 

   "The improved fiscal deficit, lower long-term interest rates and 
the stabilization of the rand exchange rate could help reduce 
inflation further next year.  The Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut 
inflation barometer reading for the fourth quarter of 1993 said a 
CPI inflation rate close to 7 percent was on the cards for mid-1994. 
Inflation for the fourth quarter of this year was 7.4 percent 
compared with 9.1 percent in the previous quarter." (Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Retail Sales 

   "In mid-November, the 100 top retail groups told the Central 
Statistical Service that they expected the month's sales to be 
around 12 percent higher than in the same month last year.  Factors 
cited for the improvement in retail sales included reductions in 
interest rates on mortgages; the upsurge in the gold price, which 
had restored confidence in the gold mining industry and made people 
more willing to spend; and the good rains, which have put the 
agricultural sector back on its feet."  (Johannesburg THE STAR 2 Dec 
93) 

   Fixed Investment 

   "Economists said there would be a small real increase of 0.5 
percent for the year as a whole after a pickup in the second half 
neutralized declines in the first half.  Expectations were that real 
fixed investment would rise to more than R11.2bn in the first six 
months of 1994.  Finance Department director general Estian Calitz 
said real gross domestic investment had increased in the third 
quarter for the first time in three and a half years.  Econometrix 
economist Azar Jammine said it was unlikely a recovery in investment 
had occurred in the building, mining and construction industries.  A 
good indicator of investment in these sectors was heavy commercial 
vehicle sales which were still weak, he said.  Jammine added that 
private sector investment in capital goods would remain fairly flat 
until there was more certainty about the new government's policies." 
(Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 2 Dec 93) 

   Tourism 

   "Overseas arrival figures from January to August reflected a 
significant growth of 11 percent compared with last year, with the 
business market contributing slightly more to the growth than the 
holiday market The South African Tourism Board said the industry is 
now bracing itself for a 15 percent increase in the number of 
overseas visitors this holiday season."  (Johannesburg THE STAR 26 
Nov 93) 

   To request additional information on these articles or to offer 
suggestions/comments, please call (703) 733-6414. 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, AFRICA/LEVANT 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6408) 
ENEAG/13 Jan/ECONF/NEASA Division JEG 13/2102Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43190 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002294001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--WEST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 94-02--WEST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 2, 13 
January 1994 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group featuring brief summaries of 
foreign media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most 
recent sources available to FBIS. 

   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Latin America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 

   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

   FEATURE 

   France:  Bank of France Forms Monetary Policy Council 

   FRANCE 

   6-Year Arms Sales to Saudis Reach Fr30 Billion; Mandil Sees 
Foreign Alliances for GDF, EDF; 52 Percent of Businessmen Satisfied 
With Balladur 

   GERMANY 

   New Ekostahl Takeover proposal; Commerzbank Opens First Western 
Bank Office in Belarus; Construction Outlays Fuel Boom in East 

   ITALY 

   Ciampi's Economic Policy Criticized; Artisans Criticize New 
Finance Law 

   PORTUGAL 

   GATT Advantages Disadvantages Assessed 

   SPAIN 

   Deputy Prime Minister Serra on GATT Accord; Government 
'Vagueness' on GATT Agreement Criticized; PP Proposes Stimulative 
Economic Measures; PP Proposals Criticized; Textile Industry Seeks 
Opening of Asian Markets; PSV Scandal Seen Damaging UGT; Attitudes 
Toward General Strike Polled 

   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EC, France 

   FEATURE 

   Bank of France Monetary Policy Council Formed 

   In early January President Francois Mitterrand approved Bank of 
France (BOF) reform legislation which established the BOF as an 
independent central bank, complying with Maastricht Treaty 
requirements that all EU member states do so in anticipation of 
eventual European Monetary Union.  This legislation established the 
Monetary Policy Council (CPM) which will independently formulate 
French monetary policy.  Media reporting on the appointment of the 
CPM's founding members characterized them, with few exceptions, as 
supporters of European union and as such, commentary noted that they 
"are unlikely to question the main principals of monetary policy" 
the government is currently following.  However, commentary also 
concluded that the CPM's major challenge would be "to prove itself 
capable of stimulating economic growth." 

   Economy Minister Edmond Alphandery has announced the appointment 
of the BOF's new monetary policy group, the CPM.  According to an 
article in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, it will end the tradition of 
concentrating all the bank's power in the hands of its governor. 
The appointees are "strong personalities" who are "able to make 
their views known" and most are characterized as pro-European. 
Alphandery confirmed the reappointments of the BOF's first and 
second deputy governors, Denis Ferman and Herve Hannoun 
respectively, who will also sit on the CPM, as will BOF Governor 
Jean-Claude Trichet.  The article characterizes six of the members, 
as well as Trichet, as long-time supporters of a united Europe who 
will continue to pursue European Monetary Union (EMU) with the same 
strong franc monetary policy and close French-German monetary 
alignment which has guided France since former Prime Minister Pierre 
Beregovoy became finance minister in 1988.  The six appointees 
characterized as pro-European are Denis Ferman, Herve Hannoun, 
Michel Albert, Jean Boissonat, Michel Sapin, and Bruno de Maulde. 

   However, some in this group may advocate changing the BOF's 
"extremely cautious" positions and may campaign to lower interest 
rates, breaking the pattern of following Germany's high interest 
rate policy.  Among these advocates may be Denise Flouzat, who was 
an adviser to the anti-Maastricht Gaullist deputy Philippe Seguin 
and who, as a university professor, sided against ratifying the 
Maastricht Treaty.  While some believe she will be inclined to 
defend a stimulative, and thereby isolationist, monetary policy to 
bring France out of its recession, Flouzat has so far refrained from 
commenting on the subject.  Jean-Pierre Gerard, another appointee to 
the CPM, may join Flouzat in opposition to current government 
monetary policy.  Also a close associate of Philippe Seguin, his 
experience in industry makes him respected by the business 
community, which has voiced criticism of the high level of French 
interest rates. 

   Below are profiles of the new appointees: 

   CPM Members 

   MICHEL ALBERT--An article in LE FIGARO calls Albert, president of 
the large AGF insurance company since 1982, more an "agitator of 
ideas" than a financier, whose successful television broadcast "Long 
Live the Crisis" and various writings have eclipsed his insurance 
profession.  The article describes Albert, 63, as having a Christian 
democratic political philosophy.  He served under former centrist 
Finance Minister Raymond Barre as France's EC representative for 
regional development and worked with Hans Tietmeyer, the current 
Bundesbank president, when the two men were in Brussels.   After a 
stint as administrator at the European Investment Bank, Albert 
joined the L'EXPRESS publishing group.  While at L'EXPRESS, he 
edited Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber's book, "The American 
Challenge."  In 1976, former President Valery Giscard D'Estaing, 
then head of the Planning Commission in the Barre administration, 
named Albert as one of his commissioners for planning.  He occupied 
that post until 1982, when the Socialist government of President 
Francois Mitterrand appointed him head of AGF. 

   JEAN BOISSONNAT--Described as having a Christian socialist 
political philosophy, Boissonnat, 64, has the reputation as one of 
France's most respected economic commentators and as a "voice of 
tolerance."  He is an economic journalist and chief editor for the 
monthly economic publication L'EXPANSION.  He is also a commentator 
for the television channel Europe 1 and for several daily 
publications.  According to an article in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, 
Boissonnat will have to learn to "keep secrets," a difficult task 
for a journalist. 

   BRUNO DE MAULDE--Considered a warm, humorous man despite being 
caustic at times, de Maulde is reported to have an independent 
character, according to unnamed friends cited by same article. 
Former head of the Credit du Nord bank during 1986-93 and currently 
president of the Stock Exchange Council, the 60-year old de Maulde 
is inspector general of finances and a graduate of the National 
School of Administration.  He worked in the United Stated for three 
years as a financial attache in the French Embassy before joining 
the Treasury for a stint in the 1970's. 

   MICHEL SAPIN--A close associate of Michel Rocard, former Economy 
Minister Sapin will leave his post in the executive office of the 
Socialist Party to join the CPM.  According to the article, Sapin is 
close to Governor Trichet who served as Treasury director in his 
ministry.  Sapin will also derive influence within the CPM from his 
ties to President Francois Mitterrand, who selected him to become a 
founding member of the council. 

   Sapin, 41, is a graduate of the National School of Administration 
and began his career as a counselor to the Administrative Tribunal 
of Versailles.  Elected deputy to the National Assembly in 1986, he 
was named president of the Law Commission in 1988 and minister 
delegate to the Justice Ministry in 1991.  He was economy minister 
from April 1992 to March 1993 under then Prime Minister Pierre 
Beregovoy. 

   DENISE FLOUZAT--The article claims Flouzat, daughter of a former 
Resistance member and Armed Forces comptroller, has the firmness of 
character on which the CPM can count.  The article cites her husband 
as saying, "She accepts nothing without reservations, and refuses to 
act like a bunch of sheep."  Along with some 27 other professors of 
economics and management, she signed a manifesto advocating a "no" 
vote on the referendum to ratify the Maastricht Treaty, the article 
states.  Flouzat is a close associate of Interior Minister Charles 
Pasqua and is president of the "Tomorrow France" association 
established by Pasqua and Philippe Seguin. 

   Flouzat, 65, has a doctorate in economic sciences from the 
prestigious Sciences Polytechnique Institute.  She was a professor 
at the Sorbonne, which she is leaving to join the CPM.  She has 
written numerous books, including "Contemporary Economy," a work 
comprised of three volumes. 

   JEAN PIERRE GERARD--Described by an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES as the "great unknown of the CPM" and the only 
industrialist, Gerard served as director general of Europe de 
Generale Biscuit, where he was "embroiled" in European business and 
negotiated various contracts in both English and in German.  Gerard 
claims, "I was chosen by Philippe Seguin because within the 
corporations I worked for, I lived the consequences of diverse 
monetary decisions." 

   Gerard, 54, has been president of the Council of Administration 
of the National Test Laboratory since 1992.  A graduate of the 
Sciences Polytechnique Institute, he served in the Commissariat of 
Planning before becoming head of Thomson Jeumont Cables.  After 
managing Europe de Generale Biscuit, he became head of the 
industrial measures and instruments company, Desgranges and Huot. 

   Deputy Governors 

   DENIS FERMAN--First Deputy Governor Ferman, who has worked at the 
bank since 1958, knows the intricacies of BOF management and has a 
"heavy hand" in BOF administration and its methods of payments, 
according to the LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES article.  Ferman has a law 
degree and has served a tour of duty at the Federal Reserve Bank in 
New York during 1971-72, then had a stint as an attache in New York 
to the French Embassy.  He was charge de mission to the United Arab 
Emirates for the IMF during 1977-82. 

   HERVE HANNOUN--Second deputy governor of the BOF, Hannoun is a 
relative newcomer to the BOF, joining the bank at the end of 1992. 
He is 42 and a graduate of the National School of Administration, an 
inspector of finances, and served as an adviser in the cabinet of 
Pierre Mauroy during 1981-84.  He then spent five years in the 
Office of the President as an adviser.  In January 1989, he was 
named chief of staff to Minister of Economy, Finance, and Budget 
Pierre Beregovoy.  He remained in that position during Beregovoy's 
prime ministership. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 6 
Jan 94 pp 2-4; Paris LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement in French 6 Jan 
94 p IV ), 

   COMMENTARY: BOF MUST WIN INDEPENDENCE FROM BUNDESBANK--Although 
the BOF has legally become free of French Government tutelage, it 
must now test its independence from the more "pernicious" influence 
of the German central bank, according to a commentary in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES.  The test of BOF independence from the Bundesbank will 
come after the CPM establishes its methods of operation and its 
internal regulations and defines 1994 money supply growth targets. 
During the last few years, the BOF announced these targets at the 
same time as the Bundesbank, the commentary noted. 

   An additional "test of fire" for the CPM will be when the council 
addresses its interest rate and credit policy.  The commentary 
points out that since last summer's monetary crisis, the BOF, in 
trying to assure the continuity of monetary policy, "contented" 
itself with following the credit policy of the Bundesbank.  The CPM 
has reasons to question the legitimacy of this "overly prudent" 
practice, according to the commentary.  Among these reasons are the 
fact that the franc has regained its proper EMS parity level and 
there is no longer a reason to maintain a differential between 
French and German real interest rates.  That differential is now 
high, with France's real interest rates 180 points higher than 
Germany's.  In a period of recession and increasing unemployment 
this differential is not justified. 

   The commentary cautions, however, that a revolution in monetary 
policy is not in the making.  In its view, the CPM will gradually 
try to lower this differential over the next weeks and months, 
heeding the lessons of the past, when two serious "misadventures" in 
lowering rates below those of Germany's resulted in long and severe 
currency crises from which France has yet fully to recover.  The BOF 
currency reserves are now only 10 billion francs (Fr) compared to 
the Fr145 billion it held before last summer's monetary crisis.  The 
commentary concludes that any caution the CPM may impose upon 
itself, may be "ambushed" by financial markets which want monetary 
authorities to lower interest rates quickly to stimulate economic 
growth. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 6 Jan 94 p 3) 

   COMMENTARY: BOF MUST LEARN TO COMMUNICATE--The Bank of France has 
been the "champion" of formalistic jargon in the past and now that 
it is independent, it must learn the art of communicating.  A 
commentary in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES notes that doing so will be 
difficult for the BOF and points to traditional practices of 
stonewalling" such as Jean-Claude Trichet's refusal to reply to a 
question on the accuracy of BOF currency reserve figures, which have 
been a "veritable state secret" since last summer's currency crisis. 
Nonetheless, the law that established the BOF's independence has 
given it an obligation to be more open.  The commentary points to 
the Bundesbank, which regularly gives news conferences to explain 
its monetary policy, and to the U.S. Federal Reserve which testifies 
twice a year before Congress.  Some French parliamentarians would 
like to follow this U.S. practice.  At the moment, the BOF only has 
to address parliament once a year to report on the bank's 
operations, its monetary policy, and its forecasts.  Additionally, 
the BOF governor can be called to testify at any time before the 
Senate or Assembly's finance commissions. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES in French 4 Jan 94 p 3) 

   FRANCE 

   6-YEAR ARMS SALES TO SAUDIS REACH FR30 BILLION--Rebutting the 
"frequently repeated" view that Saudi Arabia has bought "nothing" 
from France during the last six years, an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES reports the details of Saudi purchases of French arms 
during 1987-92. Citing a source "very close to the issue," the 
article claims a "veil has been lifted" on this closely-held 
information and that Saudi purchases for this period have reached 
nearly Fr30 billion (in 1992 francs).  The article points out that 
this information was not "innocently" made public before Prime 
Minister Edouard Balladur's 7-8 January visit to Saudi Arabia to 
discuss large arms contracts. 

   According to the article, France received Fr4.369 billion in 
orders for 1987 and the figure reached Fr4.9 billion in 1988.  In 
1989, it fell to Fr2.763 billion.  The following year, with the Gulf 
War, Saudi Arabia bought Fr1.9 billion in arms, of which Fr3.4 
billion were for Crotale shahine missiles from Thomson CSF.  In 1991 
sales fell to Fr2.948 billion in sales.  In 1992, the figure was 
Fr1.874 billion.  The total, from 1987 to 1992, is Fr29.770 billion. 
(DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 5 Jan 94 p 11) 

   MANDIL SEES FOREIGN ALLIANCES FOR GDF, EDF--Director of energy at 
the Ministry of Industry, Claude Mandil has issued a "public 
version" of his proposals to reform the electric and gas industries 
of France.  According to an article in LES ECHOS, Mandil's revised 
report takes into consideration the debates on the issue held in 
November within the European Parliament, the French National 
Assembly, and the 10 December European Council of Ministers.  It is 
intended to forestall a "social explosion" at Electricite de France 
(EDF) and Gaz de France (GDF) which seemed likely when Mandil issued 
his initial draft issued at the end of last October and which the 
article claims has "little chance of seeing the light of day." 
Mandil's revised report proposes the following: 

   *  Do away with the electricity production monopoly enjoyed by 
EDF. 

   *  Initiate a controlled opening of the import and export markets 
for gas and electricity. 

   *  Do away with import and export monopolies.  According to the 
article, this suggestion has little practical import, however, since 
French Government hostility to third-party access to distribution 
networks and the ban on buying electricity for export will maintain 
EDF competitiveness. 

   * Authorize large industrial users, such as the chemical 
companies, to supply foreigners through long term contracts and 
contributions to gas stocks.  In this framework, the companies would 
use the GDF distribution network. 

   * Authorize large distribution networks, such as CFM and SGSO in 
which Elf and Total hold shares, to import to some extent. 

   Mandil's report notes that these changes would impose on EDF and 
GDF the need to form alliances and engage in reciprocity but also 
gives them more capital and flexibility.  The article adds, however, 
that while the report allows that GDF may join partnerships in gas 
production, it does not mention any future privatization of French 
energy companies.  Nonetheless, the labor unions have already 
criticized Mandil's revised report, foreseeing that "the way to 
privatization is clearly open for EDF and GDF." (DiI)  (Paris LES 
ECHOS in French 4 Jan 94 p x) 

   52 PERCENT OF BUSINESSMEN SATISFIED WITH BALLADUR--Some 52 
percent of French entrepreneurs--11 percent less than in July--are 
satisfied with Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's government, 
according to a poll taken by the economic monthly ENJEUX LES ECHOS. 
According to this poll, 41 percent are not satisfied with Balladur 
and 7 percent did not respond.  More and more entrepreneurs are 
worried about the social climate: 67 percent of them believe it has 
deteriorated compared to 43 percent in July and 64 percent claim 
they are pessimistic about the social climate. 

   On the other hand, Balladur's stewardship gets good marks on 
privatizations, doing away with the one-month gap in reimbursing the 
VAT, and the immigration law.  Asked about the economy for 1994, 41 
percent claimed they were pessimistic and only 28 percent 
optimistic.  Some 49 percent of CEO's were more optimistic about the 
prospects of their own companies.  The businessmen lauded Interior 
Minister Charles Pasqua, Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, Budget 
Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, and Health Minister Simone Veil, in that 
order.  The poorest opinion was expressed of Labor Minister Michel 
Giraud.  More than a third of the businessmen polled  wanted him to 
leave the government.  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 
5 Jan 94 p 28) 

   GERMANY 

   NEW EKOSTAHL TAKEOVER PROPOSAL--The newly-formed Nordstahl 
company in Hamburg proposes to join with the U.S. Nucor Corporation 
in acquiring majority ownership of the Eisenhuettenstadt-based 
Ekostahl steel company from the Trust Agency.  Under the terms of 
the plan, Nordstahl and Nucor would initially assume 60-percent 
ownership of Ekostahl; the Trust Agency would retain 30 percent of 
the stock, with 10 percent held by Russia's Cherepovets combine.  A 
proposed second phase of the plan provides for Nordstahl to assume 
the Trust Agency's remaining holdings, with the Russian firm 
"possibly" raising its share to 20 percent.  Ekostahl's blast 
furnaces are to be assigned to the Russian firm in exchange for 
shipments of cold rolled steel.  Nordstahl intends to replace 
Ekostahl's "ecologically and fiscally indefensible" blast furnaces 
with electric arc furnaces while Nucor will provide "the know-how 
for a thin slab casting plant."  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in 
German 24 Dec 93 p 9) 

   COMMERZBANK OPENS FIRST WESTERN BANK OFFICE IN BELARUS- 
-Commerzbank has opened a bank office in Minsk, making it is the 
first Western bank to establish a presence in Belarus.  Klaus-Peter 
Mueller, bank director in charge of operations in the East, cited 
the growing number of German firms expanding into Belarus as a prime 
economic reason for Commerzbank's commitment.  He stated that, 
although economic reform in Belarus was not as advanced as in other 
Soviet successor republics, the strategic position of the country 
and the highly qualified work force meant that economic potential 
should not to be underestimated.  Mueller also noted that the 
expansion of private banking in Belarus afforded the possibility of 
profitable commercial banking, while German bankers could provide 
technical assistance in restructuring the local banking system, as 
well as training courses and internships.  Credit for encouraging 
and facilitating Commerzbank's early expansion into Minsk was given 
to Sergei Kostyuchenko, chairman of Priorbank, the leading local 
bank for currency trading and foreign trade.  Commerzbank has 
already opened offices in Alma Ata and Kiev and is planning to do so 
in St. Petersburg before 1994.  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in 
German 21 Dec 93 p 8) 

   CONSTRUCTION OUTLAYS FUEL BOOM IN EAST--According to the Ifo 
Institute for Economic Research, capital outlays in the federal 
laender rose by over one-third in the past year and an additional 
10-percent increase in the 1993-97 period is forecast.  Since July 
1990, about 300 billion German marks (DM) in capital investments 
have been made in the East.  Most of this amount has been spent on 
construction and the total expenditure for construction is expected 
to rise to DM2.4 trillion by 2005.  Construction outlays have grown 
by 16 percent in the current year and are expected to continue to 
fuel eastern German economic growth.  Residential housing 
construction has increased by about 300 percent over last year, and 
the number of units will increase from 30,000 (1993) to about 70,000 
(1997).  By 1997, construction outlays in the eastern laender are 
expected to account for about 25 percent of the total construction 
costs for all of Germany.  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in German 
23 Dec 93 p 15) 

   ITALY 

   CIAMPI'S ECONOMIC POLICY CRITICIZED--Prominent entrepreneur Mario 
Deaglio, commenting in LA STAMPA on Prime Minister Carlo Ciampi's 
end-of-year speech, criticized Ciampi's last minute 6.870-trillion- 
lire tax increase which was added to the 1994 Finance Law.  While 
Deaglio points out that Ciampi should be commended for his "heroic" 
efforts to straighten out the economy, Ciampi's program offers no 
ray of hope" for the future.  According to Deaglio, the tax 
increase highlights three weak points in the government's economic 
policy: 

   * Poor Government Economic Forecasting--Ciampi's government was 
forced to revise downward its economic estimates, losing 
credibility.  The government's revisions had to take into account 
forecasting errors which overestimated tax revenue. 

   * Political Consequences--The government is pursuing a flawed 
policy because implementing tax increases without first considering 
alternatives "challenges the endurance of citizens, courts fiscal 
revolt, and favors political instability." 

   * Bowing to Recessionary Pressures--Raising taxes is a "stopgap" 
measure which responds to the social pressures of a country which 
wants an end to large deficits and economic turmoil.  Such measures 
conflict with sound economic policy, according to Deaglio. (AB) 
(Turin LA STAMPA in Italian 3 Jan 94 pp 1, 4) 

   ARTISANS CRITICIZE NEW FINANCE LAW--According to Ivano 
Spalanzani, president of the General Confederation of Italian 
Artisans and Craftsmen (Confartigianato), the recently passed 1994 
Finance Law did not address the problems of artisans and craftsmen. 
Spalanzani claims the law perpetuates the old welfare state and 
contains inadequate measures to fight recession and encourage 
business growth.  The law has at least two negative consequences, 
Spalanzani believes.  It increases unemployment, causing additional 
expense for the state, and it expands the underground economy. 
Measures to increase the production base and encourage employment in 
small companies were not included, nor were tax breaks to artisans 
to encourage them to hire young, unemployed workers. 

   Although Spalanzani recognized that the Finance Law made great 
strides in privatizing government-owned companies, he also claimed 
that not enough was done to reform public administration.  For 
example, not enough was done to reduce public spending, increase 
public employees' production, and keep absenteeism in check, he 
maintained. (AB)  (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 30 Dec 93 p 11) 

   PORTUGAL 

   GATT ADVANTAGES, DISADVANTAGED ASSESSED--According to National 
Association of Electric and Electronic Materiel Industries (ANIMEE) 
economic adviser Alegre Magalhaes, new GATT regulations determined 
by the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations will have the 
following effects on Portuguese and Community industries: 

   * Electronics, Appliances--Reductions in customs tariffs on these 
products by more than 30 percent "may have a negative effect on 
European industry, especially during a recession" and will 
jeopardize European industry in relation to the United States and 
Japan.  Exports from Portugal of these products comprise 10 percent 
of total Portuguese exports and contribute 1.2 percent to the 
country's GDP. 

   * Automobiles--While it is difficult to gauge the effects of the 
GATT settlement on Portugal, which does not have national 
manufacturers, Renault's Portuguese subsidiary believes the gradual 
abolition of quotas for non-European car imports is "inevitable." 
Renault's Portuguese 1992 foreign sales amounted to 64.5 million 
contos. 

   * Footwear--Footwear sales will benefit from the GATT agreement, 
which will lead to antidumping measures against Asian footwear sales 
in Europe.  Portugal's footwear exports are valued at 200 million 
contos per year and represent 10 percent of foreign sales. (RM) 
(Lisbon PUBLICO in Portuguese 16 Dec 93 p 36) 

   SPAIN 

   DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER NARCIS SERRA ON GATT ACCORD--In a 21 
December  appearance before the Congress of Deputies, Deputy Prime 
Minister Narcis Serra called the outcome of the GATT negotiations 
"fruitful" and "satisfactory" for Spain, adding that the textile, 
agriculture, and audiovisual industries will benefit the most.  As 
for imports, the impact will be "very limited" since more than 75 
percent of Spanish purchases abroad come from countries with very 
low or no tariffs.  The impact on Spanish exports on the other hand 
will be "important," in the chemical, ceramics, tiles, shoes, and 
furniture, among others.  According to Serra, the most important 
structural change will occur in the textile sector.  As for 
agriculture, "Spanish requests have, for the most part, been taken 
into account."  He praised the creation of the World Trade 
Organization, which will "remove the danger of trade wars and 
unilateral reprisals" and the new rules regarding dumping. (MC) 
(Madrid DIARIO-16 in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 49) 

   GOVERNMENT 'VAGUENESS' ON GATT AGREEMENT CRITICIZED--People's 
Party spokesman Rodrigo Rato has criticized Deputy Prime Minister 
Narcis Serra's report on the GATT agreement to the Congress of 
Deputies on 21 December.  Serra, who had said he would explain the 
impact of the agreement on Spain, limited himself to details of the 
Uruguay Round negotiations and agreement itself, according to an 
article in EL PAIS.  Immediately afterwards, Rato criticized the 
government for its "vagueness" and for not addressing the impact of 
the treaty on the Spanish economy.  He demanded a detailed study 
sector by sector. (MC)   (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 43) 

   PP PROPOSES STIMULATIVE ECONOMIC MEASURES--On 20 December, the 
conservative People's Party announced a package of economic measures 
which it considers urgently needed to stimulate the economy, halt 
the increase in unemployment, and maintain competitiveness.  The 
proposed measures include a 5-percent cut in the Personal Income Tax 
(IRPF), an increase in deductions for investment in fixed assets, 
exports, and professional training), a return to the former system 
of workers' compensation, a plan for the privatization of 
government-owned companies aimed at collecting 450 billion pesetas 
to pay the public debt, a plan for reduced government spending, and 
budgetary controls, among other measures. (MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in 
Spanish 21 Dec 93 p 13) 

   PP PROPOSALS CRITICIZED--The Spanish Socialist Workers Party 
(PSOE) and the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) have attacked the 
People's Party proposals to stimulate the economy.  PNV 
parliamentary spokesman Inaki Anasagasti said on 21 December that he 
did not understand how the public deficit could be lowered by 
cutting taxes.  He described as "interesting" some of the measures 
proposed, adding that some of them, such as tax incentives, were 
already being applied in the Basque Country.  PSOE Organization 
Secretary Txiqui Benegas said that it was "demagogic and 
irresponsible" to base economic recovery on reducing the IRPF by 5 
percent during a time of budget deficit, falling tax revenues, and 
reduced spending. (MC)  (Madrid DIARIO-16 in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 49) 

   TEXTILE INDUSTRY SEEKS OPENING OF ASIAN MARKETS--In a joint 
effort, the employers' organizations of textile industries in Spain, 
Portugal, Italy, and Greece are demanding that their governments and 
EU Commission initiate negotiations aimed at opening Asian markets 
which under the GATT agreement retain a 100-percent tariff. 
According to an article in EL PAIS, European textile employers are 
convinced that the entire sector has emerged a loser from the GATT 
agreement.  The president of the European textile sector employers' 
organization (Comitextil), Juan Antonio Sanfeliu, said that 
Comitextil is seeking trade protection regulations similar to those 
of the United States which counter practices such as dumping, 
product piracy, and falsifying product origins.  Representatives 
from Spain's textile employers' association, the Intertextile 
Council, say that the Spanish Government used the textile industry 
as a bargaining chip during the GATT negotiations to obtain 
subsidies for the steel industry.  Fearing growing international 
competition, Intertextile is also asking the government "to speed up 
structural changes in the economy especially with regard to labor 
market reform." (MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 23 Dec 93 p 58) 

    PSV SCANDAL SEEN DAMAGING UGT--The bankruptcy of the General 
Workers Union's (UGT) housing cooperative and its management company 
to which 20,000 workers had entrusted their savings is being viewed 
as damaging for the union at a time when it is involved in preparing 
a general strike to protest the economic policy of the Spanish 
Government.  According to an editorial in DIARIO 16, until recently 
public opinion polls ranked Spanish labor unions very highly. 
"Undoubtedly," the PSV scandal has "undermined this credibility," 
the editorial claims.  However, there is suspicion within the UGT 
that the scandal was stirred up "deliberately" by the Socialists. 
The scandal will benefit the Socialist government at a time when 
politically important conflicts over labor reform and social welfare 
are being decided.  Additionally, the government is facing a 27 
January general strike, further placing the government under fire. 
The editorial concludes that the "PSV disaster cannot serve as a 
smoke screen to hide an economic policy which is both confusing and 
mortgaged." (MC)  (Madrid DIARIO 16 in Spanish 28 Dec 93 p 5) 

   ATTITUDES TOWARD GENERAL STRIKE POLLED--According to a Demoscopia 
poll published in EL PAIS, 60 percent of the 1,200 Spaniards queried 
do not intend to participate in the 27 January General Strike which 
has been called by five major unions in Spain to protest the 
government's economic policy.  Fifty-three percent think the strike 
is not necessary, but 64 percent predict a heavy turnout.  Following 
are the poll results: 


   "Do you think the call for a general strike was necessary?" 

   Yes                    38 
   No                     53 
   Don't know/no answer    9 

   "Do you think this is the right moment to call a strike?" 

   Yes                    30 
   No                     57 
   Don't know/no answer   13 

   "Do you think the strike will really happen?" 

   Yes                    62 
   No                     18 
   Don't know/no answer   20 

   "If the strike really does occur, will you participate?" 

   Yes                    28   - 
   No                     60 
   Don't know/no answer   12 

   "Do you think there will be a heavy turnout?" 

   Yes                    64 
   No                     16 
   Don't know/no answer   20 

   "In any case, who do you think should change their position more 
to avoid the strike, the government or the labor unions?" 

   Government             40 
   Labor unions           16 
   Both equally           34 
   Don't know/no answer   10 
(MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 18 Dec 93 p 43) 



   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EC 

   --Salomon Brothers economist Graham Bishop claims single currency 
more realistic than most think...Italy's IL SOLE-24 ORE quotes 
Bishop as saying market already indicates it expects monetary union 
to take place. (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE 31 Dec 93 p 6) 

   France 

   --Alcatel won contract from Telecom Australia to supply 5 million 
of 8.5 million total telecommunications lines sought by 
Australia. .. reliable source claims contract worth around Fr4 
billion of total Fr13.2-billion program. (LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES 4 Jan 
93 p11) 

   Anilla B. (703-733-6285), Mary C. (703-733-6288), Dian I. (703- 
733-6286), Rosa M. (703-733-6287), Charles W. (703-733-6473) 
contributed to this Foreign Media Survey. 

ELAG/13 JAN/ECONF/WED/jf 14/0150 JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43191 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002394001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   14 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-13JAN94-SYRIA-U.S. 
<H3> <TI>      Stressing Peace, Syria Looks to Washington for Summit Success </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 

                              Damascus has touted the upcoming U.S.-Syria summit as a pivotal 
point in the peace process, while alternating between optimism 
and skeptical reserve over prospects for the meeting's success- 
-an overall tack that serves both to underscore Syria's 
importance and set a positive atmosphere for the meeting, while 
deflecting blame should the summit yield no results, leave 
Washington dissatisfied, or be marred by regional violence. 
Clearly intent--at least in advance of the summit--on revealing 
no further political cards beyond its commitments to Washington 
on Israeli MIAs and exit permits for Syrian Jews, Damascus has 
put the onus for success or failure on Washington, giving no 
signal that President Hafiz al-Asad will bring new ideas to the 
meeting on key peace process or bilateral issues.  Accordingly, 
while  Syria's public posture in recent weeks has emphasized a 
general commitment to peace, Damascus has continued to avoid any 
clearer indication of its vision of peace and has reiterated 
criticism of the PLO-Israeli Declaration of Principles (DOP), as 
well as support for Palestinian rejectionists and their armed 
struggle against Israel. 

                          END SUMMARY 

   As it did on the eve of the November 1990 summit meeting between 
then President George Bush and Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad, 
Damascus has used the 16 December summit between al-Asad and 
President Clinton to highlight Syria's regional stature and key 
role in the Arab-Israeli peace process.  Repeatedly portraying 
the meeting as a milestone on the road to a comprehensive Arab- 
Israeli peace, Foreign Minister Faruq al-Shar' was quoted by 
Damascus radio as saying, "We look forward with optimism to the 
summit meeting in order to achieve results and successes that 
would help establish a just and comprehensive peace in the region 
on the basis" of UN resolutions and "the land-for-peace 
principle" (10 January).  For their part, Syria's closely 
controlled media have touted the summit as clear recognition by 
Washington that no Palestinian-Israeli agreement will succeed in 
the absence of a breakthrough on the Syrian-Israeli track.  For 
example, a commentary in the daily Al-Ba'th, as reported by 
Damascus radio on 3 January, asserted that "the recent U.S. move 
[to convene the summit] came after the U.S. Administration felt 
that the entire peace process was in danger, especially since it 
is now convinced . . . that partial, separate solutions would 
never achieve genuine peace." 
   Depicting the U.S. side as having primary responsibility for the 
summit's success, some media commentaries have anticipated that 
Washington will bring new momentum to the peace process, while 
others have cautiously withheld judgement.  A Damascus radio 
commentary on 2 January claimed that President Clinton "would not 
have arranged this meeting if he did not have anything new to 
justify efforts to push the peace process forward . . . ."  A 
subsequent radio commentary suggested the same, adding that 
"Syria is ready to listen to the ideas of the U.S. President and 
his convictions, but not on the basis of ceding what we struggle 
for and believe in."  Implicitly urging Washington to put 
pressure on Israel, the commentary concluded that "what remains 
to be seen are the actions of the U.S. Administration . 
toward the party that places hurdles and sets ambushes along the 
path of peace" (10 January).  The same theme was repeated in other 
commentaries, including one that claimed U.S.-Syrian cooperation 
"is apt to yield good fruits in the Geneva summit if the Clinton 
Administration shoulders its responsibility seriously and 
effectively to convince the Israeli rulers to comply with the 
terms of peace and to fully withdraw from the occupied 
territories" (Damascus radio, 13 January). 

   Several media commentaries have been more cautious in forecasting 
the results of the summit, citing alleged Israeli machinations to 
undermine it.  A Damascus radio commentary on 8 January asserted 
that, despite what it claimed were American expectations of 
"substantive progress" in the peace process stemming from the 
summit, "we do not want to prejudge things or express excessive 
optimism due to Israel's history of destroying peace opportunities 
and creating obstacles."  Other commentaries have vented particular 
ire at Israeli statements, most recently by Major General Yitzhaq 
Mordekhay, commander of the Israel Defense Forces Northern Command, 
calling on Syria to rein in Hizballah guerrillas in southern Lebanon 
who might provoke incidents to mar the summit (Tel Aviv Ha'aretz, 6 
January).  Referring specifically to Mordekhay's statement, an 
editorial in the daily Al-Thawrah reported by Damascus radio on 8 
January declared, "Perhaps it is not surprising that we are seeing 
desperate attempts and various techniques to disturb the summit," 
adding that "in this context we understand Israel's statements--or 
rather threats . . . about a military escalation in southern 
Lebanon."  The editorial claimed that the statements were part of 
an effort to "influence [the] results" of the summit "or derail 
it."  Even prior to Mordekhay's statement, Syrian media 
commentaries already had warned against Israeli "intrigues" and 
"disinformation campaigns" said to be aimed at undermining 
Syria's position at the summit (Damascus radio, 2 January; Al- 
Ba'th, as reported by Damascus radio on 4 January, respectively). 

   Khaddam, Media, Emphasize Peace 

   Since Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to the region 
last month, Damascus has taken pains to emphasize its general 
commitment to peace, but without going any further than it 
already has toward spelling out the nature of peace it envisions 
with Israel--one of the major stumbling blocks in the Israeli- 
Syrian negotiations.  This approach was apparent in Vice 
President 'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam's address to a conference of Arab 
media officials on 4 January.  The address was mildly reminiscent 
of al-Asad's September 1992 "peace of the brave" speech--an 
oration intended to signal Syrian readiness for peace but 
composed nonetheless to sound unyielding and defiant.  According 
to Damascus radio's account of his speech, Khaddam declared that 
"we mean by peace a peace that will enable us to regain all our 
territories and the Palestinian Arab people's national rights" 
and stressed that "there will never be a peace that is not 
honorable and that does not guarantee our full rights."  He 
added, "The peace we want is the one of which we and our future 
generations will be proud, no matter how bad or complicated the 
circumstances become," saying that "for us, an inch of land 
represents the dignity, honor, and future of our country." 

   As reported by the London-based Arabic language weekly Al-Hayah, 
but not mentioned in the Damascus radio account, Khaddam also 
touched on the issue of normalization of relations with Israel--a 
reference that Israeli media seized upon with enthusiasm as a 
favorable signal to Israel (Al-Hayah, 5 January; Jerusalem Qol 
Yisra'el, 7 January, respectively).  According to the Al-Hayah 
account, Khaddam asserted--evidently in replying to a question-- 
that recognition of Israel and normalization of relations fall 
within "the framework of the concept of peace and this is 
currently a subject for negotiation," but that it is "premature 
to refer to one vision [of peace] or another."  Although 
Khaddam's reported comments gave no suggestion of Syrian 
willingness to normalize relations with Israel and were not 
mentioned in the Syrian account, they were more forthcoming than 
President al-Asad's response to a question on the same subject 
last spring.  Al-Asad, sounding irritated, then claimed that "the 
Syrian side has answered" the question of normalization already, 
accused Israel of using the issue "to obstruct the peace march," 
and declared that "peace is peace" and "there are not many 
interpretations of it" (Damascus TV, 27 March 1993). 

   For their part, Syrian media in recent weeks have demonstrated a 
particular concern with image-building prior to the summit by 
emphasizing the general theme of peace.  While not addressing 
Israel's demand that Syria spell out its concept of peace prior 
to Israel's defining how extensive a withdrawal it will make on 
the Golan, commentaries have implied that Syria's concept of 
peace would satisfy the Israelis. 

   --A Damascus radio commentary on 16 December stressed that, in 
putting forth the formula of "full peace in exchange for full 
withdrawal," Syria "announced that it means what it says and is 
ready for everything that this formula entails, provided Israel 
accepts it."  The same theme appeared in a 13 January Al-Ba'th 
editorial, which asserted that "Syria is committed to the peace 
it advocates and to all of its dimensions and results" (Damascus 
radio, 13 January). 

   --A Damascus radio commentary on 4 January asserted that "in 
return for Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories, 
Israel would reap the fruit of peace on all tracks without 
exception."  It added that, while "neither Syria nor Lebanon will 
listen to Israel to conclude separate deals," Israel "will 
receive a favorable response if it really seeks an honorable, 
comprehensive, and just peace." 

   Criticism of PLO, DOP 

   In the weeks leading up to the summit, Damascus has continued to 
make clear its anger at the PLO for secretly negotiating an 
agreement with Israel.  Although Syrian officials have been 
characteristically more circumspect than have media commentaries 
in criticizing the DOP, they have left no doubt about the Syrian 
stand toward the PLO since the document's signing on 13 
September.  For example, in comments quoted by Syria's official 
news agency, SANA, on 27 December, al-Shar' implied that the PLO 
leadership would be virtually excluded from any further attempts 
at Arab coordination on the peace process.  "It is regrettable 
that one Arab side has abandoned inter-Arab coordination," al- 
Shar' was quoted as saying at the end of a visit to Amman, adding 
that "we hope this will be compensated by coordination among the 
other Arab sides . . . in the next phase." 

   Media commentaries have appeared almost to gloat as talks on 
implementation of the DOP have met difficulty and when it has 
seemed that the Palestinian side had been forced to make 
concessions to Israel.  A Damascus radio commentary on 21 
December declared that "those who signed the Oslo agreement and 
deviated from the unified Arab position and the constants of the 
just and comprehensive solution are reaping bitter fruit today." 
A subsequent editorial in Al-Ba'th asserted that "the Oslo 
agreement has begun to collapse under Zionist pressures" as "even 
the flawed and fragile autonomy accord appears to be rejected by 
the Israelis" (Damascus radio, 5 January). 

   Other media commentaries have portrayed the PLO leadership as 
treasonous capitulators and subjects of Israeli manipulation and 
have made clear Syria's backing for those Palestinians seeking to 
obstruct implementation of the accord. 

   --"There is a great difference," claimed an Al-Ba'th editorial, 
"between the heroes and those who have surrendered and 
disregarded the blood of the martyrs and sold it very cheaply". 
The editorial added: "We pin high hopes on those heroes who 
achieve victory through their sacrifices and who defeat all plans 
of surrender" (Damascus radio, 20 December). 

   --An editorial in the daily Tishrin declared that "Israel's 
effort to save 'Arafat is too late."  Claiming that "the 
intifadah has moved into higher gear," it asserted that "'Arafat has 
no control over the situation within or outside the occupied Arab 
territory."  It attributed the "desperate but futile" PLO attempts 
to fulfill its commitment to end violence in the occupied 
territories to the "Palestinian people's steadfastness" and "their 
mounting rejection of the agreement," as well as to a "determined 
Syrian stance that has kept the Arab position from unraveling and 
the Arabs from giving in to Israel's ambitions and terms" (21 
December). 

   Coverage of Rejectionists 

   At the same time, Syrian media, which are often selective in 
their reporting, have continued periodically to cover statements 
by PLO constituent, Palestinian rejectionist, and militant 
Islamic groups opposed to the accord.  For example, Damascus 
radio on 16 December carried a relatively lengthy report on a 
rally marking the anniversary of the Palestinian intifadah, at 
which officials of the Popular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (PFLP), the Democratic Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (DFLP), and Lebanon's Hizballah denounced the DOP. 
Monitored Syrian media, which generally avoid reporting on the 
activities of Damascus-backed Palestinians, did report at some 
length on the formation of a new rejectionist umbrella 
organization--"Alliance of the Palestinian Forces"--aimed at 
opposing the DOP (Al-Ba'th, 7 January).  The full text of the 
group's announcement, which declared the need to topple the 
Gaza-Jericho accord, had been aired on 6 January on al-Quds 
radio, the Syrian-based station of Ahmad Jibril's Democratic 
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command. 

   Support for Attacks in Occupied Territories 

   Recent Syrian news reporting and commentary have also expressed 
support, both directly and indirectly, for continued armed 
struggle against Israel, in one instance clearly including 
attacks on civilian settlers--a trend consistent with Damascus' 
longstanding differentiation between what it regards as 
legitimate resistance to occupation and terrorism.  A 28 December 
commentary on Damascus radio's Palestine Broadcast program--a 
daily feature on the Palestinian issue--referred to an earlier 
assassination of two settlers on the West Bank as an "execution" 
of "two criminal saboteurs."  Referring to the common chants by 
Israeli extremists of "death to the Arabs," the commentary 
concluded: "Arab strugglers have grasped the significance of this 
slogan sufficiently to train their guns on the invading and 
subversive parasites to teach them through the muzzle of the gun 
that they have either of two choices--get killed or clear out." 
A subsequent editorial in Tishrin warned somewhat less stridently 
that "no single Zionist settler will experience comfort or peace 
as long as the Golan is occupied" (Damascus radio, 6 January). 

   Syrian media have also continued occasionally to report 
statements by organizations claiming responsibility for or 
threatening attacks against Israeli targets, particularly in the 
occupied territories.  Thus, as recently as 6 January, Damascus 
TV reported a statement by a spokesman for Hamas in Jordan in 
which he threatened "to carry out major operations in the 
occupied territories," noting an increasing use of "automatic 
weapons and suicide operations." 

   Syrian Jews, Israeli MIAs 

   Although Damascus has avoided public discussion of promises made 
to Washington on issuing exit permits to all Syrian Jews who 
request them and helping investigate the fate of seven Israeli 
MIAs--promises announced by Secretary Christopher at the end of 
his last visit--it portrayed the issue on the eve of the summit as 
having been resolved.  Damascus radio thus quoted Rabbi Ibrahim 
Hamra, the spiritual leader of Syria's Jewish community, as telling 
the London weekly Al-Hayah that "the issue of the Mosaic community 
in Syria is all but settled" (11 January).  Evidently reflecting 
Syrian sensitivity on this matter, the radio omitted any more 
specific remarks by Hamra clarifying the nature of "the issue." 
According to Al-Hayah's account, Hamra specified that "some 550 
exit visas have been issued at the rate of 30 a day" and that 350 
applicants had yet to receive their visas. 

   Implications 

   Always concerned that Syria's stature as a key regional player be 
duly recognized, the Syrians--who have been seething over the 
PLO-Israel accord and the ensuing lavish Washington signing 
ceremony--view the summit itself as a significant gain.  Syria's 
interest in improving bilateral ties with the United States 
evidently has prompted it to yield on the issue of Syrian Jews by 
moving toward fulfillment of its promise to Secretary Christopher. 
How much further it is willing to go to ingratiate itself with 
Washington and challenge Israel with a significant new gesture is 
unclear, but Syrian media behavior offers no hint of an imminent 
breakthrough.  While al-Asad may go a bit further in indicating 
his willingness to seek a genuine settlement with Israel, he will 
undoutedly reiterate his longstanding demand for full Israeli 
withdrawal from the Golan.  In any event, the media's focus on 
alleged Israeli obstructionism will likely redouble should the 
summit fail to make progress on either the peace process or 
bilateral ties. 

(AUTHOR: BROWN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/jf 14/0022 JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43192 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002494001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-14JAN94-YUGO-BOSNIA 
<H3> <TI>      Yugoslavia--Bosnia-Herzegovina </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Serbs     Defy NATO Warning 

                       SUMMARY 

   Shrugging off threats of NATO airstrikes, Serb leaders in the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina have denied responsibility for taking the 
offensive in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  Bosnian Serb leaders flatly 
rejected NATO's call for the opening of Tuzla airport to 
humanitarian aid flights. 
                        END  SUMMARY 
   Reacting to the 11 January communique issued following the NATO 
summit in Brussels that warned of the possibility of air strikes 
to prevent the strangulation of Sarajevo and other threatened 
areas, Serb leaders and media have denied that Serb armed forces 
have gone on the offensive and complained that the international 
community has unjustifiably singled out the Serbs for punishment. 
   Reaction in Belgrade 
   Slobodan Milosevic, President of the Republic of Serbia in the 
FRY, described the "threats of bombing" Serbian positions as 
incomprehensible" because he said Bosnian Serb forces have "not 
waged war for more than seven months" and the "Muslim leadership" 
is "undoubtedly" responsible for recent "armed provocations" 
(Tanjug, 13 January).   Milosevic similarly denied Bosnian Serb 
responsibility for recent armed conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina in 
a speech to the Geneva peace conference on 29 November (Belgrade 
radio, 29 November).  He gave no indication in his most recent 
statements that he would attempt to persuade Bosnian Serb forces 
to desist from their shelling of Sarajevo and their interference 
with humanitarian shipments in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
   Although the NATO communique issued a general warning to all 
sides about the possibility of air strikes, the Yugoslav media 
have asserted that the threat was part of a wider international 
campaign of unjustified criticism of the Serbs.  A Tanjug 
commentator asserted that, "although the word 'Serb' was not 
explicitly mentioned," NATO had aimed its warning at the Bosnian 
Serbs.  Echoing Milosevic's objections to the international 
community's criticism of the Serbs, the commentator complained of 
the unfair treatment of the Serbs.  He maintained that "only the 
Serb side has so far fulfilled all it has been asked" at the 
peace talks but the international community "continues to make 
threats" to the Serbs alone "while looking with benevolence on 
the bloody fighting" between Muslims and Croats (Tanjug, 13 
January). 
   Bosnian Serb Defiance 
   The Bosnian Serb leadership was unanimous in its rejection of the 
NATO communique's call for the opening of Tuzla airport to 
flights carrying humanitarian aid.  The Serbs insisted that the 
Muslims would use the airport to smuggle arms for their army 
(Tanjug, 12 and 13 January).  Reinforcing this assertion, one 
Tanjug report claimed that Tuzla airport was already being used 
to receive flights carrying arms from Germany and Turkey (Tanjug, 
13 January). 
   The reaction of Bosnian Serb leaders to the communique's warning 
of airstrikes varied from outright defiance to dismissal of the 
idea as militarily impracticable: 
   -- Bosnian Serb "President" Radovan Karadzic described the 
threats of airstrikes as "counterproductive" to the peace 
process, "to put it mildly," charging that the possibility of 
NATO intervention encourages the "Muslim side to carry on with 
the war."  He claimed that "even UNPROFOR reports clearly 
indicate" that the "Muslims have been attacking" Serbian forces 
in and around Sarajevo (Tanjug, 11 January). 
   -- Bosnian Serb "presidency" member Nikola Koljevic was openly 
defiant in his reaction to the NATO communique.  He said that 
"Serbs have had enough of threats" and warned that those who 
issued them were "thinking incorrectly" because they "do not know 
Serbs, their history, and aspirations" (Vecernje Novosti, 13 
January). 
   -- Momcilo Krajisnik, speaker of the assembly of the self- 
proclaimed Republic of Srpska in Bosnia-Herzegovina, criticized 
the NATO communique's warning of air strikes and its demand that 
Tuzla airport be opened but assessed positively what he 
maintained was a "new approach" to the Bosnian crisis.  He 
claimed that NATO had "abandoned" its "ultimatum-style tone" that 
it had previously used in its statements on the crisis.  He 
dismissed the warning to end the strangulation of Sarajevo as 
"superfluous" for the Serbs since the Serbian side "is not the 
one strangling Sarajevo" as outsiders "keep saying" (Tanjug, 12 
January). 
   -- The chief of staff of the Bosnian Serb army, General Manojlo 
Milovanovic, dismissed the possibility of air strikes as 
impracticable.  Milovanovic claimed that air strikes on his 
forces would "directly threaten" UNPROFOR units and Muslim and 
Croat forces "that are deployed very close to Serbian forces on 
all the fronts" in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  He further belittled the 
communique's warning as a "scheme used too frequently" when a 
"peace plan likely to be rejected by the Bosnian Serbs" is about 
to be presented at the international peace negotiations 
(Politika, 13 January). 
(AUTHOR:  NASH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
EUROPE &amp; LATIN AMERICA GROUP, (703) 733-6120.) 
ELAG/GILISON cs 14/2042z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43193 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002594001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
(DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS, THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS) 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-008--CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      EVOLVING POLITICAL CARTOONS: THE "YEAR OF THE CAT" </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
The     cat has become a common symbolic subject of political 
cartoons in China since Deng Xiaoping said "It doesn't matter 
whether the cat is black or white as long as it catches the mouse." 
This sentence is often interpreted by reformers as Deng's defense of 
a pragmatic, non-ideological approach to economic reform. 
   The cartoons presented in this Foreign Media Note reveal that 
during 1993 the symbolic message behind the cat has gone from 
positive to negative. The cat has been portrayed as a successful 
mouse catcher and money maker to a corrupt official who takes bribes 
from the mouse in exchange for power, as a cat that is at the 
disposal of the mouse who is now the successful businessman, as an 
official who awards the mouse with a certificate of good citizenship 
in exchange for a bribe, and finally as a street book vendor, 
selling books for mice entitled "How To Escape the Pursuit of Cats." 

   Cartoon number one was inserted here on hard copy 

   "The Year of the Cat" (Beijing, Zhongguo Qingnian Bao 2 Feb 93 
p5) 
In this cartoon the cat's eyes are represented by traditional 
Chinese coins and the cat is holding a mouse with coins around its 
tail, all of which encourages the positive pursuit of monetary 
rewards. 

   Cartoon number two was inserted here on hard copy 

   "Why Isn't the Mouse Afraid of the Cat"? (Beijing, Guangming 
Ribao 10 Dec 93 p 2) In this cartoon the cat is dressed in a black 
cadre hat and black overalls that say "corrupt." The fish in the 
cat's hand is his reward, which says: "personal gain through power." 
The bag on the mouse's back says "bribes." 

   Cartoon number three was inserted here on hard copy 

   "Now That the Mouse Has Money" (Tianjin, Tianjin Ribao 18 Jul 93 
p 9)  In this cartoon, the mouse, with a western business suit 
symbolyzing success and money, has enslaved the cat. 

   Cartoon number four was inserted here on hard copy 

   No title  (Jinan, Shandong Huabao Oct 93 p 60)  In this cartoon 
the cat is wearing a cadre uniform and is presenting a certificate 
of good citizenship to the mouse.  The fish under the cat's tail 
reads: bribe. 

   Cartoon number five was inserted here on hard copy 

   "News From Book Stalls"  (Kunming, Yunnan Ribao 16 Oct 93 p 5) 
In this cartoon the cat is hawking books entitled "How To Escape the 
Pursuit of Cats." 

   (Zakirhans.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL ACTING CHIEF 
POL/MIL BRANCH AT (703) 733-6406) 
EAG/14 JAN 94/POLCHF/CD/SDJ 14/2057Z JAN 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43194 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002694001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-14JAN94-CHINA-U. S. 
<H3> <TI>      Beijing Takes Tough Line on U.S. Textile Decision </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 

                             Beijing has gone on the record with a "serious protest" over 
Washington's decision to cut import quotas for textiles from 
China for its illegal transshipments of textiles.  Although the 
measured language of the 7 January authoritative protest 
indicates that Beijing does not want to poison the atmosphere of 
Sino-U.S. relations, subsequent low-level media commentary on the 
U.S. decision suggests that Beijing plans to take a tough line at 
the upcoming round of textile talks, which begin on 15 January. 
It also appears that Beijing may be willing to accept 
deterioration in other trade areas with Washington if the textile 
talks do not go well. 
                      END SUMMARY 
   Beijing's special concern over Washington's action was conveyed 
in a "serious protest (yanzhong kangyi)" lodged by a spokesman of 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC) 
to register its objections to the U.S. decision to significantly 
cut import quotas for Chinese textiles (Xinhua, 7 January).  In 
the past, Beijing has generally responded to U.S. decisions to 
take trade actions against China by issuing either just a 
"protest" or a "strong protest."  For example, Beijing used a 
"strong protest" to denounce Washington's August 1993 decision to 
impose economic sanctions on China for violating the Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and selling missile technology 
to Pakistan (Xinhua, 27 August 1993), while the August 1984 
announcement by the U.S. Custom Service of new "country of 
origin" rules affecting Chinese textiles, which Beijing denounced 
as a "clear violation" of the Multi-Fiber Agreement, was 
"protested" in a letter from the PRC Ambassador to the United 
States to the U.S. Government (Xinhua, 19 August 1984). 
   While the current "serious protest" clearly reflects Beijing's 
desire to formally register its objections to the quota cuts, the 
contents of Beijing's authoritative response appears to reflect a 
desire to limit the damage to the bilateral relationship.  For 
example, the language of the 7 January "serious protest" was 
relatively mild, merely characterizing the U.S. decision as 
"irresponsible" and eschewing the harsher language used in last 
summer's protest, which said that the U.S. decision to impose 
economic sanctions on China for violating the MTCR would "break 
or destroy (po huai)" Sino-U.S. relations.  The 7 January protest 
also failed to use formulations customarily employed in Chinese 
protests over the past decade--"harmed (sunhai)" or "seriously 
harmed (yanzhong sunhai)"--to assess the impact of the U.S. 
decision on bilateral ties.  Instead the current protest noted 
only that the decision would "seriously influence (yanzhong 
yingxiang) Sino-U.S. economic and trade" ties.  While the protest 
threatened "appropriate retaliatory measures," it also 
underscored China's willingness to first try to resolve the 
problem through negotiations. 
   Tough Line Reaffirmed 
   The circumspection evident in Beijing's authoritative response to 
the U.S. quota cuts has been lacking in the harder hitting, 
lower-level media commentary indicating that China has not 
tempered the tough line on the United States it took last summer. 
For example, a 7 January Xinhua report assessing the decision 
quoted an official of the Chinese National Textile Council as 
characterizing Washington's "headstrong action" in cutting 
China's quota's as a "kind of power politcs, coercing the Third 
World countries with its economic supremacy."  The tough line on 
Sino-U.S. ties was also evident in a 9 January "commentator's" 
article in MOFTEC's paper Guoji Shangbao that called the U.S. 
decision "unwise" and warned that United States "should not 
imagine" that its actions can "force China to yield," noting that 
the Chinese people have "never bowed to any external pressure." 
A "special article" carried by the PRC-owned Hong Kong-based 
press agency Zhongguo Tongxun She on 14 January went even further 
in criticizing the decision.  Describing the upcoming Sino-U.S. 
textile negotiations as a "final showdown," the article said that 
the negotiations had only a "fifty-fifty" chance of success. 
Scoring the United States for "brandishing the big stick of 
hegemonism" and trying to "overpower" China before the talks 
begin by dealing Beijing a "head-on blow," the article warned 
that China is not a "weakling" and is "unlikely to give into 
American pressure."  The article went on to suggest that Beijing 
is willing to accept a deterioration in Sino-U.S. trade, stating 
that if the United States cuts China's quotas then the PRC will 
"retaliate by stopping or reducing the purchase of American 
agricultural and industrial products." 
(AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/BIETZ CS 14/2106z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43195 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002794001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-14JAN94-CHINA-FRANCE 
<H3> <TI>      China-France-U.S. </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Beijing,     Paris Restore Bilateral Ties 

   In a move that could have serious implications for U.S. trade and 
economic relations with China, Beijing has announced the 
restoration of bilateral ties with France.  Relations between 
Beijing and Paris had soured after France agreed in November 1992 
to sell 60 Mirage 2000 jet fighters to Taiwan.  According to a 
joint communique on the previously unpublicized 23-28 December 
visit to China by Jacques Friedmann, a special envoy of French 
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, the two countries have decided 
to restore their "traditional friendly relations and cooperation" 
on the basis of the principles on which they established 
diplomatic ties (Xinhua, 12 January).  In addition, Xinhua 
reported that the two governments also agreed to "intensify" 
their "political consultations" and to "develop" bilateral 
economic and trade relations.  The communique went on to suggest 
that Paris will also reap economic rewards for its agreement not 
to "authorize" French companies to sell arms to Taiwan, noting 
that China "welcomes participation on an equal footing" by French 
enterprises in the Chinese market.  During Chancellor Helmut 
Kohl's late November visit to China, Beijing had rewarded Bonn 
for its decision not to sell weapons to Taiwan and for its low- 
key position on human rights by awarding a number of lucrative 
economic contracts to German companies. 
(AUTHOR.  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/BIETZ CS 14/2118z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43196 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002894001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--EAST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 94-001--EAST EUROPE </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Europe     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol.III, No. 01, 
07 January 1994 

   Notice to Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
that are compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS. 
Unless otherwise identified as introduction and/or comment by FBIS 
staff, all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to 
the cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues in the FBIS Daily Reports for East and West Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normanlly do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues are generally grouped under 
subheadings by subject country or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   INTRODUCTION 

   This issue of EUR0PE ECONOMIC REVIEW spotlights Poland for an 
East European case study on how local media have reported on issues 
of Western aid and lending during 1993.  The goal is to illustrate 
recent Polish media perceptions of key issues and developments 
related to Western foreign aid and financial assistance in support 
of economic reform and restructuring in Poland and the rest of 
Eastern Europe. 

   This issue is divided into two segments: 

   --A brief regional section consisting of examples of how selected 
Polish media have reported on Western aid and lending to Eastern 
Europe as a whole. 

   --A longer section devoted solely to Polish media coverage of 
Western aid and lending to Poland. 

   In both sections, abstracts of longer press reports are grouped 
under two main subject headings: 

   --Grants and Technical Assistance -- covering all forms of 
bilateral and multilateral donations from governments, business 
groups, or international organizations to promote economic reform 
and restructuring, including both direct grants in aid and technical 
assistance. 

   --International Lending and Financial Assistance -- encompassing 
all types of lending and financial assistance (including external 
debt relief) by Western governments, Western commercial banks, 
international organizations, and international financial 
institutions. 

   Media summaries in this issue are drawn from full-text Polish 
sources, including some which were previously published by FBIS and 
others which were not previously disseminated.  All summaries 
attributed to the Polish news agency PAP are based on original wire- 
filed material processed simultaneously by FBIS field bureaus.  The 
majority of summaries in this issue that cite press sources were 
extracted more recently from Polish periodicals archived at FBIS 
headquarters.  All items are arranged chronologically and cover the 
period January through December 1993. 

   Editorial Note:  For the purposes of this special issue, the 
editors have retained the term "EC" or European Community when 
referencing media reports on European Union (EU) assistance to 
Poland or Eastern Europe that were published before 1 November 1993 

   -- the date on which the '1Maastricht Treaty" of European Union 
entered into force.  The term EU is reserved for summaries of all 
other material published after 1 November or in cases where texts 
discuss future conditions. 

   REGIONAL 

   GRANTS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 

   SUMMING UP PHARE ACHIEVEMENTS:  In late June, the Polish foreign 
trade journal RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE ran a full-page feature, consisting 
of four articles, that reviewed the accomplishments of the EC's 
PHARE program of economic restructuring assistance throughout 
Eastern Europe since its inception in 1989.  The journal drew most 
of the information used in this feature from documents published by 
the EC Commission.  The feature listed the names, addresses, phone 
and fax numbers of government officials in charge of overseeing 
PHARE aid in all of the East European countries. 

   Originally designed as an assistance program for Poland and 
Hungary only (PHARE -- French abbreviation for "Economic 
Restructuring Assistance to Poland and Hungary"), the program now 
covers most of Eastern Europe.  PHARE initiatives are in place in 
Albania, Bulgarian, Czechia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia.  The EC runs a separate 
restructuring and technical assistance program for the former Soviet 
Union -- TACIS (Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of 
Independent States and Georgia). 

   The main objective of the PHARE program is to provide technical 
assistance that will promote privatization and restructuring in the 
recipient countries, paving the way for increased foreign direct 
investment.  In Poland, for example, PHARE aid was instrumental in 
helping to finalize Fiat's acquisition of the Polish FSM automotive 
plant.  PHARE provided funds to hire consultants who put together 
the package of legal and economic paperwork that enabled both Fiat 
and FSM to bring their negotiations to a successful conclusion at 
the end of 1992, when Fiat committed itself to buy 90 percent of 
FSM's stock. 

   Since 1989, the PHARE program has disbursed 3.340 billion ECU to 
all East European recipient countries, according to RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE.  In most cases, national foreign investment agencies in 
the recipient countries manage the distribution of assistance and 
the awarding of contracts. 

   PHARE also comprises subsidiary programs providing other kinds of 
economic assistance.  The JOPP program, for example, underwrites 
bank loans to finance East-West joint ventures.  PHARE also delivers 
direct assistance to the banking sector in some East European 
countries.  In Slovenia, for example, where the government does not 
yet have the administrative support to oversee distribution of PHARE 
aid, PHARE is giving direct assistance to Slovenian banks as a part 
of a drive to reform the trade payments system. 

   The RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE feature on PHARE also included a table that 
summarized aid to the principal recipient countries.  The data in 
the table were current as of January 1993.  An edited version of 
this table appears below. 

   Poland 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and restructuring 
assistance (since 1991). 

   Responsible National Agency -- National Foreign Investment 
Agency. 

   Agency Program Goals -- Founded in April 1992, the NFIA seeks to 
attract foreign investors to Poland and to assist them in buying 
stock in Polish firms slated for privatization.  The NFIA also 
assists the Polish government in legal matters related to foreign 
investment. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- PHARE pays for the hiring of 
consultants under short and long-term contracts to aid in luring 
direct foreign investment to Poland. 

   Hungary 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Foreign investment promotion and 
export sales development (February 1992). 

   Responsible National Agency -- Investment and Trade Promotion 
Agency of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. 

   Agency Program Goals -- The program is designed to support all 
new foreign investment and encourage increased export sales in 
specific sectors. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- PHARE provides specialized consultants 
and subsidizes Agency costs in running foreign investment promotion 
programs. 

   Czech Republic 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and economic 
restructuring (1992). 

   Responsible National Agency -- Czech Foreign Investment Agency 
(Czechinvest) of the Ministry of Industry and Trade. 

   Agency Program Goals -- Founded in October 1990, the Agency 
matches foreign investors with appropriate partners in the Czech 
Republic. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- The PHARE program supporting this 
Agency began in the first quarter of 1993.  The program is a 
continuation of earlier efforts dating from 1991.  PHARE provides 
consultants, pays for training courses, and supports various 
promotional campaigns. 

   Slovak Republic 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and economic 
restructuring (1992). 

   Responsible National Agency -- Slovak National Agency for Foreign 
Investment and Development of the Ministry of Privatization. 

   Agency Program Goals -- Founded in 1991 as governmental body, the 
Agency is now semi-autonomous.  The Agency aims to promote foreign 
investment and open up new areas of industrial cooperation. 

   PHARE Technical Support --  PHARE support consists of consulting 
services, training for Agency personnel, and support for foreign 
investment promotion campaigns. 

   Romania 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and economic 
restructuring (1992). 

   Responsible National Agency -- Romanian Development Agency of the 
Council for Economic Reform Policy. 

   Agency Program Goals -- Founded by the government in March 1991, 
the Agency is described as an autonomous, public institution.  It is 
chartered to assist the government in defining and executing 
policies aimed at encouraging direct foreign investment. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- Implementation of the PHARE program 
for Romania started in first quarter of this year.  The program 
provides for consulting services, Agency personnel training, and 
support for foreign investment promotion campaigns. 

   Bulgaria 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and economic 
restructuring (1992). 

   Responsible National Agency -- Ministry of Industry and Trade. 
   Agency Program Goals -- No information. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- Based on provisions of 1991 
privatization laws, PHARE support was due to begin in the first 
quarter of 1993.  Initial efforts were to be focused on funding a 
study of privatization problems and on the delivery of consulting 
services. 

   Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania 

   Role and Scope of Program -- Privatization and economic 
restructuring (1992). 

   Responsible National Agencies -- To be determined. 

   Agency Program Goals -- Based on government studies and 
recommendations, PHARE aid funds should be spent on problemsolving 
in areas of legislation and institution building. 

   PHARE Technical Support -- PHARE experts are to provide 
troubleshooting services in solving legal and institutional 
problems.  Each country to receive one PHARE consultant.  Specific 
projects were due to commence in second quarter of this year. 
(Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 24 Jun 92 p 6) 

   'TRIANGULAR' EC AID TO CIS MAY BENEFIT EAST EUR0PEANS:  In an 
August  survey article on the EC's TACIS aid program for the former 
Soviet Union, the Polish foreign trade journal RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
noted that the program would yield dividends for East European 
vendors.  TACIS (Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of 
Independent States and Georgia) is a version of the EC's PHARE 
program tailored to the needs of the former USSR. 

   TACIS reportedly contains new elements that allow East European 
suppliers to bid on contracts for goods and services paid for by the 
EC as technical assistance to the CIS.  East European bidders would 
be competing against other bidders in both EC member countries and 
the CIS.  The EC Council has ruled that East European contractors 
will be permitted to bid on projects covered by up to 10 percent of 
the TACIS annual budget.  Contract acceptance hinges on the approval 
of recipient countries, however.  The 1993 TACIS budget was valued 
at a reported 510 million ECU. 

   RYNKI ZAGEANICZNE pointed out that Poland had long sought EC 
approval for this kind of "triangular" assistance.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 26 Aug 93 p 3) 

   NORWEGIAN AID TO REGION:  Norway planned to spend $62 million on 
aid to Central and Eastern Europe and Russia during 1993.  By the 
end of June, Oslo had donated $47 million to fund 487 projects in 
countries throughout the region.  Around $23 went for aid to the 
private sector and various infrastructure projects.  Norway donated 
about $8 million for environmental assistance.  Russia will account 
for about $14 million in Norway's regional aid budget.  (Warsaw 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 11 Sep 93 p 1) 

   EC CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE TAP PHARE, AID EASTERN CHAMBERS:  In late 
September, the "Eurochambers PHARE Working Group" organized a two- 
day conference in Warsaw to discuss its stewardship of technical 
assistance programs to Eastern Europe funded by PHARE.  The Polish 
Chamber of Commerce hosted the program, and representatives of the 
national chambers of commerce from Romania, Slovakia, and Hungary 
also attended. 

   Founded 35 years ago, Eurochambers is an association of national 
chambers of commerce from 24 European countries representing 1,200 
local chamber chapters and 13 million companies.  During the Warsaw 
meeting, Eurochambers vice president, Robert De Vilder (president of 
the Amsterdam Chamber of Commerce and Industry), announced that he 
would introduce a motion in 1994 to admit the Polish, Czech, Slovak 
and Hungarian chambers to the association. 

  Eurochambers is managing three technical assistance programs for 
Eastern Europe that have a combined budget of about ECU 1 million. 
These funds are reportedly additional to the PHARE budgets approved 
by the EC Commission for individual East European recipient 
countries.  One program is already in operation, while the two other 
initiatives are due to get underway in 1994. 

   --The MERCURE PHARE program (annual budget - ECU 250,000) pays 
for the travel of 50 officials from East European chambers of 
commerce on two-week orientation visits with EC chambers. 

   --Beginning in 1994, the "Workshops" program (projected annual 
budget -- ECU 120,000) will finance training seminars for chamber of 
commerce officials in Eastern Europe.  Training will be geared 
toward general subjects of business self-regulation. 

   --The third and newest program is called "Industrial Training 
Attachments."  Billed as a pilot program for Visegrad countries 
only, Eurochambers will arrange business training courses for East 
European middle managers in the food processing, electronics, 
woodworking, footwear, and construction industries. 

   Eurochambers also plans to organize a "sister" organization 
program with East European chambers.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 30 Sep 93 p 8) 

   GERMANY ANNOUNCES BUDGET FOR CONSULTING AID TO REGION:  The 
German federal government has approved plans to spend DM 322 million 
on technical consulting services for Central and Eastern Europe, 
according to Poland's foreign commercial office in Cologne. 

   Funding for this technical assistance package will be shared 
among 14 federal ministries.  The largest appropriations are 
earmarked for the Federal Ministry of the Economy (DM 59.2 million), 
the Ministry of Finance (DM 37.2 million), and the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Cooperation (DM 83.4).  The Ministry of the Economy 
will coordinate the consulting assistance program in close 
cooperation with the Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 14 Oct 93 p 1) 

   INTERNATIONAL LENDING AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 

   JOURNAL NOTES IMF ANNUAL REPORT ON EASTERN EUROPE:  In late 
September, the Polish foreign trade journal RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE ran a 
front-page story on "the latest IMF report," which described the 
institution's financial position and lending patterns for 1992.  The 
IMF report noted that, while a member quota increase had boosted the 
organization's capital, lending declined in 1992 due to improved 
economic conditions in many developing countries, especially in 
Latin America. 

   RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE highlighted the fact that Eastern Europe and 
the former Soviet Union accounted for the bulk of the IMF's lending 
in 1992.   Although total IMF lending dropped from 8.1 billion SDR 
in 1991 to 3.2 billion SDR in 1992, the countries of Central and 
Eastern Europe received the most -- 2 billion SDR.  The IMF loaned 
most of the remaining 1.2 billion SDR to Peru, Jamaica, and 
Zimbabwe.  The IMF report noted that demand for IMF loans in Eastern 
Europe and the former Soviet Union was lower than expected for 1992. 

   RYNKI ZAGEANICZNE predicted that the region would continue to be 
the IMF's principal client in 1993.  The paper recounted the IMF's 
temporary lending facility of 1.1 billion SDR extended to Russia and 
Kirghizstan in April of this year.  (Warsaw RThKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 18 Sep 93 p 1) 

   EBRD EYES AID TO STEEL SECTOR:  The EBRD plans to make 
restructuring loans available to selected East European iron and 
steel enterprises, according to RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE. 

   In a recap of debate among Western industry experts at the 
European Steel Conference held in Luxemburg in September, RThKI 
noted that Western efforts to erect barriers to East European steel 
imports are offset by the calls of some Western experts for the West 
to furnish aid that would ease downsizing and restructuring in the 
East European steel sector.  The paper quoted EBRD's Christopher 
Beauman, who said that Western protectionism will undermine East 
European steel restructuring programs.  Another conference 
participant, Roger Collins from the UK consulting firm W.S. Atkins, 
urged the West to focus assistance on vocational retraining for East 
European steel workers.  Otherwise, said Collins, East European 
governments may wind up repeating the mistakes of the EC in the 
l98Os, when around 40 billion ECU in subsidies were pumped into the 
West European steel industry to prop up firms and employment 
artificially. 

   The EBRD reportedly intends to begin screening East European iron 
and steel mills that "stand a chance of being able to go it alone" 
and provide them with loans to aid restructuring.  The EBRD would do 
so by participating in the industry restructuring programs proposed 
by various regional governments.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 21 Sep 93 p 3) 

   EIB FORESEES INCREASED LENDING TO REGION:  In late September, Sir 
Brian Unwin, president of the EC's EIB pledged additional resources 
for the pool of capital earmarked for long-term lending to Eastern 
Europe, according to RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE. 

   The EC finance ministers have approved EIB plans to lend 3 
billion ECU to the region over the next three years.  An earlier 
allocation for Eastern Europe of 1.7 billion ECU has already been 
exhausted.  At the beginning of September, the bank loaned 1.3 
billion ECU to Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, 
Romania, and Slovakia.  Future lending programs will also include 
Albania and the three Baltic states. 

   Unwin noted another factor that will contribute to greater EIB 
activity in Central and Eastern Europe.  He believes that Austria's 
entry into the EC would facilitate greater EIB lending in the area 
due to its historic links with the region as a whole.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 25 Sep 93 p 1) 

   POLAND 

   GRANTS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 

   PHARE AID HISTORY:  Poland has been participating in the EC's 
PHARE program since 1990.  From 1990 through 1992 Poland's annual 
share of total PHARE funding has been 200 million ECU.  In 1993, 
Poland's allotment was raised to 225 million ECU.  (Warsaw GAZETA 
PRZEMYSLOWA I HANDLOWA in Polish No 41, 13-19 Oct 93 p 3) 

   UK KNOW-HOW SUPPORT FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT:  The UK's "Know-How 
Fund" announced in January that it would launch two new technical 
training initiatives to assist Polish local governments.  One 
project involved setting up a land-use planning training program by 
Llewellyn Davies of London and the Krakow Insitute for Land-use 
Planning and Municipal Services Management.  The other project was 
to concentrate on providing training for business development 
through a cooperative business training program run by Chesterton 
International of Bristol and the Foundation for the Promotion of 
Social and Economic Initiatives in Warsaw.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
2313 GMT 15 Jan 93) 

   KNOW-HOW SUPPORT TO UK INVESTORS:  The UK's "Know-How Fund" 
offers grants of up to 50,000 pounds to pay for pre-investment 
feasibility studies by UK firms exploring long-term joint ventures 
or greenfield investments in Poland.  Prospective UK investors may 
apply for the grants to cover up to 50 percent of the costs of such 
feasibility studies. (Warsaw PAP in English 1357 GMT 28 Jan 93) 

   WORLD BANK GRANT PAYS RAIL REFORM CONSULTING FEES:  As a result 
of negotiations in early February between the ministries of 
transport and finance and World Bank representatives, the World Bank 
agreed to pay the consulting fees of U.S. experts that will advise 
Poland on the restructuring of the Polish State Railroads 
corporation.  After the consultants completed their study, Warsaw 
planned to apply for a World Bank loan to finance the restructuring 
program.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2147 GMT 5 Feb 93) 

   PHARE AID TO PRIVATE FARMING:  According to a bilateral agreement 
signed in February, the EC, working through PHARE, will provide 
Poland with 18 million ECU to aid development in the private farming 
sector.  Most of these funds will go to pay for West European 
technical advisers and consultants traveling to Poland to furnish 
technical assistance in the privatization of state-owned farms. 
Poland's Rural Property Agency will receive 5 million ECU to finance 
costs associated with the putting liquidated state farms up for 
privatization.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1551 GMT 11 Feb 93) 

   ACCORD WITH EC ON ENVIRONMENTAL AID:  On 11 March, Poland and the 
EC signed a memorandum acknowledging an EC commitment to provide 
Poland with 18 million ECU in environmental protection assistance. 
The aid would be channeled through the EC's PHARE program.  The 
program would break down to 5 million ECU for assistance in 
implementing Polish environmental policy, 12 million ECU for 
specific projects, and 1 million ECU for technical support.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 2036 GMT 11 Mar 93) 

   JAPANESE ENVIRONMENTAL AID:  A Japanese IAEA official visiting 
Poland in April for a scientific conference announced that the Tokyo 
government will provide funding to promote a new air pollution 
control technology that has been tested successfully at a Polish 
thermal power plant. 

   The IAEA's deputy general director, Sueo Machi, said that the 
Japanese government will set aside $625,000 to finance costs 
associated with travel of Japanese experts to Poland and Polish 
specialists to Japan.  Their aim will be encourage wider use of a 
new emissions control technology developed in a pilot project at the 
Kaweczyn thermal power plant in Poland.  The project was a joint 
venture funded by the Polish government, the Polish power industry, 
and the IAEA.  American and German engineering firms also donated 
monitoring equipment for the Kaweczyn experiment, which involved use 
of electron-beam technology to scrub sulfur dioxide and nitrogen 
oxide from the plant's emissions.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1919 GMT 
25 Mar 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGEANICZNE in Polish 20 Apr 93 p 5) 

   U.S. SUPPORT FOR SMALL BUSINESS:  In late May, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
published an in-depth feature on a U.S. funded program to promote 
small business development in Poland. 

   Advertising a forthcoming three-day training seminar for Polish 
small and medium-sized businesses on techniques to promote export 
sales, the author of the feature provided background on the U.S. aid 
program supporting the seminar's sponsor -- the Warsaw Small 
Business Consulting Center.  The Warsaw center is one of three 
centers in Poland funded by the Polish-American Small Business 
Development Foundation.  The foundation emerged from the East 
European aid initiative (SEED) launched by the U.S. Congress in 1990 
and is patterned after a similar U.S. domestic program.  The 
Foundation was chaired by Andrzej Arendarski, foreign trade minister 
in the Suchocka government, and it receives additional funding from 
the Polish National Chamber of Commerce. 

   The three Polish consulting centers in Warsaw, Lodz, and Gdansk 
specialize in both training and troubleshooting business problems of 
small and medium-sized firms.  The U.S.-trained Polish staff, many 
of whom are associated with local universities, offer training 
courses in marketing, capital project analysis, business plan 
development, taxation, financial management, and bookkeeping.  They 
also handle walk-in requests for direct assistance and referrals in 
solving ad hoc business problems.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 22 May 93 p 7) 

   EC RURAL AID FUND APPROVES NEW SUBSIDIES:  On 27 May, the 
"European Fund for the Development of Rural Poland" approved a grant 
of 30 billion zlotys ($1.8 million) to subsidize various 
infrastructure projects in rural areas.  For the past three years, 
the Fund has been providing grants and low-interest loans to aid the 
construction of schools, health care centers, waste disposal sites, 
and utilities in rural Poland.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1454 GMT 27 
May 93) 

   SWEDISH TRADE FAIR GROUP AIDS EXPORTERS:  The Stockholm 
International Trade Fair organization, Scandinavia's largest trade 
fair group, is assisting Polish firms to exhibit products at the 
approximately 40 trade shows on its annual program.  The Fair 
reportedly provides a number of free services to Polish exhibitors 
and offers substantial discounts on shipping and accommodation 
costs.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 3 Jun 93 p 2) 

   PHARE AID FOR ANTITRUST AGENCY HELD UP:  While in Brussels in 
early June to discuss various issues with the EC Commission, Anna 
Fornalczyk, head of Poland's "Anti-Monopoly Office," complained 
about delays in the disbursement of promised PHARE aid for her 
agency.  According to Fornalczyk, the EC acted earlier in the year 
to tap the PHARE budget for around 500,000 ECU ($600,000) to support 
the "demonopolization of the Polish economy."  Fornalczyk said her 
office had been waiting in vain since February for disbursement of 
the funds.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2113 GMT 7 Jun 93) 

   EC'S STRUDER, SIERRA PROGRAMS ADVANCE:  On 7 June, Polish and EC 
officials signed documents to lay the groundwork for implementation 
in Poland of two EC aid programs for Eastern Europe with a total 
value of 80 million ECU (around $96 million). 

   Poland's minister for European integration and foreign aid, Jan 
K. Bielecki, and EC ambassador to Poland A. Dijkmeester signed a 
memorandum on the financing of the STRUDER (Structural Development 
in Selected Regions) program.  Poland's share of the STRUDER program 
involves receipt of aid valued at around 60 million ECU ($80 
million) to support economic restructuring in areas plagued by 
excessively high unemployment.  Half of this sum is to be spent on 
direct startup aid for new private businesses, while the other half 
will go to regional institutions promoting local economic 
development.  In May, Warsaw approved the charter of the "Polish 
Regional Development Agency" that will coordinate implementation of 
the STRUDER program.  Officials predicted the first disbursements 
would occur in the fall of 1993. 

   STRUDER restructuring grants will be targeted primarily on new 
small business development in high unemployment areas.  According to 
press acccounts of the progam's rules, firms employing up to 100 
persons would become eligible for direct grants to cover up to 25 
percent of expansion and modernization project costs.  However, the 
total cost of individual projects may not exceed $525,000. 

   The two officials also signed papers authorizing the initiation 
in Poland of the EC's three-year program -- SIERRA -- to finance 
work on bringing East European legislation into line with EC laws. 
The program will also fund training for East European civil servants 
in the principles of the European Union treaty.  The EC has 
appropriated 20 million ECUs for SIERRA.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
1628 GMT 7 Jun 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 20 May 93 p 1, 
8-10 Jun 93 p 1) 

   PHARE GRANT FOR NEW LITHUANIAN BORDER CROSSING:  The EC 
contributed 2.5 million ECU toward defraying the $15-million cost of 
building a new border crossing station at Szypiliszki on the 
Lithuanian border, according to an agreement signed by Polish and EC 
officials in Warsaw on 8 June.  The funds come out of the PHARE 
budget and support a priority PHARE program to advance the "Via 
Baltica" project -- a modernized transportation network linking the 
Baltic States with Western Europe.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1139 GMT 
8 Jun 93) 

   FINNISH GRANT FROM STABILIZATION FUND:  In late June, Finland 
became the eighth donor country to release its share of the former 
zloty stabilization fund for use as aid in other areas.  On 24 June, 
the press spokesman for the Polish Finance Ministry announced that 
the Finnish government had earmarked its share of the fund -- around 
3 million Finnish marks -- as a contribution to Poland's Bank 
Privatization Fund.  Owing to its successful stabilization policies 
in recent years, Poland did not have to draw on the zloty 
stabilization standby fund -- originally totaling $1 billion -- 
formed by 17 Western countries in 1989.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1713 
GMT 24 Jun 93) 

   PHARE AID AND VAT IMPLEMENTATION:  In a 6 July statement from the 
EC Commission praising Poland's introduction of a value-added tax on 
5 July, an EC official gave credit to the PHARE program for helping 
to smooth the way for the implementation of the new tax.  In the 
statement, EC tax commissioner Christiane Scrivener cited the role 
of PHARE aid in helping to pay for the large-scale public 
information campaign designed to educate the Polish public about how 
the new tax program will work.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1358 GMT 5 
Jul 93) 

   EC LEADS IN ENVIRONMENTAL AID:  During a July press conference, 
an official from the Environmental Protection Ministry briefed 
reporters on Polish investment in environmental projects, including 
those funded with various types of Western aid. 

   Michal Wilczynski, undersecretary of state in the ministry, noted 
that Poland is spending about $1 billion annually on environmental 
protection projects.  He said that less than 3 percent of this sum 
consists of foreign assistance. 

   Since 1990, Poland has received a total of $233 million in 
various types of subsidies and grants from 13 international 
organizations and countries, including the EC, the World Bank, the 
U.S., Japan, and nine other individual European countries.  The aid 
received has been invested in 198 projects, according to Wilczynski. 
   The EC has provided Poland with the largest amount of 
environmental aid in this period, Wilczynski pointed out.  EC 
environmental aid since 1990 has totaled $92,872,000, which was 
allocated to 37 projects.  The number of funded environmental 
protection projects has declined from 20 in 1990, to 14 in 1991, to 
3 in 1992.  The EC supplied most of this aid under the auspices of 
the PHARE program, with funding and projects broken down into three 
annual "phases" for 1990-1992.  As of August 1993, it was uncertain 
whether any PHARE money would be allocated to environmental aid 
projects before the end of this year.  A planning office in Poland's 
Environmental Protection Ministry had proposed "phase four" PHARE 
initiatives worth about 45 million ECU. 

   Wilczynski stressed that in the environmental area too Poland 
needs freer access to foreign markets more than it does direct 
foreign aid in order to obtain resources needed for environmental 
protection projects.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 1 Jul 93 p 
2, 26 Aug 93 p 3) 

   GDANSK TO HOST 1994 EU TRADE PROMOTION SHOW:  In August, Polish 
business groups and EC officials reached agreement on the selection 
of Gdansk as the site for the 1994 "Europartneriat" trade show.  For 
the past five years, the European Commission's DG XXIII has been 
funding these trade shows designed to promote trade among European 
small and medium-sized businesses.  The 1994 Europartneriat will be 
the first in this series of annual trade shows to be held outside 
the EC.  Approximatey 400 small business representatives from the 
EC, EFTA, the CIS, and Eastern Europe are expected to attend the 
1994 event.  The Gdansk Chamber of Commerce estimates the total cost 
of the fair to be around 2 million ECU, most of which will be 
covered by the EU.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 21 Aug 93 p 
1, 11 Sep 93 p 1) 

   STRUDER GRANT TO L0DZ AREA ANNOUNCED:  In August, the head of the 
Lodz Regional Development Agency announced that the Lodz region 
would receive 16 million ECU ($19 million) in aid under the EC's 
STRUDER regional development program.  Most of the money will go to 
assist the startup of small and medium-sized businesses.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1529 GMT 19 Aug 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 21 Aug 93 p 2) 

   SPECIALISTS RATE PHARE-FUNDED ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECTS:  In August, 
officials from the Environmental Protection Ministry shared with 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE their assessments of the three most important 
environmental aid programs financed by the EC's PHARE program.  All 
of those interviewed agreed that PHARE aid was most effective in 
funding the following three projects: 

   --Air Quality Control -- Installation of fluidized bed coal 
burning technology at the RAFAKO plant in Raciborz (cost:  $7.5 
million). 

   --Watershed Protection -- An ongoing regional program to upgrade 
water and sewage management in Upper Silesia (cost: approximately $6 
million). 

   --Natural Resources Protection -- A regional land-use management 
plan covering the Mazurian Lakes district, including funding for a 
Mazurian Lakes environmental protection foundation (cost:  $2.8 
million under PHARE phases one and two).  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
in Polish 26 Aug 93 p 3) 

   EC APPROVES EXPORT AID PROGRAM:  In September, the EC Commission 
approved counterpart funding through the PHARE budget for a Polish 
export promotion program (EXPROM) that would be coordinated by 
Poland's National Chamber of Commerce (KIG).  EXPROM managers and 
consultants hope that the program will make strong contributions 
toward the further "integration of the Polish and West European 
economies." 

   EXPROM is designed to channel financial assistance to a wide 
range of export boosting activities, including direct aid to 
exporting firms and subsidies to build up the country's "export 
infrastructure."  KIG's general manager Marek Klockzko and former 
foreign trade minister Andrzej Arendarski will head up the EXPROM 
program in Poland.  Kloczko believes that up to 200 Polish companies 
will be eligible for EXPROM aid.  Potential beneficiary firms will 
be asked to submit export sales promotion plans for competitive 
evaluation by EXPROM.  Local chambers of commerce will canvass their 
areas for candidate companies invited to submit applications for 
assistance.  EXPROM aid will probably be focused on selected 
sectors.  However, the program's management had not yet decided as 
of early September which sectors would be selected. 

   EXPROM officials stress that assistance to exporting firms will 
be technical, not financial.  Direct assistance funding will be used 
to hire consultants, which will advise exporters on ways to improve 
their product lines and develop more effective marketing programs. 

   The program has a total budget of 12 million ECU, with 10 million 
ECU supplied by Brussels and 2 million ECU in matching funds or 
goods and services to be furnished by Poland.  EXPROM managers and 
consultants stated that the program and budget are designed to run 
for about 19 months through the end of 1994.  They intend to seek 
additional funding for the future if EXPROM is successful. 

   RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE reported extensively on EXPROM during the 
summer and fall of this year.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 7 
Sep 93p 3, 31 Aug 93p 1, 3 Aug 93p 2, 29 Jul 93 pp 3,4) 

   WESTERN ANTITRUST AID:  Poland's antitrust enforcement agency -- 
known officially in Poland as the "Anti-Monopoly Bureau" -- has been 
receiving various forms of Western assistance over the past few 
years. 

   The UK Know How Fund has donated around 100,000 pounds worth of 
assistance since 1991.  The antitrust agency has received the most 
aid in the form of travel grants for training in the UK and visits 
to Poland by British experts in antitrust matters.  This year, the 
Know How Fund paid for 14 Polish antitrust officials to attend six- 
week training courses in the UK.  Another seven officials are 
expected to go on similar training tours next year.  In September, 
the Fund donated a collection of books to the agency's library. 

   The U.S. has been sending pairs of antitrust experts to Poland 
for six-month consulting tours with the Anti-Monopoly Bureau. 

   The EC's PHARE program has also been paying for the training of 
Polish antitrust officials.  Every year, around 20-25 officials from 
the Anti-Monopoly Bureau go to Brussels for practical training 
tours.  Warsaw hopes that this training will help to promote the 
harmonization of Polish and EC law in the antitrust area.  (Warsaw 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 11 Sep 93 p 2) 

   STRUDER AID AS REMEDY TO LOW WESTERN CREDIT USE:  In a mid- 
September press interview, Jan K. Bielecki, minister for European 
integration issues, commented on the causes of Poland's low 
utilization of Western credit lines for economic assistance. 
Bielecki listed the three bottlenecks which, in his opinion, have 
been the biggest barriers to Western credit absorption, particularly 
by small and medium-sized businesses.  Bielecki stressed that Polish 
and EC officials tailored the EC-financed STRUDER aid program to 
address these specific problems. 

   --Large "Down Payment" Requirements For Small Loans -- The first 
problem Bielecki mentioned as an obstacle to foreign loan absorption 
involved the large equity commitments imposed by Western lenders on 
prospective Polish borrowers.  To qualify for Western commercial 
bank loans tied to specific capital projects, propective Polish 
borrowers have had to put up more of their own money then they can 
afford.  The EC-f inanced STRUDER aid program will help to fill this 
gap, said Bielecki, by providing grants to cover up to 25 percent of 
the total cost of development projects for small and medium-sized 
businesses, which are the focal point of the STRUDER program. 

   --Lender Risk Avoidance -- Bielecki noted that the borrower 
equity barrier is a direct function of a second problem -- the 
reluctance of Western commercial lenders to expose themselves to the 
risks of making loans to Polish small and medium-sized firms.  The 
STRUDER program will help in this area too, according to Bielecki, 
by providing grant money to back loan guarantees for up to 60-70 
percent of a bank's commercial risk exposure on individual business 
loans. 

   --High Cost of Polish Capital -- Bielecki mentioned the high cost 
of domestic capital as the third stumbling block hindering Western 
credit absorption.  Prospective small and medium-sized business 
borrowers find it difficult to afford the interest rates charged by 
Polish commercial banks insofar as they try to borrow money needed 
to meet the equity requirements of Western commercial lenders. 
However, even if all borrowed funds are supplied by a foreign 
lender, Polish borrowers still have to pay loan processing fees and 
service charges to Polish banks that act as intermediaries for 
foreign banks.  The STRUDER program will help in this regard too 
because it would require Polish borrowers to put up only 20 percent 
of the cost of a given project in order to qualify for the 25- 
percent matching contribution from STRUDER.  As a result, Polish 
firms would only have to pay market interest rates on commercial 
loans covering 55 percent of project costs.  Bielecki also noted 
that the government was trying to persuade Polish intermediary banks 
to keep their fee margins to a minimum when processing Western- 
backed loans.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 16 Sep 93 pp 1, 
2) 

   U.S. AID HISTORY REVIEWED:  In late September, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
ran a lengthy feature article by Andrzej Krzemirski profiling U.S. 
aid to Poland since 1989. 

   Krzemirski recounted the tally of total U.S. aid to post- 
communist Poland and summarized the scope and nature of many 
individual aid programs.  Since 1989, wrote Krzemirski, Poland has 
received $4 billion in U.S. aid, including $2.4 billion in debt 
reduction.  He noted that most U.S. aid to Poland is delivered in 
the context of wider regional assistance programs and coordinated by 
USAID. 

   The author profiled several aid programs and advised readers to 
consult the USAID office in Warsaw for details.  In addition to 
democracy-building programs, such as those funded by the National 
Endowment for Democracy, Krzemirski described several U.S. aid 
programs aimed at promoting free-market reforms, including: 

   --IRIS program (Institutional Reform and the Informal Sector) -- 
provides funding for technical assistance in writing legislation 
designed to enhance small, medium-sized business growth. 

   --GEMINI program (Growth and Equity through Microenterprise 
Investment) --  funds technical assistance in promoting the growth 
of financial services. 

   --Volunteer American experts are praised for making a "very 
important" contribution to finance and banking reform. 

   --The Polish American Business Center in Warsaw -- promotes 
bilateral trade and U.S. investment in Poland. 

   --RITE program (Removal of Impediments to Trade) -- funds 
technical assistance on eliminating trade barriers. 

   --CDI program (Capital Development Initiative) -- funds efforts 
to promote bilateral cooperation in the power industry, 
telecommunications, and environmental protection. 

   Krzemirski added a detailed overview of the lending and 
assistance programs managed by the Polish American Enterprise Fund, 
which was founded in 1990 with charter capital of $240 million. 
Krzemirski rated the Fund as the U.S. government's principal aid 
channel to Poland.  He described the history of the Fund's direct 
and indirect lending and assistance programs to promote 
privatization and private sector growth and cited several of the 
Fund's training and education programs in Poland. 

   Krzemirski concluded his feature with a wrap-up on private and 
public U.S. initiatives in the technical advice and consulting 
arena.  He listed several American programs in this area, including 
the Polish Business Advisory Service, Masters of Business 
Administration Corps, Polish-American Small Business Advisory 
Centers, International Executive Service Corps, and the Citizens 
Democracy Corps.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 18 Sep 93 p 6) 

   NEW EC BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM:  In late September, RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE described another EC assistance program for small and 
medium-sized business development, which was about to get under way 
in northeastern Poland. 

   The new EC program -- called COACHTING -- is intended to 
complement collateral initiatives in Poland, such as EXPROM and 
STRUDER, by providing financial assistance to private or privatized 
companies to help them become more competitive in the domestic and 
foreign markets.  EC experts affiliated with COACHTING intended to 
begin disbursing aid before the end of September to around 30 firms 
in the Bialystok, Lomza, and Suwalki areas of northeastern Poland. 
(Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 21 Sep 93 p 1) 

   STRUDER TERMED FIRST AID TO REACH SILESIAN PROVINCE:  In an 
October press interview, the head of the regional development agency 
in Walbrzych province in southwestern Poland said that funds from 
the EC's STRUDER intitiative would be the first Western aid to reach 
his province. 

   According to the Walbrzych agency head, Andrzej Walen, STRUDER 
aid for the Walbrzych area would total 16 million ECU.  Of this 
figure, 10.7 million ECU would go toward direct subsidies to aid the 
startup of small and medium-sized businesses.  The balance would be 
allocated to fund training and consulting services and small public 
works projects. 

   The STRUDER project in Walbrzych was first announced in January. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1944 GMT 28 Jan 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
in Polish 7 Oct 93 p 5) 

   AID RECIPIENTS FACE VAT TAX COMPLICATIONS:  In October, the 
Finance Ministry responded to complaints from foreign aid recipients 
about the need to pay VAT taxes on goods and services purchased with 
funds from foreign aid donors.  Many original agreements between 
foreign donors and Polish aid recipients stipulated that grant money 
could not be used to pay any Polish tax, meaning that the aid 
recipients have had to pay VAT out of their own pockets since the 
tax was introduced in July.  While Polish aid beneficiaries wanted 
exemption from VAT on both imported and domestic goods and services, 
the Finance Ministry ordered a suspension of VAT tax collections 
only on imported goods and services.  The Ministry explained that 
the VAT tax law does not permit exemptions at the point of sale. 
(Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 13 Oct 93 p 15) 

   PHARE AID FOR BANKS ON BAD DEBT WORKOUTS:  Seven state-owned 
commercial banks will receive PHARE-funded assistance in the coming 
months to help them arrange bad debt workout arrangements with 
debtor state-owned companies that submit viable financial 
reorganization plans, according to the Ministry of Finance.  The 
seven banks named by the Ministry are rated as being the most highly 
encumbered by non-performing commercial loans.  The debt 
restructuring initiatives are authorized under legislation passed in 
March defining terms for the financial reorganization of banks and 
state-owned firms. 

   PHARE funding to support the debt workout program will total 5 
million ECU.  Funds are to be used to pay the fees of contractors 
hired to advise the seven banks on technical aspects of commercial 
debt restructuring. 

   All of the participating banks already have signed contracts with 
financial consulting firms.  Five of the seven consulting firms 
hired by bank debt restructuring departments are based in Poland, 
while two are headquartered abroad.  Most of the Polish consultants 
are affiliated with Western firms such as Boston Consulting Group or 
Crown Agents. (Warsaw GAZETA PRZEMYSLOWA I HANDLOWA in Polish No 41, 
13-19 Oct 93 p 3) 

   DANES TO HELP BUILD GDANSK TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE:  In early 
November, officials from the Danish town of Helsingor and Gdansk 
signed an agreement providing for Danish assistance in developing 
and promoting tourism in Gdansk.  Terms call for the Danes to build 
hotels on the Gdansk coast and assist in the "economic 
restructuring" of Gdansk.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1142 GMT 10 Nov 
93) 

   GERMAN AID CHIEF VISITS WARSAW:  Walter Kittel, head of the 
Chancellry Office for German Aid for Central and Eastern Europe, 
traveled to Warsaw on 1 December for talks with Deputy Premier Marek 
Borowski on future directions in German aid to Poland. 

   Kittel advised that German aid to Eastern Europe, currently 
managed by individual Laender governments, will be centralized at 
the federal level beginning in 1995. 

   Acknowledging the satisfactory course of existing aid programs, 
Kittel and Borowski discussed areas for expanded German assistance 
in the future.  Borowski noted Polish interest in German technical 
assistance in fighting unemployment, labor retraining, social 
insurance reform, and small business development.  Kittel reported 
that Germany wants to assist Poland with programs involving banking 
modernization, control of customs and tax evasion, and the startup 
of a "futures exchange." 

   In a separate meeting with Education Minister Aleksander Luczak, 
Kittel said Germany intended to furnish assistance for the startup 
of a vocational training center in Olsztyn in northeastern Poland. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1643 GMT 1 Dec 93) 

   INTERNATIONAL LENDING AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 

   GOVERNMENT APPROVES FOREIGN LOAN GUARANTEE FORMULA:  Meeting in 
late January, the Polish cabinet's economic policy steering 
committee (KERM) approved a government plan to guarantee bank loans 
to companies and local governments for certain types of capital 
projects.  Individual loans financed with foreign credit lines also 
would be covered up to a value of 15 million ECU.  Coverage would 
apply to 60 percent of a loan's drawn-down value.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2240 GMT 21 Jan 93) 

   NO SIGN OF WORLD BANK FUNDS FOR UNEMPLOYED:  The Ministry of 
Labor and Social Affairs reported in January that it had no evidence 
that World Bank loans intended to assist the unemployed had ever 
been distributed.  The World Bank mission in Warsaw, on the other 
hand, reported that it had set aside $8.2 million to be used as 
loans in "direct support" of unemployed persons seeking to start 
their own businesses.  (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 29 Jan 93 p 
V) 

   EUROPEAN BANKS TO FINANCE SEWAGE PROJECT:  Banks in Luxembourg 
and France reportedly will finance most of the costs associated with 
the construction of a new sewage treatment plant near Warsaw. 
Financing was arranged by the French firm Degremont, which will be a 
partner in the capital project with the Warsaw city government and 
other Polish firms.  The treatment plant will cost around $100 
million, with Warsaw authorities investing around $6.25 million for 
the purchase of the construction site.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1720 
GMT 1 Feb 93) 

   FRENCH STAND ON STABILIZATION FUND RELEASE:  Finance Minister 
Osiatynski travelled to Paris in February to negotiate financial 
assistance issues.  After returning to Warsaw, Osiatynski announced 
conditional French agreement to release $100 million from the 1989 
currency stabilization fund to support restructuring and 
privatization of the country's banking system.  Paris insisted, 
however, that Poland first finalize standby arrangements with the 
IMF. 

   Osiatynski told reporters that seven out of the 18 countries who 
contributed to the stabilization fund had agreed to similar 
releases.  The entire banking reform program would cost around $700- 
$800 million, according to the finance minister.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2357 GMT 1 Feb 93, 1539 GMT 2 Feb 93) 

   LONDON CLUB TALKS RESUME:  Poland and the London Club group of 
commercial bank creditors resumed negotiations in Vienna on 11 and 
12 February for the first time since June 1991.  The head of the 
Polish negotiating team, Krzysztof Krowacki, told reporters that the 
two sides made "good progress" in the talks and plan to continue 
efforts to find ways to resume Polish commercial debt payments and 
to reduce the total commercial debt service burden -- along lines 
similar to the accord reached with the Paris Club. 

   At the Vienna talks, the London Club negotiators urged Poland to 
resume interest payments on most of its $12 billion commercial debt. 
Krowacki indicated to the press that Poland was willing to make 
payments on 20 percent of the overdue interest.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2248 GMT 12 Feb 93) 

   PRESSING FOR FASTER, CHEAPER ITALIAN LOANS:  On a visit to Rome 
in late February, Deputy Premier Henryk Goryszewski discussed 
bilateral credit issues with Italian Treasury Minister Piero 
Barucci.  Goryszewski made two proposals: 

   --Establishment of a joint commission to speed processing of 
Polish applications for Italian investment loans. 

   --Action by Rome to move Poland into the lowest country-risk 
category, which would result in a two-percent drop in interest 
charges on Italian capital project loans. 

   The two officials also discussed Poland's low utilization of 
existing Italian credit lines.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1906 GMT 18 
Feb 93) 

   IMF APPROVAL OF REFORM PROGRAM NOTED:  On 8 March, Finance 
Minister Osiatynski told reporters that IMF approval of the 
country's economic "adjustment program" is tantamount to approval of 
the standby arrangement.  If approved in fact, the standby facility 
would allow Poland to receive around $700 million (SDR 476) in five 
tranches to finance external restructuring costs.  The IMF was most 
impressed by Poland's draft "Pact on State Enterprises," according 
to Osiatynski. 

   Speaking to reporters on 15 March, Osiatynski said that the IMF 
had "accepted" the "Polish-IMF standby arrangement," which would 
remain valid through April 1994. 

   Osiatynski travelled to Washington on 16 March for talks with 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Bentsen and IMF and World Bank officials. 
He planned to seek U.S. support for Poland's position in 
negotiations with the London and Paris clubs. 

   Commenting on the IMF decision, one Warsaw editorial writer 
hailed the "heroic efforts" of the government and the "goodwill" of 
the IMF as instrumental in bringing about a renewal of Poland's 
agreement with the IMF.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2015 GMT 8 Mar 93; 
Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 9 Mar 93 p 1; Warsaw PAP in English 
1802 GMT 15 Mar 93) 

   WORLD BANK PLEDGES MINE RESTRUCTURING LOANS:  The World Bank 
indicated in March that it would offer financial assistance for the 
restructuring of Poland's coal mining sector once the government's 
restructuring program for the industry "gets off the ground." 
Principal World Bank Representative in Warsaw, Ian Hume, made the 
assistance offer to a Polish mining official on 16 March while 
touring a Silesian coal mine. 

   Also on 16 March, the head of the government agency in charge of 
hard coal mining officially unveiled the government's restructuring 
program for the industry at a news conference.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2243 GMT 16 Mar 93) 

   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESTRUCTURING UNDER-FINANCED:  While at 
tending a communications trade fair in Lodz in March, Communications 
Minister Krzysztof Kilian told reporters that Poland needs to line 
up more foreign capital to complete the restructuring of the 
nation's telecommunications network.  While Poland has lined up 
loans from the World Bank, EBRD, EIB, Germany, and Spain, it is 
still short of capital needed to pay the estimated $10 billion cost 
of modernizing the country's phone system.  The state 
telecommunications authority -- Telekomunikacja Polska (TP) -- also 
plans to invest in the recapitalization program.  Kilian urged that 
a foreign telecommunications company be invited to bid on shares in 
TP in an effort to fill the financing gap.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
0028 GMT 18 Mar 93) 

   EBRD INVESTS IN FIRST PRIVATE MORTGAGE BANK:  On 23 March, the 
Polish-American Mortgage Bank Inc., Poland's first private bank 
offering home mortgage loans, opened for business.   The bank plans 
to write 15-year mortgages at fixed rates that will cover 60 percent 
of the value of new construction and 50 percent of the value of 
existing housing.  The EBRD and Wielkopolski Credit Bank are listed 
as shareholders in the new bank. 

   Through the following spring and summer, the bank made several 
mortgage loans to individuals, construction companies, housing co- 
ops, and companies.  By November, work was completed on a Warsaw 
subdivision of 13 single-family homes financed by Polish-American 
Mortgage Bank.  The bank reportedly has made loans to finance the 
construction of "several dozen" other houses elsewhere in Poland. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1947 GMT 23 Mar 93, 1424 GMT 22 Nov 93) 

   KOREANS FINANCE TELECOMMUNICATIONS MODERNIZATION:  South Korea's 
Foreign Economic Development Fund and the Export-Import Bank of 
Korea will provide financing for the modernization of the telephone 
system in Poland's Opole province.  The Korean firm Samsung will 
carry out the project, which will involve installation of 12 new 
exchanges and 150,000 new telephone service connections. 

   Korean banking officials told reporters that this is Korea's 
first major economic development loan to Poland.  The Export-Import 
Bank plans to loan $50 million for five years at an annual 
percentage rate of 4.2 percent. 

   The project will take a projected 16 months to complete and was 
due to commence with deliveries of Samsung equipment as soon as 
transaction contracts were signed by the Korea Exchange Bank and 
Polands BIG bank.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 6 Apr 93 p 8) 

   EBRD INVESTS IN MAJOR COMMERCIAL BANK:  In April, the EBRD bought 
up all of the first issue of shares in the privatizing commercial 
bank Wielkopolski Bank Kredytowy (WBK) SA.  WBK is one of the nine 
state-owned commercial banks spun off from the National Bank of 
Poland in 1989.  The share issue, dated 6 April, marked the 
commencement of WBK's privatization. 

   While WBK stock will be offered ultimately to the public, the 
EBRD acquisition is viewed as a "vote of confidence" in Poland and 
its banking system, according to Finance Minister Osiatynski.  The 
EBRD purchase reportedly raised the value of WBK's charter capital 
to about 210 billion zlotys ($13 million).  When privatization is 
completed, EBRD will control about 28 perent of WBK stock.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1703 GMT 6 Apr 93) 

   EBRD LOAN TALLY:  As of April, EBRD loans to Poland totaled 540 
million ECU (around $270 million), according to the bank's Warsaw 
office.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1733 GMT 14 Apr 93) 

   BANK ADVERTISES WESTERN CREDIT LINES:  In mid-April, RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE profiled the full-spectrum of lending programs offered 
by the commercial bank Polski Bank Rozwoju (PBR) SA (Polish 
Development Bank SA), including several programs based on Western 
credit lines. 

   The paper gave a brief overview of five lending programs backed 
by the following Western financial institutions: 

   --European Investment Bank -- PBR SA draws on EIB capital to 
finance capital project loans to private firms, state-owned 
commercial companies, and firms on the verge of privatization. 
Loans are earmarked for various projects in manufacturing, food 
processing, tourism, environmental protection, and energy 
conservation ventures.  Loans are disbursed in ECUs for terms from 
four to 13 years.  Interest rates are fixed and include a profit 
margin for PBR SA and intermediary banks.  The EC's PHARE program 
provides supplementary financing to recapitalize firms that take out 
EBI loans. 

   --World Bank/Privatization and Restructuring -- PBR SA also 
invites privatized or privatizing firms to apply for capital project 
loans funded by the World Bank.  Loans must be earmarked for 
"privatization and restructuring," including expenditures on plant 
expansion and modernization, financing working capital requirements, 
and various management streamlining programs.  Loans are disbursed 
in U.S. dollars or German marks.  Terms are 12 years with grace 
periods not to exceed four years at variable LIBOR/FIBOR rates 
including margins charged by PBR SA and intermediary banks. 

   --World Bank/Small Business -- The World Bank has also opened a 
credit line to support small business development in Poland. 
Privatized or privatizing firms with fewer than 500 employees may 
apply for loans to cover a various costs associated with expansion, 
modernization, working capital financing, and management 
streamlining.  Small businesses may use 100 percent of loan proceeds 
to import foreign goods or to purchase domestic goods directly from 
manufacturers; 80 percent of loan proceeds may be spent on 
consulting services, and only 40 percent of loan proceeds may be 
used to purchase domestic goods from middlemen.  Terms are seven 
years with a maximum grace period of three years.  Disbursements are 
denominated in dollars or marks or, with the consent of PBR SA, in 
any other convertible currency.  Loan amounts are limited to $2 
million per project and $4 million per borrower. 

   --Banco de Sabadell -- This Spanish bank has opened a credit line 
to fund 5-year capital project loans to Polish firms that contract 
to import Spanish-made capital goods.  Loans are disbursed in 
pesetas or ECUs and carry "variable OECD interest rates" plus a 
margin for PBR SA. 

   --Credit National -- This French bank has opened a line of credit 
to meet the financing needs of small and medium-sized French-Polish 
joint ventures.  Firms may use proceeds to import capital goods or 
services from France or to fund working capital requirements. 
Priority is given to projects that boost exports or contribute to 
import substitution.  Loan terms are for up to 10 years.  (Warsaw 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 17 Apr 93 p 5) 

   DEBT-FOR-ENVIRONMENT DEAL UPDATED:  In late April, RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE published a lengthy overview of the status of Poland's 
debt-for-environment arrangements with the Paris Club.  This feature 
article detailed the history and management of this financing 
package that reduces Poland's official foreign debt by 10 percent in 
exchange for commitments to earmark the savings for spending on 
environmental protection projects. 

   After the agreement covering the debt-for-environment swap was 
concluded with the Paris Club in April 1991, Poland set up the 
"Ekofundusz" (Ecofoundation) in August 1992 to manage set-aside 
funds attributable to the 10-percent debt service relief.  The 
foundation is chartered as a non-governmental organization and 
charged with ensuring the effective outlay of debt-for-environment 
funds. 

   According to RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE, translating the principles of 
debt-for-environment swaps into practice has proven to be difficult 
due to footdragging on the part of most Paris Club members.  The 
paper singled out the United States, however, for being the more 
forthcoming in this regard than other Paris Club members. 
In theory, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE explained, the Polish government is 
supposed to set aside a sum in its annual budget equivalent to 50 
percent of its principal and interest obligations on foreign 
official debt due in a given year,  Provided that a given Paris Club 
creditor government consents to set aside 20 percent of this 
annualized receivable (10 percent of the total government-to- 
government debt), the funds are deposited in the Ecofoundation's 
account. 

   In practice, recession-plagued Paris Club members have been 
reluctant to consent to this conversion, and, as a result, the 
amount of funding available to the foundation for environmental 
projects in Poland is rated "relatively small."  According to the 
analysis of RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE, Western governments operating on 
reduced budgets see major political risks in forfeiting even a small 
percentage of taxpayer financed loans amid general recession and 
mounting unemployment.  "Even Norway" has renegged on contributing 
its share of debt to the environmental fund.  So far, only the U.S. 
has pledged its full share, while France had "tentatively" agreed to 
put up "1 percent" of its annual receivables on official Polish 
debt. 

   As a result, Ecofoundation managers are making do with far less 
money than they expected and scaling back the number of 
environmental protection projects they had hoped to finance.  If the 
foundation received the full share of funds attributable to a 10- 
percent reduction in Western official debt, it could expect a total 
inflow of around $3 billion.  Western governments reportedly now 
regard a figure of $1 billion to $1.5 billion as "more realistic." 
At present, the foundation has an annual lending budget of around 
100 billion zlotys. 

   While these limitations have forced it to require that loan 
applicants (businesses and institutions) meet stiff eligibility 
conditions, the foundation has nevertheless provided financing for 
several enviromental projects since it was chartered.  From November 
1992 through March 1993, the Ecofoundation approved loans worth 120 
billion zlotys to finance various environmental cleanup projects. 
The most important of these projects involve efforts to control 
sulfur and nitrogen emissions, reduce Baltic Sea pollution, and 
control emissions of "greenhouse effect" gases.  The foundation made 
a supplementary financing loan of 20 billion zlotys to aid in the 
installation of desulfurization equipment at the Skawina power 
plant; the U.S. government has allocated $7.9 million to finance 
most of the cost of this project.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 20 Apr 93 p 5) 

   POLISH CREDIT RATING IMROVES SLIGHTLY:  RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
reported a slight improvement in Poland's international 
creditworthiness based on a ranking published in March in the 
financial industry journal INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR.  Poland's rating 
increased by 2.3 points from the last ranking in September 1992, 
putting it in 69th place on the list of 127 countries.  The Polish 
rating overtook regional competitors Slovenia and Hungary, whose 
credit standings were raised by 2.2 and 2 points respectively.  The 
signing of an IMF accord, improved economic performance, and the 
absence of ethnic strife helped raise Poland's standing.  (Warsaw 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 27 Apr 93 p 3) 

   WORLD BANK LOANS FOR BANKING, AGRICULTURE:  On 3 May, the World 
Bank approved two loan packages for Poland totalling $750 million. 
One package consists of $450 million to recapitalize Polish 
commercial banks struggling to restructure the debts of financially 
strapped state-owned companies.  The second package of $300 million 
is for lending to ease the transition of Polish agriculture to a 
market-oriented system.  The terms of both loan agreements call for 
the set-aside of $100 million to service London Club debt.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1135 GMT 5 May 93) 

   CARPATHIAN 'EUROREGION' NEEDS WESTERN SUPPORT:  In early May, 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE reviewed efforts of Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and 
Ukraine to establish a subregional cooperation entity patterned 
after Western Europe's "Euroregions."  The author of this feature 
stressed that the group -- formed earlier this year -- will not 
meets its ambitious regional development and environmental 
protection goals without Western aid.  Leaders of the Carpathian 
group have contacted the EBRD and other Western foundations to seek 
financial aid.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 11 May 93 p 7) 

   RESUMPTION OF LONDON CLUB DEBT PAYMENTS:  On 11 May, Deputy 
Finance Minister Krzysztof Krowacki told reporters that Poland would 
intended to resume partial payments -- effective 20 May -- on 
interest arrears owed to London Club commercial bank creditors. 
Krowacki cited an agreement reached between Polish and London Club 
negotiators on 6 and 7 May as the grounds for the resumption of 
payments. 

   After suspending service of its London Club debt at the end of 
1989, Poland had previously resumed interest payments on a short- 
term revolving credit facility in February 1993.  The country's 
London Club debt totals around $12 billion. 

Poland hoped to secure a 50-percent reduction in its London Club 
debt in later negotiations with London Club creditors.  Krowacki 
cited U.S. and IMF support for the Polish position as boosting the 
chances for a successful outcome to these negotiations.  At the 6-7 
May meeting, Polish negotiators reportedly tabled three proposals 
for debt reduction.  Under the first option, Poland offered to buy 
back its debt "at a market price."  The other two options involved 
converting London Club debt into "30-year long discount or parity 
bonds."  The London Club's position was unknown beyond a declared 
readiness to reduce the Polish debt "substantially." 

   Terms of the May accord call for Poland to begin repaying 10 
percent of overdue interest -- about $5 million monthly.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 2029 GMT 11 May 93; 1725 GMT 18 Jul 93) 

   IFC ROLE, ACTIVITY PROFILED:  In early June, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
ran a short front-page feature describing the scope and nature of 
IFC activities in Poland. 

   In an interview with RZ, IFC vice president William Ryrie 
clarified the mechanisms and purpose of IFC lending in Eastern 
Europe.  Ryrie underscored that IFC is limited in its ability to 
provide direct financial assistance to small and medium-sized 
private sector businesses.  In Poland, as elsewhere, IFC confines 
itself to making loans in U.S. dollars for larger projects valued in 
excess of $1 million, and it places loans through intermediary banks 
in the recipient countries.  In Poland, for example, the IFC deals 
with Bank Rozwoju Eksportu SA (BRE SA).  However, IFC is helping 
Polish small business indirectly through technical assistance 
projects, according to Ryrie.  For example, he mentioned that IFC 
financing helped to set up the "Polish Business Advisory Service," 
which delivers management consulting services to small and medium- 
sized firms in Poland. 

   The IFC has been active in Poland since 1987 and opened a Warsaw 
office in 1990.  Since 1987, the IFC has disbursed a total of $270 
million to finance 12 capital projects, including the modernization 
and renovation of a Warsaw hotel, the modernization and expansion of 
a consumer electronics plant, the construction of the Warsaw 
Corporate Center, and the modernization of a steel mill in the 
Warsaw area.  Most of these projects involved joint ventures with 
other foreign partners. 

   The IFC plans to expand investment programs in Poland.  Current 
plans envision providing IFC financing for restructuring the PZU 
insurance firm and for road construction throughout the country. 
(Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 3 Jun 93 p 1) 

   DEBT FOR ENVIRONMENT SWAP WITH FINLAND:  In early June, a Polish- 
Finnish task force reached agreement on reducing Poland's $140- 
million debt to Finland by $15 million over the next three years in 
exchange for investment in various environmental cleanup projects. 
The capital can be tapped to finance up to 30 percent of the costs 
of projects, such as a recent one involving the installation of oil- 
spill cleanup gear on board two Polish ships.  Finland holds 0.4 
percent of Poland's total foreign debt.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1033 
GMT 3 Jun 93) 

   BANKERS ANALYZE LOW USE OF WESTERN LOANS:  In early June, Polish 
banking officials (including officers of the National Bank of 
Poland) attended a two-day conference to discuss reasons why the 
Polish economy has been slow to take advantage of loans from Western 
governments and international financial institutions.  The 
conference was organized by the Polish government in cooperation 
with the EBRD, the EC Commission, the Polish National Chamber of 
Commerce, the Polish Industrial Development Agency SA, and UNIDO. 

   The conference also served as a forum for marketing foreign loans 
to Polish businesses.  Representatives from over 1,450 Polish 
manufacturing, construction, trade, service, and consulting firms 
attended the meeting.   During the proceedings, these 
representatives signed a reported 300 loan agreements with officials 
representing foreign financial institutions. 

   Conference participants heard the following breakdown of figures 
describing Poland's low absorption of Western loans: 

   --Declared "loans and grants" since 1990 -- $8.3 billion, 

   --Funds available at end of first quarter 1993 -- $6.1 billion, 

   --Value of signed contracts for loans placed through Polish banks 
at end of first quarter 1993 -- $2.1 million, 

   --Value of loan proceeds disbursements at end of first quarter -- 
"slightly more than half" of $2.1 billion figure. 

   The bankers noted that some Western credit lines expire virtually 
untapped.  Lines of credit from Austrialia, Austria, Belgium, 
Finland, and Canada recently expired with only 2.3 percent of 
available credit having been used. 

   The bankers attributed low credit absorption by Polish businesses 
to the following factors: 

   --Business borrowers lack information about the availability of 
Western credit lines. 

   --Polish banks lack interest in negotiating loans with Western 
capital; banks seek to minimize risks and prefer more profitable 
interbank transactions and government securities trading. 

   --Potential borrowers are unable to put together "credible" loan 
applications. 

   --The earmarking of many Western loans (except for PHARE and SAL 
loans) limits loan demand because proceeds must be used to by 
specific types of goods from countries providing the loaned funds. 

   --Many firms that drew on Western credit lines in the last two or 
three years are now in financial difficulty because of reduced 
domestic demand for their products. 

   --Risk avoidance and bureaucracy deter Polish governmental bodies 
from embarking on protracted loan negotiations with banks in lender 
countries; it sometimes takes nine months to negotiate credit lines. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1918 GMT 3 Jun 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
in Polish 27 May 93 p 8, 5 Jun 93 p 1) 

   EBRD PROMISES FUNDS TO ASSIST MINE RESTRUCTURING:  On 8 June, 
EBRD representatives visiting Warsaw told Polish Deputy Minister for 
Industry and Trade, Eugeniusz Morawski, that EBRD wanted to write 
loans that would help pay for the restructuring of the Polish coal 
mining sector.  Morawski agreed that his ministry would draft a 
study on how much it would cost to shut down unprofitable mines and 
pay welfare benefits for redundant miners.  The findings would then 
be passed on to the EBRD. 

   According to the PAP news agency, however, mounting losses in the 
coal sector make it difficult to estimate realistic restructuring 
costs.  While the government earmarked 2 trillion zlotys ($120 
million) for coal restructuring in March, by April operating losses 
industry-wide had increased to 5.3 trillion zlotys.  Industry 
experts estimated that losses would total 8 trillion zlotys by the 
end of June.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1929 GMT 9 Jun 93) 

   EBRD LOANS TO WOOD, PAPER PRODUCTS FIRMS:  In mid-June, the EBRD 
wrote two loans totalling DM 46 million for two Polish companies: 
the Polspan chipboard plant in Szczecin and the Malta-Decor paper 
products company in Poznan.  The firms will use the proceeds for 
investments in increased capacity.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2045 GMT 
16 Jun 93) 

   EBRD LOAN TO DANISH JOINT VENTURE:  In mid-June, the EBRD wrote a 
loan of 6.2 million ECU to aid the modernization of a new Polish- 
Danish joint venture in the manufacture of insulating materials.  On 
11 June, the Danish firm Rockwool International AS and the state- 
owned Polish firm Izolacja pooled resources to form the joint 
venture Rockwool Polska.  The Danes hold a 51-percent stake in the 
new company.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1841 GMT 17 Jun 93) 

   DEBT FOR ENVIRONMENT SWAP WITH ITALY:  Meetings between Polish 
and Italian officials in Rome in late June resulted in an Italian 
decision to join other Paris Club members by cancelling 10 percent 
of Poland's official external debt in exchange for a Polish pledge 
to earmark the conserved resources for environmental protection. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2100 GMT 25 Jun 93) 

   HEALTH MINISTRY QUASHES HOSPITAL'S BID FOR GERMAN LOAN:  In a 
precedent-setting case, the Ministry of Health asked the Central 
Planning Office's foreign loan review board to deny government 
guarantees for German commercial bank loan sought by a Warsaw 
hospital in the Ministry's jurisdiction. 

   The daily RZECZPOSPOLITA  reported that unnamed officials in 
other agencies were disturbed by the Health Ministry's action. 
These officials pointed out that the loan was for a relatively small 
amount (DM 0,7 million) and was earmarked for capital investment (in 
medical equipment) by a subordinate agency of the Health Ministry. 
If the German bankers were willing to lend the money, they believed 
it should be used. 

   The Health Ministry reportedly witheld its support for the loan 
because it thought the loan proceeds should be shared with other 
Polish hospitals for spending on various other worthy purposes. 
Other officials countered that German lenders would never write 
loans to be used to pay the general operating expenses of several 
hospitals.  Rather, they argue, such commercial loans are normally 
tied to specific projects backed by sound business plans.  (Warsaw 
RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 29 Jun 93 p 10) 

   POLAND ROLE IN IMF, WORLD BANK SEEN STRONGER:  According to RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE, Poland has gained a stronger say in the management of 
World Bank affairs by aligning itself with the "Swiss Group" of IMF 
and World Bank governors. 

   After joining the World Bank in 1992, Switzerland invited Poland 
to leave the "Italian Group" and join the new grouping of World Bank 
member countries headed by Switzerland.  The Swiss Group consists of 
Switzerland (26,858 votes), Poland (6,372 votes), Uzbekistan (1,649 
votes), Azerbaijan (1,174 votes), Kirghizstan (871 votes), and 
Turkmenistan (776 votes).  Polish national Jan Sulmicki serves as 
deputy executive director of the Swiss Group. 

   Markus Lusser, president of the Swiss central bank and chief of 
the "Swiss Group" in the IMF, visited Poland in early July for 
meetings with Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz, president of the National 
Bank of Poland, and for briefings on the Polish banking system. 
Lusser said he intended to draw on what he learned during the visit 
to advance cooperation between Poland, the IMF, and the World Bank. 
Lusser termed Poland the "most important country" in the group of 
member countries that he heads.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1550 GMT 5 
Jul 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 15 Jul 93 p 3) 

   UK REINSTATES EXPORT CREDIT INSURANCE:  In early July, the UK 
Department of Trade and Industry announced that it had re-authorized 
the British insurer ECGD to guarantee loans covering exports to 
Poland.  London stopped the program in 1982 following the 
declaration of martial law in Poland.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1952 
GMT 9 Jul 93) 

   WORLD BANK LENDING RECORD UPDATED:  In mid-July, RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE reviewed the World Bank's ledger of lending programs for 
Poland. 

   The World Bank began making development loans to Poland in 1990. 
Since 1990, the IBRD has opened credit lines for Poland totaling 
$2.703 billion.  Of this amount, $860 million were actually 
disbursed to borrowers as of May 1993. 

   Also in May, the World Bank and Poland began wrapping up 
negotiations on opening up three new lines of credit for the 
following SAL (structural adjustment loan) projects: 

   AFSAL -- $300 million to finance agricultural development loans. 

   EFSAL -- $450 million to finance bank recapitalization. 

         --Forestry Development -- $146 million. 

   (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 15 Jul 93 p 3) 

   MEDIA COVERS START OF IMF REVIEW MISSION:  During July, Polish 
media reportedly extensively on the beginning of the IMF's mid-year 
review of Polish economic performance.  An IMF mission came to 
Warsaw to begin the process of measuring Polish compliance with 
standby agreements reached earlier with the IMF. 

   The mission, headed by Michael Deppler, arrived in Warsaw on 5 
July to begin its regular quarterly review.  On 15 July, Jerzy 
Kropiwnicki, chief of Poland's Central Planning Office, said in a 
press interview that there were no grounds to fear that the IMF 
would not certify Polish compliance with the three-year Extended 
Fund Facility (EFF) granted in April 1991.  Kropiwnicki noted that 
both Polish and IMF experts had agreed that Poland's trade deficit 
posed no threat to standards set for the country's foreign exchange 
reserves.   On 16 July, the IMF mission announced that it had 
certified Polish economic performance over the first half of 1993 as 
being in compliance with EFF standards.  The mission also laid down 
economic indicator standards for the rest of the year. 
Certification meant that Poland was authorized to draw on the next 
tranche of IMF standby financing worth a reported $700 million, 
according to the PAP press agency. 

   Total financing available to Poland under the terms of accords 
with the IMF amounts to about 1.8 billion SDR, including 1.2 billion 
SDR per the three-year EFF and 0.6 billion under the Compensatory 
and Contingency Fund Facility (to cover emergency energy imports), 
according to a report in RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
2157, 2159 GMT 15 Jul 93; Warsaw TVP Television First Program 
Network in Polish 2155 GMT 15 Jul 93; Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in 
Polish 17 Jul 93 p 1) 

   POLES REJECT LONDON CLUB DEBT REDUCTION OFFER:  At a press 
conference on 26 July, Finance Minister Jerzy Osiatynski said Poland 
could not afford to repay its London Club commercial bank debts 
under the latest debt-reduction terms offered by a Club working 
group on 19 July in London.  "Poland needs and agreement, but not at 
any price," Osiatynski declared.  The London Club offered Poland a 
28-percent debt reduction program instead of the 50-percent 
reduction sought by Poland.  The difference amounts to $2.5 billion, 
according to Osiatynski. 

   Osiatynski explained that the Polish delegation to the 19 July 
meeting in London refused to discuss the London Club proposal 
because it was "incompatible" with the three principles underlying a 
future debt settlement agreed upon in talks held in May. 

   Osiatynski cited long-term IMF and World Bank studies on Poland's 
debt service capabilities to support his argument that the London 
Club proposal was unaffordable.  While the IMF and World Bank 
contend that Poland can afford to pay $400 million annually over the 
next 30 years to service its inherited commercial bank debt, the 
latest London Club offer would translate into $600 million over the 
next few months, rising to $1 billion annually later on.  Adoption 
of these terms would lead to the "collapse" of Poland's economic 
reforms, according to Osiatynski.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2221 GMT 
19 Jul 93, 1243 GMT 26 Jul 93) 

   WORLD BANK, EIB FOREST, BANK REORGANIZATION LOANS:  Through last 
summer, Poland, the World Bank, and the EIB continued negotiations 
on two loan packages covering reforestation projects and the costs 
of restructuring Polish banks and enterprises.  The World Bank 
approved the reforestation loan in July and the bank and enterprise 
restructuring loans in October. 

   In late July, a World Bank mission came to Warsaw to discuss 
final arrangements for a loan to support reforestation in Polish 
regions suffering from excessive environmental degradation. 

   The reforestation program is based on a plan drafted by the 
Polish Ministry of Environmental Protection covering the period 
1993-1997.  The total cost of the program an estimated $335 million. 

   The World Bank proposed-to grant Poland a long-term loan of $146 
million to support the project.  Terms would be 17 years at a mean 
interest rate of 7.5 percent with a five-year grace period.  Warsaw 
was also expecting to obtain a loan of $20 million from the European 
Investment Bank -- repayable in 20 years at 7 percent with a seven- 
year grace period.  The balance of the projected total cost of $335 
million would be covered by funding from Poland's National Forests 
agency plus additional foreign grants, which are expected to total 
$22.5 million.  The Polish government would service $86 million of 
the debt to the World Bank and EIB, while the National Forests 
agency would cover the rest. 

   On 22 July, Finance Minister Osiatynski announced that the World 
Bank had approved loans to Poland totaling $750 million, including a 
reported "$300 million" for the reforestation project and "$450 
million" for bank and enterprise restructuring.  Osiatynski 
emphasized that the proceeds would be available immediately. 

   In early September, the EIB approved a loan for its share of the 
financing package covering the reforestation initiative.  The EIB 
loan was less than what Poland had expected in July -- about $15 
million instead of $20 million. 

   The World Bank approved the bank and enterprise restructuring 
loans in early October.  The $450-million loan total is to be broken 
down into two components:  $350 million to cover bank and enterprise 
reorganization or social safety nets for discharged factory 
employees and $100 million to finance the redemption of external 
Polish debt owed to foreign commercial banks.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 20 Jul 93 p 2; Warsaw PAP in English 1651 GMT 
19 Jul 93, 1031 GMT 22 Jul 93, 1444 GMT 3 Sep 93, 2010 GMT 11 Oct 
93) 

   LONDON CLUB SPURNS POLISH REQUEST F0R MEETING:  In late July, the 
London Club refused a Polish request for a meeting to explain 
Warsaw's reasons for rejecting the London offer of a 28-percent debt 
reduction -- instead of the 50-percent cut sought by Poland.  Jerzy 
Krowacki, head of the Polish negotiating team, asked for the meeting 
in reaction to press statements by Jeffrey Stokely, head of the 
London Club working group on Polish debt, who said he did not 
understand Polish calculations behind the rejection of the 28- 
percent formula, as explained by Finance Minister Osiatynski during 
a 26 July press conference.  Krowacki wanted an opportunity to 
convince Stokely that a 28-percent cut in Poland's commercial bank 
debt would amount to a net reduction of only 8 percent.  (Warsaw PAP 
in English 2030 GMT 29 Jul 93) 

   STATUS OF GERMAN (HERMES) LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM:  As of late 
July 1993, Poland had managed to use just over half of its quota of 
export-import loan guarantees backed by the German trade finance 
institution Hermes.  Working through Hermes, the German government 
has agreed to guarantee up to DM 2.5 billion worth of financing 
loans provided by Polish commercial banks and the Polish government 
to help Polish importers pay for purchases of German raw materials 
and capital goods.  The Polish-German Credit Committee, which 
oversees implementation of the program and reviews all guaranty 
contract applications for loans over DM 20 million, held one of its 
regular meetings on 28 July. 

   The pool of capital available for Hermes loan guarantees is 
broken down into segments for short-term and medium to long-term 
loans.  As of July, Hermes had accepted contracts to guarantee loans 
worth DM 197 million out of a total quota of DM 300 million.  Of the 
DM 2.2 billion allotted for medium and long-term capital project 
loans, guarantees had been written for loans worth DM 1.648 billion. 

   A decision to carry over any unused portion of the 1993 guarantee 
quota into 1994 would require agreement of the Polish and German 
governments.  Bonn and Warsaw agreed last year to carry over the 
unused quota from 1992.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 29 Jul 
93 p 1) 

   WHO'S WHO FROM THE EC IN WARSAW:  In its regular supplement on 
Polish relations with the EC, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE publishes 
informative text/graphic sidebars designed to boost readers' 
awareness of facts and figures about EC programs and institutions. 
In July, the supplement featured a box identifying key personnel in 
the EC mission to Warsaw, including those responsible for aid and 
loan programs: 

Alexander H. Dijckmeester -- Ambassador. 

   Klaus Schmidt -- First Counsellor, Chief Coordinator of the PHARE 
program. 

   Andrew Rasbash -- Economic Counsellor. 

   Hans Glaubitz --  Counsellor for Press, Culture, and Information. 

   Dieter Birkemaier -- Legal Counsellor (responsible for managing 
social aid programs and some aspects of the PHARE program), 

   Pierre Gerard -- Agriculture Counsellor. 

   Nigel Tucker -- Administrative Attache. 

  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 28 Jul 93 p 3) 

   EBRD, OTHERS FINANCE GDANSK PHONE SYSTEM UPGRADE:  Along with 
American and other European banks, the EBRD will finance loans for 
the modernization of the Gdansk telephone system.  Officials 
representing AT&amp;T Network System International and Telekomunikacja 
Polska signed papers in Gdansk on 26 August giving the go-ahead for 
the $150-million joint venture project.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1745 
GMT 26 Aug 93) 

   IMF STANDBY TRANCHES NOT DRAWN:  In late August, a Finance 
Ministry officials reported that Poland planned to defer drawing on 
available IMF credit tranches earmarked to bolster foreign exchange 
reserves.  Warsaw intended to refrain from using IMF credit until 
negotiations were completed with the London Club on commercial debt 
restructuring. 

   On 15 August, the IMF suspended Poland's access to the second 
tranche of IMF credit available under the March standby agreement 
(190.4 million SDR) due to the country's failure to live up to one 
of the agreement's implementation standards regarding foreign 
exchange reserves.  Foreign exchange reserves fell by $95 million 
below the standard required by the IMF. 

   Deputy Minister of Finance Stefan Kawalec and Finance Ministry 
Foreign Department chief Krzysztof Kalicki explained that IMF credit 
lines were not being used because the interest charges are too high 
at the prevailing market rates charged by the IMF.  They observed 
that the added debt service burden was unwarranted despite the 
falloff in foreign exchange reserves, which the IMF credit 1ine is 
intened to bolster.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 31 Aug 93 p 
1) 

   IMF REVIEW MISSION GIVES GOOD REPORT:  In late August, another 
IMF mission visited Warsaw to wrap up work on the institution's 
review of Polish compliance with the March standby agreement.  RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE and other Polish media reported that, in general, the 
mission found that Poland had met all performance criteria with the 
exception of foreign exchange reserves, which had declined below 
desirable levels. 
   At the conclusion of this mission, the Minister of Finance and 
the head of the central bank submitted a letter of intent to the 
IMF's managing director declaring Polish readiness to continue 
implementation of the standby agreement during the third and fourth 
quarters.  Implementation guidelines were to be adjusted to reflect 
current economic conditions, chiefly including the drop in foreign 
exchange reserves and the growing trade deficit. 

   While the IMF mission voiced concerns about foreign exchange and 
trade deficit issues, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE reported that the delegation 
was favorably impressed by the 26 August decision to devalue the 
zloty by 8 percent. The central bank hoped that the devaluation 
would stem the decline in foreign exchange reserves and shrink the 
trade deficit, although the Finance Ministry realized that the move 
would also require fine-tuning in the IMF compliance guidelines. 

   On other issues, such as budget deficit management, inflation 
control, and econoniic restructuring, the IMF mission gave Poland 
high marks, according to a Finance Ministry official.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 28 Aug 93 p 1, 31 Aug 93 p 1) 

   WORLD BANK RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE LOAN:  In September, the World 
Bank approved a loan of $300 million with a three-year grace period 
to support rural infrastructure development in Poland.  The proceeds 
are to be earmarked for spending on the construction of water and 
sewer lines, telephone systems, and small-scale food processing 
operations.  The "Rural Infrastructure Fund" created by the 
Agriculture Ministry will oversee dispersement of the World Bank 
loan.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 11 Sep 93 p 2) 

   NEW EC CREDIT LINE FOR AGRICULTURE:  In mid-September, Alexander 
Dijckmeester, EC envoy to Poland, and Jan K. Bielecki, Polish 
Minister for EC Integration, signed an agreement opening a new line 
of EC credit intended to support capital investment in agriculture 
and the food processing industry.  Three Polish commercial banks in 
Poznan, Wroclaw, and Warsaw will process loan applications from 
prospective Polish borrowers.  The credit line is for 3 million ECU 
over 12 years, with disbursements in zlotys or other currencies. 
Individual loans would be limited to a maximum of 200,000 ECU. 

At the signing ceremony, Dijckmeester commented that the EC hoped 
that Polish farmers would now have easier access to EC credit on the 
assumption that "all technical obstacles" had been removed.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1357 GMT 14 Sep 93) 

   UNUSED EC LOANS CARRY OVER TO STRUDER PROGRAM:  In a September 
edition of its regular supplement on EC issues, RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
published a detailed review of the accomplishments of the EC-funded 
"Program for the Support of Small and Medium-sized Business 
Development." 

   Founded in 1990 with an original PHARE appropriation of 25 
million ECU, the Program is managed through a government-held 
foundation called the "Cooperation Fund."  The government set up the 
foundation in 1990 to direct all foreign aid aimed at promoting 
democracy and free markets.  Of the 25 million ECU total, 19 million 
ECU were designated for direct lending to small and medium-sized 
firms, while 6 million ECU were set aside for non-governmental 
organizations, trade associations, and training centers serving the 
business sector. 

   The Cooperation Fund has focused on aiding private sector 
development in Poland.  Given the relatively small funding level of 
the EC-sponsored business development program, Polish and EC 
officials decided that it would operate initially as a pilot project 
targeted on specific regions -- Gdansk, Lodz, and Lower Silesia. 
The program set aside 19 million ECU as a credit line available to 
Polish small and medium-sized businesses for various capital 
investment projects.  To be eligible for loans financed through the 
program firms had to be 51-percent privately held and employ no more 
than 100 workers.  Applicants were also required to use their own 
capital to finance 15 percent of the cost of a given project.  While 
the loan limit was set at 250,000 ECU, program managers fenced off 
most of the available loan capital into blocks of 50,000 ECU in 
hopes of writing loans for as many firms as possible. 

   With a view to improving the efficiency of the Polish banking 
system, Polish commercial banks were tapped to handle loan 
processing.  Loan interest rates originally ranged between 12 and 15 
percent, including Polish bank margins.  Current interest rates are 
set at LIBOR levels for the ECU plus 4 percent.  Loans are disbursed 
in foreign exchange and repayable in local currency.  Loans are due 
in seven years with possible grace periods of up to two years. 

   Fears that the credit line of 19 million ECU would fall far short 
of demand in Poland's emerging private business sector proved 
unfounded.  The program has only managed to disburse around 10 
percent (approximately 2 million ECU) of the available credit. 
RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE blamed the banking system, businesses, and 
changing economic conditions for the low usage of this Western 
credit pool.  Banks reportedly believed that the loan processing was 
to time-consuming, while the loans themselves were viewed as too 
risky.  Meanwhile, businesses had difficulties filling out 
applications and drafting business plans for review by bank credit 
committees.  Firms were also seen as being overly cautious about 
making any investment commitments.  Finally, the program grew less 
competitive over time as regular commercial bank loans became more 
readily available under the same terms. 

   The Polish government worked to retain the unused EC credit for 
future use even though the credit line was due to expire at the end 
of 1993.  Warsaw finally persuaded Brussels to merge the untapped 
credit pool with funds appropriated for the EC's newer aid program 
-- STRUDER.  (Warsaw RYNI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 16 Sep 93 pp 3, 5) 

   SEEKING WAYS TO TAP, PRESERVE UNUSED CREDIT LINES:  In a mid- 
September issue, RYNKI ZAGRANIZCNE published a feature reviewing the 
reasons for Poland's low absorption of Western credit and options 
for making better use of this resource. 

   The journal quoted Zbigniew Kopyra, chief of the Loan 
Applications Review Agency in the Central Planning Office, on the 
need to preserve and open up Western credit channels.  Since many of 
these credit lines opened under various assistance programs are due 
to expire soon, Kopyra urged the government to keep them open by 
continuing to pay loan access fees.  Kopyra claimed that these fees 
do not strain the budget because they only amount to a small 
fraction of the total credit available.  Kopyra also pressed the 
government to renegotiate loan agreements in order to obtain an 
extension of the deadline for the expiration of credit lines.  He 
also believed that the terms under which loans are made to 
individual borrowers should also be rewritten in order to build more 
"flexibility" into the lending programs.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE 
in Polish 16 Sep 93 p 7) 

   EBRD FINANCING FOR FRANCO-POLISH SANITARY PROJECT:  The EBRD 
intends to finance part of the costs of a Polish-French joint 
venture project involving the construction of a new sewage treatment 
plant in Lodz.  The EBRD loan is preferential, tied to covering part 
of the 32-million ECU price tag of a design study for the new sewage 
plant by the French partner in the project, Compagne General des 
Eaux.  Compagne General and Bank Societe General of France have 
formed a consortium to cover the rest of the design costs.  Terms 
are 15 years with a grace period of three years.  The loan will be 
repaid in part from profit margins on the treatment plant's rate 
charges. 

   The Lodz sewage treatment facility is billed as Poland's largest 
environmental protection investment to date -- at a projected total 
construction cost of about $75 million.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2148 
GMT 16 Sep 93) 

   EC LOAN APPLICATION RULES REVIEWED:  In late September, RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE ran a feature article reviewing guidelines, rules, and 
procedures that business applicants must follow when applying for 
investment loans through Polish banks funded by EC credit lines. 
The article was apparently written as a reference aid for Polish 
businessmen. 

   In an end-to-end overview, the author of the piece, Halina 
Brdulak, describes the charter and duties of official Polish loan 
application review bodies and explains all of the documentary 
information that must accompany loan applications.  Brdulak reminded 
readers that the "Loan Applications Rating Commission" under the 
Central Planning Office does not disburse loans, but rather reviews 
these applications for capital investment loans, funded either by 
foreign or domestic credit lines, for consistency with government 
macroeconomic policies.  With a macroeconomic blessing from the 
national loan committee, individual commercial banks evaluate the 
microeconomic merits of a given capital project before approving a 
loan and disbursing proceeds. 

   Brdulak listed two of the "most frequent mistakes" made by Polish 
businesses when applying for loans backed by EC credit lines to 
finance capital investments.  First,  applicants seeking capital to 
finance joint ventures often fail to check up on the credit ratings 
of the prospective foreign partners.  Second, businesses are sloppy 
and unprofessional in filling out loan applications and assembling 
other supporting documentation.  Brdulak recommends that loan 
applicants should hire professional consulting firms to help them 
with loan paperwork.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 21 Sep 93 
p 6) 

   EIB, AUSTRIAN BANK PLAN JOINT LOAN:  In September, the EIB and 
its Austrian counterpart -- Investkreditbank -- were working on 
plans to lend 100 million ECU in untied funds to the Polski Bank 
Rozwoju (Polish Development Bank).  The Polish bank would use the 
funds to make various small business loans.  EIB's president, Sir 
Brian Unwin, also believes that such "all-purpose loans" help 
promote growth in Poland's banking industry.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 25 Sep 93 p 1) 

   GERMAN BANK OPPOSES DEBT REDUCTION:  While he favored a rapid 
rescheduling of Polish commercial bank debt, Martin Kohlhaussen, 
president of Germany's Commerzbank, said he is opposed to the 50- 
percent debt reduction sought by Poland, according to the PAP news 
agency.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2228 GMT 28 Sep 93) 

   IMF, WORLD BANK CONCERNS ABOUT NEW GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES: On 29 
September, outgoing Finance Minister Osiatynski met with senior IMF 
and World Bank officials in Washington for talks that dwelled on 
speculation about Poland's future economic policies after the 
victory of left-wing parties in the 19 September elections. 

   Osiatynski sought to reassure the IMF and World Bank that it 
would be difficult for the then yet-to-be formed government to 
reverse standing economic reform policies.  To do so, he explained, 
would jeopardize Poland's chances for securing the second part of 
the Paris Club debt reduction program, in addition to torpedoing 
talks with the London Club and breaking agreements reached with the 
IMF.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2219 GMT 29 Sep 93) 

   WORLD BANK ADVERTISES THIRD WORLD PROJECT CONTRACTS:  RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE periodically publishes World Bank invitations to bid on 
development project contracts in third countries.  In this issue, 
the journal listed Bank-financed projects in Guyana, Brazil, Turkey, 
Philippines, Kenya, Bangladesh, and Pakistan.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 30 Sep 93 p 4) 

   IFIs MAY REWARD LONDON CLUB SETTLEMENT:  Returning to Warsaw on 3 
October from the annual World Bank-IMF summit in Washington, 
outgoing Finance Minister Osiatynski told reporters that 
international financial institutions promised Poland more credit "in 
case we sign an agreement with the London Club."  The IMF and World 
Bank reportedly made the offer on the condition that Warsaw not 
retreat from current economic reform and financial discipline 
policies.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1838 GMT 3 Oct 93) 

   SLD EXPECTATIONS FROM WORLD BANK:  On 11 October, World Bank Vice 
President Ernest Stern met with SLD (Democratic Left Alliance) 
officials in Warsaw for an exchange of views on the economic policy 
goals of the newly elected Polish government and future bilateral 
relations.  Officials of the SLD's coalition partner PSL (Polish 
Peasant Party) as well as experts from the UP (Union of Labor) also 
attended. 

   Stern rated Poland's overall chances for obtaining new credit 
sources as "good."  He cautioned, however, that improving economic 
performance has a downside.  If the country is no longer 
"impoverished," creditor groups such as the London Club may no 
longer be willing to agree to debt reductions on the order of 50 to 
60 percent. 

   SLD leader Jozef Oleksy listed his party's objectives in terms of 
cooperation with the World Bank: 

   --Collaboration in drafting a study on the causes of inflation in 
Poland.  The SLD wants to pinpoint the impact of cost-push inflation 
and the potential effects of a further increase in energy prices. 

   --Collaboration in examining the reasons for Poland's low rate of 
foreign loan absorption.  In addition to deficiences on the part of 
prospective Polish borrowers, the SLD is also concerned about the 
complexity of processing bank loans that tap into World Bank credit 
lines. 

   --Securing World Bank loans for the modernization of firms 
included in the mass privatization program. 

   --Obtaining World Bank support for reform of the entitlements and 
social security system.  The SLD deems World Bank activity in this 
area to be "inadequate." 

   --World Bank financing to support guarantees for export loans and 
loans to small and medium-sized businesses. 

   --Negotiation of World Bank loans to support road and housing 
construction. 

   --World Bank support for Polish efforts to secure greater market 
access in Western Europe. 

   In reply, Stern acknowledged that the World Bank is "very much in 
favor" of discussing difficulties in obtaining World Bank loans.  As 
for helping Poland to improve EU market access, he said there was 
little the World Bank could do.  (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 12 
Oct 93 p 5) 

   EBRD FINANCING FOR PRIVATIZATION:  In October, the EBRD set aside 
$300-400 million to be used for recapitalization loans to firms 
slated for participation in mass privatization.  The bank is also 
reported ready to lend $60 million to finance the working capital 
needs of the national investment funds participating in the program. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1441 GMT 14 Oct 93) 

   GOVERNMENT REPORT ON LOW WESTERN CREDIT ABSORPTION:  An October 
issue of the business weekly ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE summarized a 
government study which analyzed the reasons why Poland has been slow 
to take advantage of approved credit lines from Western governments 
and international financial institutions.  The authors of the study 
--"a Special Task Force For the Study of Foreign Loan Absorption" 
reporting to the Polish Prime Minister -- concluded that the fault 
for low loan absorption rate lies more with Poland than with Western 
lenders. 

   Only a fraction of loans approved by Western governments and 
international financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the 
European Investment Bank, have translated into actual disbursements 
to Polish borrowers.  Looking at total foreign lending to Poland 
during 1990-1992, the task force cited loan absorption figures that 
were generally consistent with those reported to Polish borrowers 
and international lenders who attended the banking conference held 
in Warsaw in June.  The authors of the government report found that 
Western official lenders had approved loans to Poland totaling $8.3 
billion.  Of this sum, the lenders had actually opened available 
credit lines worth $6.5 million.  Over this period, intermediary 
Polish financial institutions drew on these lines to approve 
applications for loans valued at $1.9 billion.  However, actual 
disbursements of proceeds to Polish borrowers only came to "less 
than half" of the latter amount. 

   The Premier's loan task force broke out the external and internal 
barriers to faster absorption of Western loans.  The authors used 
the term "external" to refer to problems caused by Western lenders 
and the term "internal" to denote Polish barriers to fuller 
utilization of Western credit lines. 

   Lender Problems -- The task force blamed bureaucracy and 
procedural obstacles -- rather than lack of good faith -- for 
Western tardiness in approving loans to Poland.  The authors singled 
out the World Bank as a prime example of an institution encumbered 
with overlong and complicated loan application and planning 
procedures.  They also found that $2 million seems to be the 
threshold for the onset of significant delays in loan processing. 
World Bank loans are further complicated by requirments for 
compliance with IMF conditions on Polish economic performance. 

   Borrower Problems -- The task force tagged Poland with most of 
the blame for the slow utilization of Western official loans.  They 
listed all of the internal obstacles to faster loan absorption under 
three main headings: 

   --"Environmental" Factors -- The authors laid most of the blame 
for the tardy absorption of Western loans to problems in Poland's 
overall "economic environment" -- attributable chiefly to stumbling 
blocks and delays in the privatization process.  They pointed out 
that uncertain privatization timetables complicate long-term 
investment and borrowing strategies.  State-owned proprietaries that 
may not be around in two or three years are simply unable to qualify 
for long-term capital loans if the lender has no input into their 
eventual privatization.  Another "environmental" obstacle is that 
state-owned firms slated for privatization are reluctant to borrow 
because lower debt loads translate into higher share prices when 
they go on the block.  Polish laws that delay and complicate lender 
efforts to recover bad debts are another deterrent to the approval 
of loans to specific Polish businesses and projects. 

   --Problems In the Banking Sector -- Many of the barriers to 
faster absorption of Western loans reflect problems that are unique 
to Polish financial institutions.  For example, the lack of trained 
personnel makes its difficult for Polish banks to evaluate loan 
applicatons properly.  Other problems are more institutional in 
nature.  For example, capital requirements levied by Poland's 
central bank, such as an 8-percent return on equity, tends to 
discourage commercial banks from drawing on foreign capital to make 
long-term loans that inflate loan assets beyond central bank 
guidelines.  Capital adequacy shortfalls (estimated at 24 trillion 
zlotys in September 1993) in the Polish banking sector make it more 
difficult for banks to write new loans and remain within the 
profitability guidelines set by the central bank.  Polish banks also 
compete with Western lenders because they feel compelled to make 
their "own" foreign exchange loans by drawing on private foreign 
exchange deposits -- on which banks pay high interest rates. 

   --Problems In the Business Sector -- Demand for loans in the 
business sector is low for a variety of reasons reflecting the 
particular situations of individual firms and sectors.  Bank loan 
requirements, undercapitalization of firms, and uncertainty about 
future ownership status are seen as barriers to the absorption of 
Western loans.  The authors of the government report pointed out, 
for example, that the shortage of capital in the business sector 
makes it difficult for many firms to qualify for investment loans. 
Firms are typically required to fund 20 - 50 percent of total 
capital project costs out of their own pockets in order to qualify 
for loans to cover the rest.  State-owned proprietorships, on the 
other hand, are passive:  they are not borrowing anywhere because 
they do not want to invest until privatization issues are settled. 
In addition to lack of experience in filling out loan application 
forms, some businesses shy away from foreign-financed credit by 
financing their operations from other sources, such as preferential 
government loans designed for agriculture.  Moreover, the roughly 35 
percent of all privately owned businesses that are in the retail 
trade sector have no need for long-term financing. 

   The authors concluded that accelerated privatization is the 
single most important key to breaking the logjam preventing Poland 
from tapping the pool of loan capital pledged by official Western 
instititutions. 

   Accompanying its overview of the government's study on Western 
loan utilization problems, ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE published the table 
shown on the following page.  The table illustrates patterns in 
Polish borrowing from Western sources by institutions, availability 
dates, loan amounts, loan purposes, and loans actually disbursed. 
(Warsaw ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE in Polish No 43, 24 Oct 93 p 20) 
(At this point, the hard-copy version of this report contains a 
graphic) 

   IMF ENVOY MEETS NEW LEADERS:  In early November, Markus Radlauer, 
IMF Representative in Warsaw, met with leaders of the new SLD-PSL 
coalition government. 

   On 3 November, Radlauer met with the new Polish Prime Minister, 
Waldemar Pawlak for discussions about future bilateral relations. 

   Pawlak and Radlauer laid out their respective positions and 
expectations regarding Polish economic policy and the extent of 
future cooperation with the IMF.  Pawlak pledged that Polish 
planning and budget policies would strive to lay a groundwork for 
continued growth, while also making allowances for "social factors." 
Pawlak stressed that social justice and economic growth are mutually 
complementary. 

   Radlauer accented the need for Poland to maintain fiscal 
discipline in its 1994 budget as "the most important factor for 
cooperation with the IMF." 

   On 4 November, Radlauer met with the new Sejm speaker Jozef 
Olesky (SLD). 
   At a press conference after their meeting, Oleksy announced that 
Poland and the IMF would start negotiations in December on policy 
issues concerning which Warsaw is seeking IMF relief.  Oleksy 
mentioned that he told Radlauer that Warsaw wants the IMF to be 
more flexible" in its stands regarding the Polish budget deficit, 
energy prices, and interest rates.  In particular, Oleksy referred 
to the new government's desire for greater latitude in shifting 
funds between budget accounts in order to meet social policy 
objectives.   (Warsaw PAP in English 1722 GMT 3 Nov 93, 2017 GMT 4 
Nov 93) 

   NO CHANGE IN NEW GOVERNMENT'S LONDON CLUB POSITION:  Krzysztof 
Krowacki, head of the Polish negotiating team in talks with the 
London Club, announced in early November that the new government's 
position on Polish commercial bank debt reduction was unchanged from 
that of the previous government. 

   After a meeting with Ernst-Moritz Lippe, the new chief of the 
London Club working group in charge of the Polish debt issue, 
Krowacki predicted that a final settlement could be reached in "two 
or three months."  (Warsaw PAP in English 1936 GMT 4 Nov 93) 
WORLD BANK STUDYS URBAN TRANSIT LOAN PROGRAM:  A World Bank team 
of experts visited Poland in November to work on a feasibility study 
for a loan program earmarked for urban mass transit development in 
six Polish cities:  Katowice, Krakow, Wroclaw, Poznan, Lodz, and 
Gdansk.  The Bank deems Katowice most in need of assistance in this 
area. 

   While team leader Slobodan Mitrovic said it was too early to 
estimate the value of the lending program, he indicated the project 
should be designed to focus efforts on making more efficient use of 
existing urban transportation assets -- as opposed to the Polish 
preference for building new systems from the ground up.  (Warsaw PAP 
in English 2033 GMT 10 Nov 93) 

   EBRD OFFICIAL FORECASTS 'MAJOR' NEW LOANS:  On 15 November, EBRD 
representative Yves Fortein met with Premier Pawlak to review 
existing EBRD investments in Poland and to discuss new initiatives. 

   With its focus on supporting privatization, infrastructure 
development, and environmental protection, the EBED, to date, has 
invested around $600 million in 26 capital projects around Poland. 
Most loans are managed under the umbrella of the "Stabilization, 
Restrucuturing, and Privatization Program." 

   Speaking to reporters after their meeting, Pawlak emphasized the 
importance of EBRD support for financial sector reforms involving 
banks, insurance companies, and export insurance companies. 

   Both Pawlak and Fortein noted that negotiations are under way on 
some "very major loans" from the EBRD to support additional projects 
in Poland's private and public sectors.  Fortein said loan contracts 
might be ready for signing before Christmas.  (Warsaw RYNKI 
ZAGRANICZNE in Polish 16 Nov 93 p 8; Warsaw PAP in Polish 1132 GMT 
15 Nov 93) 

   PREMIER, WALESA MEET IMF DEPUTY MANAGER:  On 16 and 17 November, 
IMF Deputy Managing Director Richard D. Erb visited Warsaw for 
meetings with Premier Pawlak, President Walesa, and others. 

   After meeting with Erb on 16 November, Pawlak told a press 
conference that he foresaw "great opportunities" for increased 
cooperation with the IMF.  Pawlak concluded that the IMF has 
accepted his government's economic policy priorities. 

   Erb told reporters at the same press conference that IMF 
"flexibility" on the economic performance guidelines set for Poland 
"will be of lesser importance" provided that the new government's 
policies lead to substantial economic growth.  Erb rated Polish 
economic growth as a "major IMF concern," according the news agency 
PAP. 

   President Walesa reassured Erb about the continuity of Polish 
economic reforms at a meeting on 17 November, according to 
presidential press spokesperson Andrzej Drzycimski.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 1039 GMT, 1301 GMT 16 Nov 93; 1137 GMT 17 Nov 93) 

   FOREIGN LENDING INSUFFICIENT, SAYS PLANNING CHIEF:  On 24 
November, Zbigniew Kopyra, Director of the Central Planning Office, 
addressed a seminar in Warsaw on reasons for Poland's low 
utilization of foreign credit lines. 

   In Kopyra's view, the amount of foreign credit currently 
available to Poland -- "$3.6 billion" -- is not enough "to 
restructure the entire economy." 

   Polish borrowers and foreign lenders share the blame for low 
credit absorption in Poland, according to Kopyra.  Lack of 
experience and capital on the part of Polish companies and 
bureacuracy in the Polish government are bad enough, he said, but 
lenders also contribute to the problem with "discouraging" and 
preferential" loan terms. (Warsaw PAP in English 1702 GMT 24 Nov 
93) 

   BULGARIAN LONDON CLUB DEAL NOTED:  Speaking to the press on 29 
November, Deputy Finance Minister and chief London Club negotiator 
Krzysztof Krowacki commented on Bulgaria's recent settlement with 
the London Club of commercial banks -- resulting in a 50-percent 
debt reduction.  While he acknowledged that Bulgaria was negotiating 
with a completely different group of banks within the London Club, 
Krowacki hoped nevertheless that the Club's Polish working group 
would "draw conclusions" from the deal. 

   Krowacki indicated that there is "chance" for another round of 
talks with the London Club before the end of the year.  He observed, 
however, that it would be premature to set a specific date for 
another meeting.  Krowacki met with the chair of the London Club 
working group, Ernst-Moritz Lippe of Dresdner Bank, to discuss the 
timing of another negotiating round.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1258 
GMT 29 Nov 93) 

   FINANCE MINISTER SCORES LONDON CLUB POSITION:  In an interview 
for the Warsaw daily RZECZPOSPOLITA published in early December, 
Marek Borowski, Minister of Finance and Deputy Premier in the newly 
elected government, criticized recent statements by London Club 
principals regarding the Polish debt reduction issue. 

   In its introduction to the interview, RZECZPOSPOLITA highlighted 
earlier comments on prospects for a Polish debt settlement by 
officials of Dresdner Bank, who have taken over management of 
negotiations with Poland.  The paper quoted Dresdner Bank chairman 
Juergen Sarrazin stating that a 50-percent reduction of Poland's 
debt is "out of the question."  Dresdner Bank's Bernhard Walter -- 
in charge of actual negotiations with the Polish side -- sounded a 
somewhat different note with the observation that a debt settlement 
would depend on the health of the Polish economy. 

   In his interview with RZECZPOSPOLITA, Borowski voiced his 
impatience and disappointment with these statements and, in general, 
with Dresdner Bank for its role in the debt talks.  After initial 
expectations that Dresdner Bank would bring more vigor to the 
negotiations, Borowski noted that Poland now hears only what it has 
heard all along from the London Club -- declarations about what 
Poland will not receive instead of "terms we have to meet so as to 
make an agreement possible."  Borowski stressed that Poland has been 
waiting for five months -- since Dresdner Bank took over the 
negotiations -- for new concrete options for a final settlement.  In 
place of a "realistic proposal," however, Poland only hears "blunt 
statements made in advance about what we will not receive." 

   Borowski continues to maintain that the London Club has not lived 
up to the "general terms" of a future accord worked out with the 
London Club in May.  Reviewing the three principles which Poland 
believes were agreed to in May, Borowski stressed that a settlement 
must be comprehensive, reflective of Poland's short and long-term 
ability to pay, and acknowledge Poland's "other contractual 
obligations."  In view of the current state of the economy and the 
state of play in the internal debate over future economic policy, 
the Finance Minister stressed that the country's ability to make 
major" payments on commercial bank debt would be limited through 
1997.  Moreover, after 1997, Borowski said that Poland had "no 
intention" of neglecting "ever-increasing obligations to other 
creditor groups." 

   Borowski closed the interview by remarking that the London Club's 
hard line in the debt reduction talks has caused its commercial bank 
members to lose money in forfeited debt collections.  He noted that 
if the Club had accepted Poland's 1991 offer to make annual payments 
of $500 million, the country's commercial bank creditors would have 
recouped "$1.5 billion by now."  (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 7 
Dec 93) 
ELAG/07 January/ECONF/East Europe Division/ta 14/0115z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43197 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000002994001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   15 January 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-005--EURASIA 
<H3> <TI>      EURASIA:  AIDS COVERAGE IN NIS PRESS </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
Recent     Russian-language press articlesreporting the present state 
of AIDS prevent ion and control in former Soviet republics are 
gisted. 

   The independent multinational physicians' newspaper MEDITSINSKAYA 
GAZETA has devoted an entire issue to World AIDS Control Day (1 
December 93). KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA (1 December 93) ran six articles 
on AIDS on its second page the same day.  KOMMERSANT-DAILY, LESNAYA 
GAZETA and other newspapers have also recently published articles on 
AIDS developments.  Key information from these articles is 
summarized below by republic. 

   RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

   Draft Legislation to be Reviewed 

   New draft legislation on AIDS, which was previously considered by 
the Russian Supreme Soviet, has been included in a package of 
priority items for the Duma.  In a second-page article, Professor V. 
V. Pokrovskiy speculates that adoption of the bill may result in 
abandonment of mass compulsory AIDS testing in favor of voluntary 
testing and public education on safe sex practices. 

   Pokrovskiy feels that the territorial centers' role in AIDS 
control is growing as a result of the increasing economic and 
political role of the krays, oblasts, and republics which fund them. 
By contrast, the only part of the extensive 1993 federal AIDS 
program that was actually funded was the federal purchase of test 
systems for territories.  Pokrovskiy thinks that the federal 
government may not fund the program at all in 1994-95. 

   Other problems affecting the Russian AIDS control program, 
according to Pokrovskiy, are the failure of the AIDS centers to 
focus on prevention of sexual transmission of AIDS and the failure 
to allocate manpower and organize AIDS control institutions where 
the incidence is greatest (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   HIV Incidence 

   The number of Russian HIV carriers began to increase rapidly in 
1993.  Eighty new HIV carriers were identified, and 32 HIV-positive 
patients developed AIDS.  Of the 692 HIV carriers detected in 
Russia, 124 are AIDS patients, 96 have died, and 435 are foreigners 
and have been deported  (Moscow IZVESTIYA 3 Dec 93).  The average 
age of the AIDS patients was 28, and the ratio of men to women was 8 
to 1.  Two of the HIV-infected were donors (Moscow KOMMERSANT-DAILY 
17 Nov 93). 

   According to Vadim Pokrovskiy, director of the Russian Center for 
AIDS Prevention and Control, the pattern of HIV transmission in 
Russia has changed.  Starting in 1990 HIV has spread predominantly 
among Russian homosexuals and to some extent among intravenous drug 
users.  Initially, the virus was spread primarily by foreigners or 
through medical negligence.  Pokrovskiy predicts a sharp rise in 
incidence among drug users within the next two years (Moscow 
KOMMERSANT-DAILY 17 Nov 93). 

   A front-page column in MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA lists the incidence 
of HIV carriers by city and oblast. Moscow leads with 125, 70 
percent of whom are male homosexuals.  Following it are three 
localities where the infected are primarily victims of medical 
negligence in 1988-89: Rostov Oblast with 109 carriers, Kalmykia 
with 98 and Volgograd Oblast with 72.  HIV was sexually transmitted 
to most of the 59 St. Petersburg and 33 Moscow Oblast patients. 
Twenty territories have no identified AIDS carriers and the rest 
have a few each (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   Testing 

   Twenty-five million people were tested for AIDS in Russia during 
1992, 21 million in 1993 (Moscow KOMMERSANT-DAILY 17 Nov 93, 
KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA 1 Dec 93).  For initial screening, laboratories 
use domestically produced test systems, which are less reliable than 
foreign systems.  Specimens that test positive are sent to the 
Russian Scientific Methodological Center for AIDS Control, where 
foreign test systems and computer analysis are used to confirm the 
diagnosis.  Positive results at this stage are retested and then 
confirmed by immune blotting (Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 8 Jun 93). 

   Russian Azidothymidine 

   Domestically produced azidothymidine has been tested and 
evaluated as equal in quality to the English version of the drug 
(Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA 1 DEC 93). 

   AIDS Database 

   The Volgograd AIDS Prevention and Control Center, in 
collaboration with the Volgograd Medical Institute, has created a 
screening program for analyzing test results.  The system, which 
includes a database on patients screened for AIDS starting in 1990, 
makes it possible to determine the extent to which a risk group has 
been screened. A supplementary program analyzes the effect of 
therapies on individual patients.  The programs have been placed 
under the control of the municipal public health committee (Moscow 
MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   AIDS Education 

   The periodical OGONEK, television company VID, and the OGONEK- 
ViD-AntiSPID [Anti-AIDS] charitable fund are jointly sponsoring the 
first international competition for films on AIDS.  During the year- 
long contest, documentary, educational and dramatic films on AIDS 
will be broadcast weekly on the Ostankino channel (Moscow LESNAYA 
GAZETA 4 Dec 93).  On 1 December in Moscow, the charitable All- 
Russian AIDS Control Association and Russian Ministry of Health 
jointly produced a benefit program including meetings with 
physicians and distribution of literature (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA 
GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   KAZAKHSTAN 

   Galiya Sheriyazdanova, director of the Kazakhstan Aids Prevention 
and Control Dispensary in Almaty, believes that AIDS screening of 
Kazakhstan residents may be unreliable.  As the result of 
environmentally caused depression of their immune systems, they 
produce few antibodies when exposed to the human immunodeficiency 
virus, causing false negative test results (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA 
GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   Press figures on HIV incidence in Kazakhstan are inconsistent. 
MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA (1 Dec 93) reported that only one HIV carrier 
had been detected, but the Almaty newspaper KARAVAN reported a total 
of 9 registered HIV cases and one AIDS death (Moscow SELSKAYA ZHIZN 
21 Jul 93). 

   Few Kazakhstan residents seek AIDS testing.  Only 411 patients 
requested screening in 10 months of 1993, despite a public education 
effort that establishes a monthly quota of lectures, seminars and 
published writings for AIDS center physicians (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA 
GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   UZBEKISTAN 

   Based on the results of an international symposium held in 
Tashkent, the World Health Organization is developing a program of 
assistance to Uzbekistan. WHO's representative at the symposium 
believes that Uzbekistan is capable of containing the spread of HIV 
(Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   Uzbekistan maintains a network of AIDS control institutions 
despite a low HIV infection rate.  Testing of 11 million individuals 
detected 31 HIV carriers, including 24 foreigners, who were 
deported, and 7 citizens. There has been one AIDS death.  The AIDS 
service consists of centers in Karakalpakistan, Tashkent, and all 12 
oblasts; 90 diagnostic laboratories; and over 100 offices for 
anonymous treatment.  Funding is received from a state interbranch 
program, although at least one oblast center has a commercial 
sponsor that funds building repair and medical supplies (Moscow 
MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   According to Olim Yakubov, head of the republic's AIDS prevention 
and control center, the priorities of the Uzbekistan AIDS program 
are equipping AIDS centers and educating physicans and medical 
workers.  Mass AIDS testing has been abandoned in favor of screening 
high-risk groups such as patients with venereal diseases, 
homosexuals, and drug addicts.  In addition, all pregnant women and 
donors are tested.  A key need is AIDS diagnostic systems and 
medical equipment, which are available in Uzbekistan on a barter 
basis only.  Banking system problems and the introduction of a 
national currency have reduced the delivery of AIDS test systems to 
Uzbek AIDS Centers by 40 percent.  Needed supplies and equipment are 
not being sent from Russia or Ukraine because the payments are not 
being transmitted (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93.) 

   UKRAINE 

   AIDS is on the rise in Ukraine.  From March to December 1993, 29 
new AIDS cases were detected, more than during the entire previous 
year.  HIV incidence has increased from 4.4 per million in 1992 to 
5.4 per million.  One hundred forty one people are infected, and 8 
adults and 4 children have died.  The largest numbers of HIV 
carriers are found in Odessa Oblast, Kiev, Donetsk, and 
Dnepropetrovsk Oblasts and in the Crimean Republic.  The virus was 
sexually transmitted -- heterosexually in 76 cases and homosexually 
in 16 (Moscow MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). These statistics may 
not include infected foreigners, since Ukrainian AIDS Committee 
chairman Matsuk reported a total of 303 HIV carriers detected as of 
1 January 1993, including 112 Ukrainians and 191 foreigners (Kiev 
DEMOKRATYCHNA UKRAYINA 5 Jun 93).  Ternopol epidemiologist Tamara 
Burtnyak considers weakening of immune systems by the Chernobyl 
nuclear accident to have increased Ukrainians' susceptibility to 
AIDS (Ternopol VILNE ZHYTTYA 26 Oct 93).  Ukraine is pursuing a mass 
screening program, with 1.9 million examined every quarter (Moscow 
MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   Ukraine's AIDS detection abilities have been enhanced by new 
developments. The Ukraine AIDS Committee has created a national 
reference laboratory for HIV infection and has developed a reference 
panel of positive sera to be used in evaluating the quality of 
imported test systems.  The US firm Abbott is selling third- 
generation test systems and modern equipment to the Kiev Scientific 
Research Institute for Hematology and Blood Transfusion.  Only two 
Ukrainian firms manufacture test systems, using raw materials 
imported from other former Soviet republics.  Most medicines for HIV 
carriers and AIDS patients are obtained from abroad (Moscow 
MEDITSINSKAY GAZETA 1 Dec 93). 

   A KHRESHCHATYK article blames an outbreak of "'exotic' contagious 
diseases,'' including AIDS, on "the uncontrolled stay of foreigners 
in Kiev."  Sixty-five of the 92 new AIDS cases in Kiev were aliens 
(Kiev KHRESHCHATYK 15 Dec 93). 

   Convicts incarcerated at the Interoblast Hospital of the 
Administration of Internal Affairs in Donetsk Oblast wrote an open 
letter to KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA (1 Dec 93), complaining of unsanitary 
conditions and poor treatment.  They allege that they have not 
received necessary medications and have been refused treatment by 
the Ukrainian AIDS Center in Kiev. 

   BALTICS AND BELARUS 

   Latvia reported 14 AIDS patients and 16 HIV-positive individuals 
(Riga Radio Riga Network 1 Dec 93).  Belarus has recorded 98 cases 
of HIV infection, 69 of them in Minsk. One-fourth of the Belarusian 
HIV carriers have developed AIDS and 6 have died.  There are an 
estimated 900-1200 HIV carriers in Minsk.  Sexual transmission of 
the virus predominates (Minsk VECHERNIY MINSK 30 Nov 93).  Lithuania 
has detected 19 HIV carriers ranging in age from 19 to 40 and 
including 14 homosexual males and 1 woman.  During the past year, 
Abbott test systems have been used in Lithuania to screen donor 
blood for HIV (Vilnius TIESA 3 Dec 93). 

   GEORGIA 

   According to Tengiz Tsertsvadze, senior doctor at Republican AIDS 
and Immunodeficiency Center, Georgia has recorded 16 HIV carriers, 
11 of them citizens of the republic.  Drug addiction and the 
shortage of disposable syringes, medical equipment, and sterilizers 
are key factors promoting the spread of AIDS.  Tsertsvadze predicts 
20,000 cases by the year 2000 and several hundred thousand cases by 
2010, unless radical action is taken.  AIDS screening, which is 
voluntary, is down to one-quarter of the 1990 level because of the 
lack of money to purchase test kits. Consequently, AIDS statistics 
are probably understated, in Tsertsvadze's opinion (Tblisi NOVAYA 
GAZETA Nov 93). 

   (AUTHOR:  DOBBINS.  FOR QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES BRANCH AT (703) 733-6332. 
GIG/11JAN94/TEPF/TID/ta 14/0148z jan 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
