<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59802 </DOCNO>
<HT>  "jpjst004__l94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-004L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan </ABS>
<DATE1>   27 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> Superconductivity </F>
<H3> <TI>   Toshiba Develops High-Performance Freezer Without Liquid 
Helium </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  43070026 Tokyo THE NIKKEI WEEKLY in English 29 Nov 93 p 
12--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 43070026 </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo THE NIKKEI WEEKLY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Toshiba Corp. has developed a freezer which can cool 
objects down to minus 269 C without the use of liquid helium. 
  With this freezer, the company has designed a more compact 
and easy-to-maintain superconducting magnet ensemble for use in 
applications which require an extremely strong magnetic 
field--such as the magnetic resonance imaging devices used in 
medicine, and the propulsion system used by maglev trains. 
  Toshiba used the relatively inexpensive niobium-titanium 
superconducting material for the magnet in its ensemble. This 
material must be cooled down to minus 269 C before it shows 
superconductivity. Liquid helium can be used to cool the 
material down this far, but this technique poses several 
problems. First, it results in larger equipment, and second, an 
expert technician is needed to handle the liquid helium. 
  There has been much research on the development of freezers 
which can accomplish the task without the use of liquid helium. 
But until Toshiba's announcement, the best that could be managed 
was a temperature of minus 263 C, which is not cold enough to 
achieve superconductivity in a niobium-titanium superconducting 
material. 
  Toshiba succeeded in reaching liquid helium temperature by 
improving both the cooling and the heat insulating efficiency of 
its freezer. For example, the company used the new material 
erbium-3-nickel for the heat exchanger. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59803 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Saddam, Rafsanjani Said Preparing for Summit </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0025A Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 22 Oct 93 
pp 20-21--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94AE0025A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Raja Mansur: "Tehran Prepares for </F>
Saddam-Rafsanjani Summit; Iranian Intelligence Raids Baqir 
al-Hakim's Offices and Arrests His Group] 
  [Text] Will Iraqi-Iranian normalization be realized, and 
the promised Hashemi-Rafsanjani--Saddam Husayn summit take 
place? Apart from the good will and serious intentions of both 
sides, there are intensive secret and public meetings going on 
in the normalization negotiations, which recently led to 
practical steps against Iraq's Shiite opposition, which had 
sought refuge in Tehran. These have included raids on the 
offices of Baqir al-Hakim and the arrest of his group, which has 
begun to seek another country to which to flee. 
  Before realizing even partial progress in the Iranian-Iraqi 
talks to normalize relations between Tehran and Baghdad, Iranian 
authorities embarked on a series of international measures to 
get ahead of the outcome of the negotiations being conducted in 
Baghdad by Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister for International 
Affairs, Mohammad Jawad Zarif. It was clear that Tehran's aim 
was to show its good intentions, and to express its readiness to 
reach an agreement pleasing to the Iraqi capital. 
  Perhaps the most prominent of these measures, and the most 
significant, was the Tehran government's establishment of 
investigative tribunals supervised by 'Ali Mohammadi, the 
official responsible for the Iraqi committee in Khamene'i's 
office, to limit the activities of the Supreme Assembly of the 
Islamic Revolution of Iraq [SAIRI], led by Ayatollah Muhammad 
Baqir al-Hakim. 
  These tribunals attended diligently to the tasks Khamene'i 
himself assigned to them, in al-Hakim's presence, who went to 
confront the investigationa and left depressed and worried about 
the future because tribunal officials insisted upon a a 
wide-ranging investigation of the funds al-Hakim and his 
supporters had received from the Iranian Government. 
  Despite the fact that Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim opposed the 
investigative tribunal, and his group refused to give out the 
information demanded of them, Mohammadi went to the Ministry of 
Intelligence (security), which in the previous week had engaged 
in two raids on al-Hakim's Tehran and Qom offices. The raids 
took place simultaneously at all the offices, and the Ministry 
arrested numerous leaders of al-Hakim's group on charges of 
financial corruption and forging government documents. 
  In the first raid, mounted by the security forces on 
al-Hakim's offices, Iranian officials met no significant 
resistance on the part of al-Hakim's supporters, who were 
relying on al-Hakim's closeness to Ayatollah Khamene'i, whose 
had supported him in the past when Iranian security agencies and 
other agencies responsible for the Iraqi opposition tried to 
limit al-Hakim's influence. But the supporters of the head of 
the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq, who with 
his entourage has established an empire not unlike the "empire" 
of PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat, did show opposition to the second 
raid, which resulted in the arrest of the director of the 
recruiting office in Qom, Sayyid Ibrahim Lajvardi and a number 
of al-Hakim's other followers and confidants. 
  High-ranking and well-informed diplomatic sources have 
confirmed to AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI that al-Hakim suffered a severe 
shock, because what the Ministry of Intelligence did was part of 
a startling context that indicated the coming of normalized 
Iranian-Iraqi relations. This was after word circulated in 
Tehran of the forthcoming visit of Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar 
Velayati to Baghdad, and Velayati's meeting, prior to these 
events, with his Iraqi counterpart, Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf, in 
New York, and their agreement on the exchange of visits of the 
two countries' officials. 
  What could "Abu-Sadiq" [al-Hakim] do but go, as he usually 
does in these circumstances, to the leader, Khamene'i, who had 
always stood by him in the blackest times, and supported him at 
the expense of his opponents, who had begun to speak openly of 
secret deals that had taken place, or were taking place, between 
al-Hakim and Western and American intelligence agencies? 
  The first time, Khamene'i promised al-Hakim to look into the 
matter and take the necessary steps; that there would be no 
repeat of Intelligence's raid; the documents that were seized 
would be returned. But after intelligence operations against the 
offices, and the arrest of a number of his supporters, Khamene'i 
told al-Hakim, that the Ministry knew what it was doing, and 
that "it knew its duty best." 
  The ayatollah left the other ayatollah's office 
disappointed, 
expecting increased pressure on him and on his Supreme Assembly, 
which now represented only his entourage, groups of penitent 
prisoners, and the remnants of Iraqi intelligence, who had 
declared their repentance to al-Hakim, who had assigned them to 
the organs of the assembly and the units of the Badr 9 military 
corps. 
<H5>  Saddam-Rafsanjani Summit </H5>
  The diplomatic sources say they are sure that the raids on 
al-Hakim's offices and the halt to its financial budget long 
months ago are part of the ongoing normalization process in 
Iranian-Iraqi relations, and the meetings of the two countries' 
officials. These had been conducted in total secrecy on the 
joint border before the announcement of the recent 
Velayati--al-Sahhaf meeting in New York on the sidelines of the 
current General Assembly session of the United Nations. 
  Diplomatic circles in the Iranian capital believe--and they 
are joined in this by factions of the Iraqi opposition in 
Damascus and London, and even in Tehran--that the Iranian 
Government is determined to normalize relations with Baghdad. It 
is awaiting the results of the negotiating process between Zarif 
and Iraqi officials over 5,000 to 8,000 Iranian prisoners, which 
Tehran says Iraq denies holding, before sending Foreign Minister 
Velayati to prepare for a controversial summit between President 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani and Iraqi President Saddam Husayn. 
  A few weeks ago, Iran's Supreme Council on National Security 
held a meeting to study the likelihood that relations between 
Tehran and Baghdad would be normalized. In this meeting, 
Rafsanjani said that "the alliance with Iraq benefits Iran in 
improving its Gulf relations, as well as with the West, and 
perhaps the United States." 
  Iran's Supreme Council on National Security studied an 
"encouraging" report submitted by its secretary general, Hasan 
Rohani, based on information from inside Iraq confirming that 
Iraqi President Saddam Husayn is personally supervising the 
renovation of the Shiite holy places in al-Najaf and Karbala', 
which had been devastated in the March 1991 uprising. 
  Rohani said that Iraq appeared serious in mending President 
Saddan Husayn's relations with the Shiites, and that Saddam had 
personally advised the governor of al-Najaf, Hasan Rida, to look 
after the holy places and prepare them for the visits of Iranian 
Shiites, which will resume very soon, if Zarif's negotiations, 
and then Velayati's in the Iraqi capital, succeed. The Supreme 
Council on National Security viewed the renovation of the 
al-Kufah mosque, and the seminaries in al-Najaf, and the 
well-known library of Ayatollah [Muhsin] al-Hakim, as a step 
proving Iraq's readiness to receive Iranian pilgrims. 
  Hasan Rohani's report welcomed any step toward improving 
bilateral relations on Baghdad's part, and the council made a 
unanimous decision to support a public summit between the 
presidents of Iran and Iraq, which it was said had been proposed 
by Iraqi Foreign Minister Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf in New York. 
<H5>  Secret Meetings </H5>
  It is worth mentioning that this is not the first time the 
foreign ministers of the two countries have met. Velayati and 
al-Sahhaf met in Karachi, Pakistan, when they both attended the 
emergency ministerial meeting of the countries of the Islamic 
Conference Organization, on Bosnia. They agreed at the time to 
continue meeting. Informed diplomatic sources confirmed that 
Velayati met with al-Sahhaf three times in the border region 
between the two countries, and that al-Sahhaf went to the city 
of Qasr Shirin last month and held a meeting nearly seven hours 
long with his Iranian counterpart. Their talks focused on ways 
of normalizing relations without a fuss affecting the two 
countries, which are trying to break the international isolation 
imposed on Iraq, and which may be imposed on Iran because of its 
position on the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord. 
  But political sources in Nicosia seeing, in the evolution of 
events between Baghdad and Tehran, open borders on both sides, 
oil trade, and smuggling, including drug smuggling, express 
their doubts about the two countries' intentions in this 
anticipated opening. Particularly as Iraq is awaiting 
impatiently the lifting of economic sanctions, it does not want 
new problems from a strategic rapprochement with Iran. These 
sources believe that these moves mean Iraq is wooing the West 
and the United States, using the approach to Iran as a lever for 
lifting the economic sanctions, and returning it gradually to 
the international community. 
  Iran is working both sides of the street, doing anything to 
get one of its possibilities accomplished. Thus it would accept 
normalized relations with Iraq, not caring whether it angers or 
pleases the West and the United States; as long as it is wet, 
why should it fear the rain, as they say--especially when its 
options are limited. They say that Iran is more serious about 
playing the Iraqi normalization card to infuriate the Arab Gulf 
states, especially Kuwait, which supports the Emirates in its 
struggle for the three islands. 
  Why Kuwait? 
  Political sources confirm that Velayati did not want to make 
public his recent meeting with al-Sahhaf in New York, even 
seeking cover for it in the UN building, if Kuwaiti Foreign 
Minister Sabah al-Ahmad had not made a speech at the 
international forum, speaking candidly about Kuwait's position 
in support of the UAE [United Arab Emirates] in demanding the 
three islands, Tunb al-Sughra, Tunb al-Kubra, and Abu-Musa. 
  The sources quoted one of those accompanying Velayati to New 
York as saying it was the Iranian Foreign Minister who requested 
the meeting with al-Sahhaf just one day after Sabah al-Ahmad's 
speech at the international organization. The sources went 
further, saying its information confirmed that the Iranian 
Government was behind the leaking of reports of secret meetings 
between Iranian and Iraq's meetings at the border, and that it 
had spread the news of the open commercial and economic route 
between Iran and Iraq, especially for oil, linking Iraq 
commercially and economically to the republics of Central Asia. 
  Tehran is doing all this because it does not want to put all 
its eggs in one basket that might be broken. The sources added 
that the subject of normalizing Iranian-Iraqi relations was 
broached by Omani Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Yusuf 
Bin-'Alawi. They said that Bin-'Alawi had participated, as had 
his Qatari counterpart Hamad Bin-Jasim Al-Thani, who gave his 
blessing to Velayati's announcement of his meeting with 
al-Sahhaf in New York. He also gave his blessing to the meeting 
with UAE Foreign Minister Rashid Bin-'Abdallah al-Nuaymi on 
continuing direct bilateral talks to solve the crisis over the 
islands. The same sources said that Qatari Energy Minister 
'Abdallah al-'Attiyah, who visited Tehran last week, was 
informed of the details of the Iranian-Iraqi talks and the 
course they were taking, which would end or be ended with Iraq's 
return to the oil market if trade sanctions against it were to 
be lifted. 
<H5>  What Alternative to the Shiite Opposition? </H5>
  So, what is left? 
  Iraqi opposition sources in the British capital said that 
the 
Shiite opposition based in Iran is very worried about the 
future, and has hastened to arrange two extended visits. Two 
senior leaders were sent to some Arab countries to search for a 
new, alternative foothold, in case Tehran and Baghdad might 
reach an agreement that would mean the fall of their 
turbans--and heads. 
  The sources say that Damascus offered to play host to 
al-Hakim, but he appeared hesitant to accept the Syrian 
invitation at this particular time, after having accepted it 
seven months ago, when there had been talk of imminent 
Iranian-Iraqi normalization. The reason for al-Hakim's 
hesitation, and that of the opposition leaders with him, was 
their secret promise to the U.S. Administration to support the 
Arab-Israeli peace agreement. The leader of the [Executive 
Council of the] Iraqi National Congress, Ahmad al-Shalabi, 
conveyed this promise via al-Hakim himself. This was before the 
surprise Gaza-Jericho First agreement. Al-Hakim, like Syria and 
numerous regional and international parties, thought the peace 
negotiations would drag on until after the Iraqi problem was 
solved with the fall of Saddam Husayn and his party, and the 
coming of the opposition, which had agreed, in Irbil (Salah 
al-Din), on an agenda worked out by American officials. 
  After the Gaza-Jericho agreement, however, and the silence 
of 
the Shiite Iraqi opposition over manifesting a public position, 
al-Hakim's variables changed. Estimates in the field changed 
when the harvest came in. People close to al-Hakim said that he 
feared asking Damascus to make public a position based on one of 
two options, the better of which was still bitter to him and his 
thesis, which does not differ very much from 'Arafat's and that 
of the PLO: to rely on the West, particularly the United States. 
  If the Syrian-track negotiations make progress and result in 
Syria's signing a peace accord with Israel, it will be up to 
al-Hakim, if he is in Damascus, to support the accord. He does 
not want to do that before his own plan comes to fruition, with 
him holding power instead of Saddam Husayn. But if the 
negotiations on the Syrian track stumble, or drag on too long 
for the United States, then channels of communiction between 
al-Hakim and the U.S. Administration will require him to declare 
a position on the Gaza-Jericho accord. If he condemns it, he 
will burn the bridges to Washington that al-Shalabi has built 
for him over the years; if he supports it, he will have gotten 
into his first predicament. 
  And so, these days al-Hakim is studying the options open to 
him while Tehran works on its relations with Baghdad, and 
earnestly studies the proposals of hard-liners, since Iraq's 
invasion of Kuwait, of the strategic alliance with the 
government of President Saddam Husayn. It is keeping all its 
options--and maneuvers--open. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59804 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rafsanjani Considers Saudis Key to His Success </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0024A Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 8 Oct 93 pp 
16-17--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94AE0024A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Raja Mansur Ali in Nicosia: "Rafsanjani: Saudi </F>
Arabia Is the Key to the Solution of All Our Problems] 
  [Text] The Supreme Council for National Security held a 
meeting presided over by Rafsanjani shortly before the trip of 
the foreign minister, 'Ali Akbar Velayati, to the Gulf States 
last May. During that meeting, the Iranian president attempted 
to circumvent the new Majles and its bloc leaders who had 
competed with him for power after they had deceived him by 
posing as his allies in his struggle with the extremists who 
were led by Mahdi Karubi, former speaker of the previous Majles. 
In the presence of all the members of Majles, with the exception 
of Nateq-Nuri, the speaker of Majles, Rafsanjani proposed that 
Velayati visit all member states of the Gulf Council in order to 
improve relations between them and Iran before pilgrimage time 
in view of the rumors and instigations, which that period brings 
with it. 
  As soon as Rafsanjani convinced the Council members of the 
validity of his viewpoint, it was agreed that the Council would 
present a detailed study to the mentor of the revolution, Ali 
Khamene'i, in order to win his support and to send Velayati on a 
mission, the purpose of which stretches beyond the diplomatic 
reasons given at the time, namely the improvement of relations 
between the Gulf states and Iran and concern for regional 
security. 
  The study, which was surrounded by great secrecy, referred 
quite plainly and clearly to the enormous difficulties facing 
the Islamic regime in Iran. The study warned that those 
difficulties might lead to an explosive situation in the capital 
itself similar to the one that took place in the cities of 
Meshed, Shiraz, and Arak last year when the disturbances and 
demonstrations were a warning of an imminent danger, which made 
the officials aware of the possibility of a confrontation 
between the people and the regime. 
  The study highlighted the economic aspect, which it viewed 
as 
the strongest factor in influencing the regime and altering its 
tendencies and policies, and probably leading to its demise 
"unless bold and courageous decisions are taken to restore to 
the people its faith in the Government and its Administration as 
well as in those in charge of the situation in Iran." 
  The study allocated a large section to the relations with 
the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in light of the important changes and 
developments in the region following the second Gulf war. The 
study quoted Rafsanjani as saying that there was no way for Iran 
to survive and enhance the trust between the people and the 
government, and to improve the economic conditions, except 
through the improvement of relations with Riyad and said "which 
is the key to the solution of all our economic, political, and 
even social problems." 
  But the wishes of Rafsanjani and even Khamene'i soon clashed 
with the fundamentalist factions and the Khomeyni issue. In his 
will, Khomeyni had indeed left strong words that could create 
problems for Rafsanjani, as well as to the mentor of the 
revolution, and lead to a fierce outbreak of the internal 
situation should they attempt to draw close to Saudi Arabia. 
This issue was raised by Ahmad Khomeyni during the meeting of 
the Supreme Council for National Security. The study answered 
the issue by stressing the need for a Rafsanjani initiative and 
for a statement expressing his desire to visit Riyad. As to the 
timing of the visit, the study indicated that it should take 
place during the Hajj in view of its effects and impact on the 
Iranian people and on the Hezbollah party, as well as on other 
revolutionary followers of Ayatollah al-Khomeyni. 
  In fact, Rafsanjani did launch his initiative by sending his 
Foreign Minister Velayati in the name of the policy of overture 
adopted by the president. 
  To counter that attempt, the speaker of Majles, Nateq-Nuri, 
launched an opposing initiative by holding a meeting he called 
with the leaders of the "New Revolutionary Students." During 
that meeting he answered the participants' questions regarding 
the forthcoming visit of Rafsanjani to Saudi Arabia, and he 
revealed that Rafsanjani's Gulf visit, as well as that of 
Velayati, were planned during the session of the Supreme Council 
for National Security and was supported by the mentor of the 
revolution. It was obvious that Nateq-Nuri wanted to distance 
himself from the responsibility and the implications of 
Rafsanjani's visit and its effects on the Iranian people. At the 
same time, he wanted to embarrass Rafsanjani, especially at a 
time when the latter was overwhelmed by the presidential 
elections and the frenetic search for as large a number of 
voters as he could get to face the Parliamentary blocs who 
wished to curtail his authority and test his ability. 
<H5>  The Alliance of the Fundamentalists </H5>
  Nuri felt that what he had done so far was not enough. Nor 
was he content with instigating the "revolutionary" students and 
inciting them to organize demonstrations against Rafsanjani, 
accusing him of deviating from the path of the Imam and his 
revolutionary approach. In fact, huge demonstrations were 
organized and a number of rallies proceeded to march but were 
not allowed by Rafsanjani to leave the university campus. But 
the organizers of the protest filled the streets and highways 
with posters carrying slogans hostile to Rafsanjani's policies. 
Both the Majles and Nateq-Nuri went even further. The speaker of 
Majles paid a spectacular visit to Qom, the stronghold of the 
clerics and the leaders of the Shi'ite governing institution. 
There, he held long meetings with Ayatollah Fazel Lankarani 
whose influence is taken into consideration, with apprehension, 
by both Khamene'i and Rafsanjani, in the configuration of the 
balance of power. What Nuri did also, was to open up to 
Ayatollah Lanakrani and the other religious leaders, telling 
them everything he wanted to say hoping to win their support in 
his confrontation with Rafsanjani. Not to be outdone, 
Rafsanjani, who was backed by Khamene'i, went to Qumm. However, 
his visit was a failure because he failed to win the support of 
the Ayatollah there. Moreover, Rafsanjani was harshly criticised 
because of the bad economy and its harmful and dangerous effects 
on the social conditions. Rafsanjani, as well as other 
observers, realized that the hands that were fomenting the 
internal instability in Iran, were not necessarily foreign. In 
fact, both Nateq-Nuri and Muhammadi Reyshahri, together with 
their supporters, could, by opposing the president, upset the 
internal configuration of power and harm the foreign relations 
of Iran, especially with the Arab Gulf states. It is relevant to 
note that all those who view Rafsanjani as their competitor and 
as a deviationist dictator, have formed an alliance against him, 
an alliance that spans from the far right to the far left on the 
Iranian map of political forces. This was obvious by the number 
of votes the president received during the presidential 
elections, and the parliamentary sessions for the vote of 
confidence on the Government, when Rafsanjani received a 
nonconfidence vote for his minister of economy and finance, Dr. 
Mohsen Nurbakhsh. So Rafsanjani found himself in a "bottleneck," 
and as he did not wish to be burned twice from the same spot, he 
threw all his cards in Khamene'i's basket and allied himself 
with him, having convinced him of a bitter reality, namely that 
all fundamentalists, both the former and the new, did not 
believe in Khamene'i's authority. The new fundamentalists, whose 
leader in Majles is the speaker of Majles, Nateq-Nuri, even 
though they recognize the competence of Khamene'i as a Faqih 
[Muslim scholar], they follow the religious teaching of 
Ayatollah Azari-Qomi, and the political decisions of Ayatollah 
Mahdavi-Kani. 
  As to the former fundamentalists who are today shunned and 
harassed, they are led by the former speaker of Majles, Mehdi 
Karrubi. They formed an alliance with the person they had once 
defeated and made him lose the position of al-Faqih and the 
succession of Khomeyni, namely Ayatollah 'Ali Montazeri, to whom 
they secretly paid allegiance. 
  Rafsanjani and Khamene'i have decided to improve relations 
with Saudi Arabia because they are convinced that it constituted 
the key to the solution of the problems of Iran, as mentioned in 
the study referred to above. As result, Khamene'i forced the 
speaker of Majles, Nateq-Nuri, to attend the meeting of the 
Supreme Council for National Security held at the time when the 
OPEC foreign ministers were meeting in Geneva to study the 
dangerous effects of the low prices of oil on the economy and 
hence the social situation and the internal stability of Iran. 
  The meeting of the Supreme Council for National Security, 
which met at Rafsanjani's request, concluded its meeting by 
reaffirming the recommendations of the previous study of the 
Council presented to Khamene'i, namely the need to improve 
relations with Riyad and the approval of Rafsanjani's trip to 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and his meeting with the custodian 
of the two holy mosques, King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz. And 
because the first Rafsanjani study won the approval of 
Khameni'i, the second study gave Rafsanjani the green light to 
contact King Fahd and fulfill his desire to meet with him while 
his innermost feeling saying: "Deliver us from the falling oil 
prices, God will have mercy upon you." 
  Some informed Iranian sources said that Rafsanjani, during 
his telephone conversation with the Saudi King, discussed the 
question of mutual cooperation on the question of oil and 
promised to find a solution to the problems between the two 
countries, foremost among those problems, were the problems of 
Hajj and 'Umra. This pilgrimage problem arose when Rafsanjani's 
enemies sent groups of non-Iranians to Saudi Arabia first for 
pilgrimage, and later to the other Arab Gulf States. While in 
Saudi Arabia, Velayati told King Fahd of Rafsanjani's desire to 
meet with him wherever he wishes, either in Tehran or Riyad. 
This request was interpreted by the observers as an expression 
of Rafsanjani's desire to visit the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The 
custodian of the two holy mosques responded by opening his house 
to the visitor and by expressing his hope that Rafsanjani would 
visit Riyad so as the two could meet in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia. 
  During Velayati's visit to Saudi Arabia, Rafsanjani made a 
declaration intended to enhance his initiative. He said that he 
would soon meet the Saudi king and he expressed his wish to 
improve Iranian-Arab relations. He went even further and said 
that he looked forward to the west and hoped to build strong 
relations with all states without exception. 
  However, Rafsanjani's initiative failed at that time because 
Nateq-Nuri and the new fundamentalists took over the Majles by 
winning more seats, all of which belonged to the leaders of the 
Muslim fundamentalist movements. 
<H5>  Rafsanjani's Victory </H5>
  The telephone conversation between Rafsanjani and the Saudi 
king, which took place under the aegis and support of the mentor 
of the revolution, Khamene'i, opened the way to Rafsanjani to 
tighten his control and enhance his position vis-a-vis 
Nateq-Nuri and the fundamentalists, so Nuri found himself bound 
to accept Khamene'i's decision because the speaker of Majles and 
all the followers of Mahdavi-Kani and Azari-Qomi wished to 
appear as paying allegiance to the authority of the Faqih as 
represented by Khamene'i. 
  On Thursday (30 September) Nateq-Nuri gave a well-prepared 
interview to TEHRAN TIMES, the mouthpiece of the new 
fundamentalists. In that interview, he said that the telephone 
conversation between Rafsanjani and King Fahd took place with 
the consent of Khamene'i and at the request of the Supreme 
Council for National Security. This reveals the extent of the 
importance that Rafsanjani's administration attach to Saudi 
Arabia for the solution of the economic problems of Iran. 
  In an ostentatious show of allegiance to Khamene'i, 
Nateq-Nuri felt compelled to assert that both Iran and Saudi 
Arabia play a major and important role in stabilizing and 
raising the prices of oil within the framework of OPEC. Nuri 
went as far as to quote from Rafsanjani's previous study, which 
Nuri had then opposed, namely "that if Iran wishes to solve its 
problems within OPEC, it has to cooperate with Saudi Arabia." 
  However, Nateq-Nuri did not wish to accept his fate and that 
of his group, so he deliberately mentioned the forthcoming visit 
of Rafsanjani to Saudi Arabia even though Rafsanjani did not 
mention it following his conversation with King Fahd. Nateq-Nuri 
added that the telephone conversation between Rafsanjani and 
Fahd, as well as "the visits among officials" would help Iran 
reach its goal within OPEC. 
  Rafsanjani had not revealed his forthcoming visit to Saudi 
Arabia, which he hoped to undertake without prior announcement. 
But the fact that Nateq-Nuri mentioned it, proved that Nuri and 
his group were still intent on putting sticks into Rafsanjani's 
wheels so as to arouse the fundamentalists against him. 
  It is apparent that there are wise men and moderates who 
work 
to transfer Iran from the revolutionary positions and the 
proliferation of the centers of power to an area of the state 
where a unified decisionmaking system could be established. That 
is why Rafsanjani decided, before announcing his latest 
initiative, to restrict the freedom of certain extremist 
newspapers, which can stir public opinion in Iran against him. 
Subsequently, he arrested Abbas 'Abdi, the editor of the paper 
SALAM, mouthpiece of the former fundamentalists who had lost 
their positions in Majles and had boycotted the government but 
who, nevertheless had kept some power and influence in Majles. 
Rafsanjani hinted to his supporters in the Judiciary to exert 
pressure in various ways on the press. This led all the 
newspapers, especially SALAM, to appear "rational" and to tone 
down their outspokenness, and, for the first time since the 
inception of the Islamic Revolution, to curb down their 
criticism of the Iranian-Saudi rapprochement. Moreover, several 
newspapers welcomed Rafsanjani's initiative and published the 
views of various economic analysts and experts saying that the 
agreement reached in Geneva was a historic victory to Tehran, 
which could not have been reached without that telephone 
conversation and without the coordination displayed during 
OPEC's meeting between the two major parties, namely, Iran and 
Saudi Arabia. Those analysts who were frightened by Rafsanjani's 
stick, expressed optimism that the latest OPEC agreement could 
lead to an increase in the prices of oil, which have been 
steadily falling. Few of them went even further and called for a 
summit conference for OPEC in order to enhance the standing of 
the organization "despite the existing political differences," 
among the member states. 
  It is obvious that the Iranian economy, especially in the 
current phase that requires construction and economic reforms, 
relies on the income from oil; so the drop in oil prices 
constitutes an unfortunate beginning for the launching of the 
programs of the Second Five-Year Plan. This in turn is a serious 
indicator that would increase inflation, aggravate an already 
bad economic situations, and cause the disruption of the 
internal social fabric, and eventually, lead to disturbances, 
especially in Tehran, where it could threaten the regime and its 
projects. All the above-mentioned issues were discussed by the 
Supreme Council for National Security before it asked Rafsanjani 
to contact King Fahd. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59805 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Islamic Groups: Similarities, Relationships Noted </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0034A Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 11-17 Nov 93 
pp 30-33--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0034A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Marc Yared: "The French Target"--first paragraph </F>
is JEUNE AFRIQUE introduction] 
  [Excerpts] Algeria. The kidnapping of three Foreign Affairs 
officials was a carefully planned political and military 
operation. A turning point in the Islamic armed struggle. Paris 
is on the front line. [passage omitted] 
  In fact, there is every indication that the kidnapping of 
the 
three French officials was a large-scale, carefully planned 
political and military operation. The banning of the Islamic 
Salvation Front [FIS] eighteen months ago, and the ruthless 
repression of its militants disoriented the "bearded brothers." 
Although dissensions are far from being overcome, the era of 
armed-struggle "professionals" and political strategists is 
approaching. 
  The kidnappers, who claim to belong to the GIA [Armed 
Islamic 
Group], operated in closely watched areas dotted with military 
roadblocks, areas that had been under tight police control for 
months. They kept their victims in the Oued Koreiche district of 
Algiers, close by the Ministry of Defense and not far from the 
government palace. For four days, from 26 to 29 October, the 
masterminds of the operation led secret negotiations with French 
emissaries, including one Foreign Affairs diplomat. Then, in a 
communique sent to Western press agencies, they announced the 
impending release of the hostages. 
<H5>  Scapegoat </H5>
  The Islamist operation was spectacular, all the more so 
because it crowned a series of attacks against foreigners, 
carried out within one month, in every corner of Algeria, by the 
GIA or the related GUD (Jihad United Group). 
  What is the reason for this general anti-European, and above 
all anti-French offensive? Paris is not just the traditional 
scapegoat of Algerians of all persuasions, or the natural target 
of the "bearded brothers" who claim to be the heirs of the 
anti-French mujahidins of the fifties. The xenophobic outburst 
is not just an easy answer to the extreme violence used by 
Algerian authorities: widespread use of torture, summary 
executions, over 100 death sentences. As in Egypt, the hunt for 
foreigners is also the result of an Islamist strategy of 
economic war, which attempts to deprive the Algerian State of 
most of its revenues. Islamists know that foreigners who work in 
Algeria play a key part in the economy. 
  But French-Islamist disagreements are also political. Even 
the most moderate Islamists, such as the former chairman of the 
FIS foreign relations commission, Rabah Kebir, blame French 
officials for their "aggressiveness and provocative talk," which 
contrast with their formerly more balanced behavior. 
  This political protest of the "bearded brothers" does not 
explain everything. The kidnappings and negotiations of October 
1993 were overseen by the two most extremist trends in the 
Islamist nebula. These trends have special reasons for attacking 
Frenchmen and foreigners. To begin with, the GIA was born of the 
al-Takfir Oua El-Hidjra (Repudiation and Renunciation) 
organization created in 1971 on the banks of the Nile by 
engineer Choukri Mustapha. Before his execution, the latter had 
already specialized in the kidnapping and assassination of 
personalities such as the former Egyptian minister of religious 
affairs, Shaykh Dahab. Back in 1974, the very clandestine 
al-Takfir Algerian branch already disseminated tracts denouncing 
"the impiety of society" and advocating the use of armed force 
to institute an Islamic State. Ten years later, the movement was 
one of the first in the Arab world to systematically send its 
militants to Afghanistan, to be trained in armed struggle. After 
that, al-Takfir took part in the October 1988 and summer 1991 
riots before joining the FIS. 
  Until January 1992, al-Takfir supporters controlled the 
En-Nour mosque in Algiers and recruited adherents in two 
working-class suburbs east of Algiers, Beni Merad and Ben Zerga. 
Then, under the name of GIA, al-Takfir organized underground 
groups in Batna, Sidi Bel-Abbes, and Qoleiya. According to the 
authorities, it is responsible for most of the assassinations 
and holdups perpetrated in Algiers and Blida. Before being 
killed in an ambush, Omar el-Eulmi, founder of the Islamic Labor 
Union, who had become the GIA's "spiritual leader," issued a 
fatwa (religious opinion) authorizing the assassination of 
intellectuals, journalists, police officers, and State 
employees, including women and older people. It was this fatwa 
that cost the lives, among others, of writer Tahar Djaout and 
psychiatrist Mahfoud Boucebsi. In addition, the GIA's 
second-in-command, Abdelkader Hattab, wrote a brochure whose 
title says it all: "Slaughter and Murder, Until Power Belongs to 
God." 
  Based on this reasoning, foreigners were doomed to become 
targets in their turn, sooner or later. For instance, the 
seven-member GIA commando armed with Kalashnikov machine guns, 
who attacked the home of the German Junger family on the night 
of 13-14 October, had for mission to warn all Western 
communities to leave Algeria within eight days, under penalty of 
death. 
<H5>  An Outstanding Strategist </H5>
  There is a striking similarity between certain methods of 
al-Takfir-GIA and those used in Lebanon by the Khomeynist 
Islamic Hezbollah-Jihad during the eighties. Both handle 
hostages as bargaining counters. Both kidnap and/or assassinate 
foreigners not just to punish and deter Western States believed 
to be hostile to the Islamist cause, but also to discredit the 
local government, to assert that they cannot be ignored, and to 
negotiate the release of imprisoned militants. Also to extract 
material benefits. 
  Affinities between the Lebanese Hezbollah and the Algerian 
al-Takfir do not stop there. The militants of both organizations 
have close links with Iran, which is said to finance them 
generously and to train some of their commandos in southern 
Lebanon. Was it out of consideration for Tehran that the GIA 
Islamists did not manhandle the Junger family--one week after 
the Iranian minister of intelligence, Ali Fallahian's official 
visit to Germany? On the other hand, do you know that several 
Iranians, including one relative of President 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani, are still held in French prisons because 
they were involved in the assassination of antikhomeinist 
personalities, in Paris and in Switzerland? 
  Other Algerian Islamist leaders asserted themselves on the 
occasion of the kidnapping. They included, in particular, Said 
Mekhloufi who, in April 1992, was appointed "military affairs 
coordinator" by several separate armed groups. A former 
lieutenant and chief editor of the FIS daily EL-MOUNQUID, who 
organized the departure of Algerian volunteers to Iraq in 1990, 
Mekhloufi is an outstanding military strategist. 
<H5>  God's Sword </H5>
  His supporters, al-Baqun 'ala al-'Ahd (Those Faithful to the 
Oath), often disguise themselves as police commandos, wearing 
bullet-proof vests and masks to hide their faces. 
  Said Mekhloufi is the only war lord to maintain cordial 
relations with all Islamist leaders: former FIS president Abassi 
Madani and his children Salmane, Ikbal, and Okba; "General" 
Abdelkader Chebouti and Imam Ali Benhadj; the "moderate" tandem 
consisting of Rabah Kebir and Mohamed Said, who control Islamist 
information; and finally the GIA "emir," Mourad Si Ahmed, also 
known as Djaafar Seifallah (God's Sword). 
  Whereas Mekhloufi is in a good position to direct the course 
of the armed struggle in the field, his alter ego, Kamreddine 
Kherbane, another former officer, deploys the external network 
of the movement. 
<H5>  Pack Up and Leave, or Die </H5>
  Helped by his brother in arms from the Afghanistan 
guerrilla, 
Hadj Boudjemaa Bounoua, by the venerable Shaykh Abdel Baki 
Sahraoui, and by Djaafar el-Houari, president of the Algerian 
Brotherhood in France [FAF], Kherbane already succeeded in 
supplanting the FIS "moderates" in France. He got in touch again 
with the French authorities, who had expelled him in August 
1992, and he actively contributed to the release of the French 
hostages. Without a doubt, the Mekhloufi-Kherbane tandem, which 
has connections with a powerful international Islamist network, 
will carry much weight in determining the future of Algeria and 
its relations with France. 
  How far can the power struggle between GIA extremists and 
Paris go? A process of deterioration, similar to what happened 
in Lebanon, cannot be ruled out. The message that the GIA left 
next to Michele Thevenot was clear: "Pack up and leave, or die. 
Foreigners have one month to get out." Eventually, unless 
Algiers and the "bearded brothers" miraculously reach an 
agreement and unless the imprisoned Islamist leaders are 
released, the departure of the 10,000 or so French expatriates 
appears unavoidable. Just like in Beirut not so long ago. They 
could be followed by tens of thousands of Algerians belonging to 
the intelligentsia, who feel threatened. The wealthiest have 
already bought apartments or restaurants on the banks of the 
Seine or on the shores of Lake Geneva. Worse still: like the 
Lebanese war in the past, the Algerian armed conflict may move 
to the other side of the Mediterranean. Djaafar el-Houari 
himself acknowledged that much in an interview published in LE 
FIGARO of 29 October: "Uncontrolled elements show increasing 
exasperation. They may want to strike at targets in France." 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59806 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001__l94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   PLO Sources on Solving Settler Question </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P50064A Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 10 Dec 92 
p 7--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94P50064A </F>
<F P=104>  Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Steve Rodan: "The Settler Question"] </F>
  [Text] Israel and the PLO might be fighting tooth-and-nail 
over the details of the interim agreement for Palestinian 
self-rule. But both sides quietly agree that the fate of the 
130,000 settlers is the chief issue in the talks on the 
permanent status of the territories. 
  Publicly, the PLO says all the settlements have to go. In 
November, the PLO organ, FILASTIN AL-THAWRAH, outlined the 
organization's view that whatever came with the Israelis must 
leave with them. It is a position that embraces the Jewish 
neighborhoods built after the Six-Day War. 
  Jamil Zakut, a Gaza deportee and member of the Palestinian 
delegation to the talks on implementing the interim accord, 
agrees. "These settlements were the product of military 
occupation," he says. "There is no way we can accept a military 
entity inside a Palestinian state." 
  Privately, Israeli and PLO officials say there can be a 
compromise. A senior minister says he has been given assurances 
that Jewish settlers in Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza can remain as 
Palestinian citizens. He says virtually nobody in the 
government wants to physically remove the settlers. 
  But senior PLO sources make it clear that even if the 
settlers are allowed to stay, life will not be easy for them. 
First, they say, 'Arafat will not agree to such a large number 
of Jews living in areas they consider strategic, such as the 
Jordan Valley, and the ridge from Ramallah to the north to 
Hebron in the south. 
  "We cannot digest such a large number of foreigners," one 
PLO 
source says. 
  Some PLO officials already have a solution. After they 
insist on a reduction in the number of Jewish residents in the 
territories, the Palestinians will insist on "changing the 
demography of the settlements themselves," as one official put 
it. 
  What does that mean? Take Efrat, the PLO official says, 
with more than 600 families. The PLO might allow Efrat to 
remain, but would take control over all its land and construct 
housing for Arabs. Apartments sold or abandoned by Jews would 
be filled with Palestinians. The Jews would no longer be a 
majority in their own community. 
  "No matter which way you look at it," the PLO official says, 
"we're not going to let them be Israeli citizens in a 
Palestinian state." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59807 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Strength of Islamic Movement Growing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P50061A Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 8 Dec 93 p 
7--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94P50061A </F>
<F P=104>  Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Elie Rekhes: "Moslem Movement Gains Strength </F>
Here"] 
  [Text] Local media analysts have contended that Islamic 
forces were "curbed" or "blocked" in last month's municipal 
elections. This use of terminiology suggests the fears and 
concerns engendered by the Islamic Movement (IM) in Israel. But 
the actual results in the Arab sector show that the IM actually 
got stronger. 
  Its representatives climbed from 51 to 59, and the number of 
communities in which the movement has won representation rose 
from 14 to 16, including three mixed cities--Ramle, Lod, and 
'Akko. 
  In Rahat, the Beduin township in the Negev, the IM lost the 
council leadership; but in Kafr Kari, it won the top council 
spot. In Kafr Kana, the Islamic representative will rotate as 
head of the council for half a term. 
  Generally, the public put its trust in IM representatives in 
those communities where the movement had already proven itself 
as an efficient and active municipal force. One of the 
movement's biggest achievements was getting residents involved 
in community functions by instilling the virture of 
"self-reliance." It replaced the old approach of dependency to 
an activistic approach that emphasized community members. 
  In those communities where it has operated since 1989, the 
movement showed itself to be a well-organized and well-oiled 
mechanism. Its representatives operated in a pragmatic fashion, 
cooperating with various government agencies. So, after four 
years, the movement could boast the establishment of 
kindergardens, improved health service, more paved roads, new 
libraries, removal of alcohol, setting up drug clinics, 
lessening crime, and developing an independent basketball league 
and other sports activities. 
  Nor did the IM operate only in the narrow municipal sense. 
It also demonstrated wide-ranging activities on a national 
scale, especially in the Committee of Arab Council Leaders. 
Shaykh Ra'id al-Salah, the mayor of Umm-al-Fahm, did not miss a 
meeting and initiated projects which he took the trouble to 
execute. 
  At the same time, the IM undertook religious activities. Its 
municipal activities were carried out under "the Green Flag" 
(the color of Muhammad's banner) and the slogan: "Islam is the 
solution." The organization worked to deepen the religious cast 
of the Arab community by spreading the wearing of Islamic 
traditional clothing and the availability of religious 
literature. 
  And the number of mosques in Israel grew dramatically from 
80 
in 1988 to 240 in 1993. 
  Special effort was exerted in spreading the cultural-social 
message of the IM via educational institutions ranging from 
kindergardens to a college for religious law. Simultaneously, 
the IM led the battle to have properties of the Waqf (Islamic 
Religious Council) returned to Muslim control, succeeding where 
its opponents had failed over the years. It reawakened the 
religious conscience of the Muslims in Israel, tying the subject 
of the Waqf to the Muslim identity of Palestine. 
  Since 1989, the IM projected support for the intifadah and 
its publications widely featured the activities of Hamas 
[Islamic Resistance Movement], the Islamic force in the 
territories. The IM also sent food and clothing to Hamas and 
adopted 2,500 orphans from the territories. 
  It led demonstrations protesting the expulsion last December 
of 415 Hamas activists, and demanded their return. 
  In recent weeks, backers of Hamas have appeared prominently 
in the IM's weekly SAWT AL-HAQQ WAL-HURRIYAH (The Voice of Truth 
and Freedom), often appearing to be Hamas' mouthpiece. It has 
featured Khalid 'Amayun of Hebron, Fu'ad Shahin of Jenin, and 
Isma'il al-Jamal of Jericho. At the same time, the IM has 
strengthened its ties to Islamic forces in Egypt and elsewhere 
in the world. 
  The 1993 municipal elections symbolize the coming of age, 
the 
political institutionalization, of the IM. It moved away from 
its earler image of an elite cadre that used only the purest of 
methods. Now it took off its gloves and got into the political 
arena with other political forces, forging political deals when 
needed. 
  Also in the social sphere, the IM abandoned as illusory its 
original idea that it could form a new social context beyond the 
family and the clan group. Instead, it tried to work out some 
form of cooperation with these institutions, forming alliances 
with certain family clans in some localities. This was 
particularly true in Kafr Qasim where the clans were 
incorporated under the Islamic Alliance (al-Hilf al-Islami). 
  It is important that the IM's leaders view their effors as 
successful and that they have long-term goals and much patience: 
al-Haqq, or divine justice and absolute truth, will win even if 
it takes years. And it is fair to say that the IM's future 
success will depend on several factors: 

  -  The IM will have to safeguard its own internal unity even 
as regional developments of other Islamic movements (in the 
territories, Egypt, North Africa, and Jordan) will have the 
impact on the IM in Israel. 
  -  The Arab community's ability to emerge from its 
post-Communist 
sense of crisis will be important. 
  -  The IM will continue to be measured by its record in the 
municipal sphere where other political forces have failed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59808 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Netanyahu Moving Toward Center, Likud Rivals </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0032B Tel Aviv MA'ARIV (Weekend Supplement) in Hebrew 
19 Nov 93 pp 10-11--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0032B </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv MA'ARIV (Weekend Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shalom Yerushalmi] </F>
  [Text] It does not require much imagination to picture the 
emergency session of Bibi Netanyahu's strategy team on 27 
November, immediately after Rafa'el Eytan announced that he 
plans to run for prime minister in the next (direct) elections. 
"Raful is in view, passing you on the left," one of those 
present, perhaps Ayal Arad, or Dany Eyran or Eyvat Liebermann, 
told the Likud chairman. "He's talking about negotiations with 
the PLO, Iran, and even Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement]. 
He's also threatening you from the right by taking an 
uncompromising position on the Golan Heights. What do we do?" 
  Netanyahu placed two fingers on his forehead, as he likes to 
do in a tough spot, thought for another minute and came up with 
a tactical decision. He would adopt a statesmanlike posture, 
refraining from an attack on Raful and declaring that everyone 
has the right to run, for why else had he himself fought all 
those years, even against Shamir and the Likud, for direct 
elections? At the same time, however, Netanyahu sent his 
loyalist, Knesset member [MK] Tzahi Hanegbi, to the media to 
explain that Raful is exploiting the national camp and why this 
is liable to cause Netanyahu's defeat. 
  Since then, one poll after another has been taken, and Raful 
is gaining on Netanyahu (and on Rabin) to a worrisome degree. 
Netanyahu, those close to him say, has long understood that no 
one running for prime minister in the next elections, which will 
undoubtedly be held early, will be able to win 50 percent of the 
vote and prevail in the first round. Raful wants to force a 
second round. In the expected face-off between Rabin and 
Netanyahu, the winner will be the one who controls the middle 
point. What are they doing now? They are creating an image of 
pseudo-moderation. They are speaking, for example, about 
cosmetic changes on the Golan Heights, and fleeing towards the 
center, the key to success. 
  So it was that Netanyahu found himself on Tuesday, relaxed 
and smiling, in the Labor faction's meeting hall on the fifth 
floor of the Knesset, sitting between Avigdor Qahalani, chairman 
of the lobby for the Golan, and Eli Dayan, the coalition whip, 
working together with other members of the Knesset on how to 
strengthen the Golan law in the Knesset and constrain Rabin, who 
has drifted to the left. Netanyahu, by the way, made clear at 
the meeting that he was not understood correctly, and that his 
remarks about some centimeters were meant only to annoy the 
prime minister, but that the public had already solidified its 
impression of him as a pragmatic person, and that is what was 
important. 
  Netanyahu also argued that he had not intended his comments 
for any purpose and that he was not speaking from firm opinions. 
Here too, one may believe him and those close to him, who 
contend that if he had really wanted to send up a trial balloon, 
he could have staked out moderate positions on issues that are 
much more popular, such as the Gaza Strip. Netanyahu is no fool, 
and he would not deliberately walk into the traps happily laid 
for him by his rivals in the Likud's top ranks. MK Moshe Qatzav, 
chairman of the Likud faction, headed off a discussion in the 
faction leadership this week on "Netanyahu's remarks" after he 
heard the explanations, but he asserted in private conversations 
that "the government is deep in negotiations with Syria and the 
Likud doesn't need to speed it up to lower the price. You can't 
talk about centimeters and not about meters." 
  It is reasonable to suppose that Ari'el Sharon (of whom more 
later) also has jumped at the opportunity and is now meeting 
with his inner circle and planning how he will get to Netanyahu, 
without mentioning his name, of course, during the Likud 
assembly on Sunday. Perhaps he will pull out the speech he made 
to the Likud central committee, which met on 17 May at the Yad 
Eliyahu arena, with only minor changes. One recalls that at that 
time, Sharon summoned his most sneering tone to tell those 
eyeing the center: "The Alignment wants to hand over the Gaza 
Strip. Even among ourselves, we have heard voices on this 
subject. Fine, that's popular, it may indicate a readiness to 
compromise. That puts us in the middle." 
  Netanyahu wants to place the Likud in the center and himself 
in the center of the Likud. This is a tricky maneuver, bound to 
run into obstacles, that Netanyahu adopted with all deliberation 
only after the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian agreement in 
September. His zigzag course since then has made still other 
tactical changes of direction. Netanyahu at first totally 
ignored public support for the agreement and was swept along 
behind Gandhi [Rehavam Ze'evi], Sharon, Benny Qatzover, Uri 
Ari'el and many other settlers who led the unruly right-wing 
demonstrations outside the prime minister's residence. He failed 
to offer any alternative. Even his speech to the Knesset on the 
day of the signing was not particularly impressive. Today, there 
is nothing to remember of Netanyahu except some superfluous 
thoughts he shared with his listeners about the bitter fates 
that befell Viet Nam and Korea. Netanyahu also failed to impose 
party discipline on his comrades as his image continued to 
deteriorate. 
  He and his staff realized in October that the nation was 
waiting to hear a reasoned alternative. Netanyahu planned to 
unveil his alternative in the Likud central committee, which 
convened at the Cultural Center last month, but the Citadel 
leaked out the details one by one before that to keep the 
momentum up. The plan, in the end, contained nothing new and 
restated his narrow political philosophy: large security zones 
and Jewish settlements on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip, 
which would not be subject to autonomy. The zones and the 
settlements, according to the plan, would form a territorial 
continuum between the coastal plain and the Jordan Valley. 
Earlier proposals raised by Netanyahu's staff for changing 
planks in the Likud platform and approving negotiations with the 
PLO were rejected eventually by the movement's chairman. 
  Netanyahu himself has admitted that he has been speaking for 
years about the plan that he presented to the central committee. 
It represents not distilled pragmatism but only a concrete 
formulation of the security aspect of autonomy. One way or 
another, this recycling of ideas shook off his back his critics 
from both within and without and proved, somehow, that he was 
ready to deal with the new reality. He even called on Rabin this 
week to hold elections on the basis of one plan against another. 
  Fortunately for Netanyahu, he has managed to leap into a 
comfortable position in the Likud's center, between the 
moderates and the extremists, even if some are certain that his 
plan wipes the Camp David accords off the map. In an interview 
in HA'ARETZ on the eve of the primaries, Benny Begin declared 
that Netanyahu's policy was contrary to common sense and the 
national interest. Nothing less. "Netanyahu, in fact, is seeking 
to annul the Camp David accords," said Begin. "He has adopted 
Ari'el Sharon's slogan, `Islands of autonomy in a sea of 
security.' What that means is taking unilateral steps and 
completely ignoring the need to reach an agreement" (2/18/93). 
  David Levy, Moshe Qatzav, 'Uzi Landau and Dan Meridor have 
also stated since the signing of the agreement with the PLO that 
it is necessary to adhere to the Camp David formula. Sharon, as 
noted, has stated that we must quickly forget the autonomy plan. 
That is how Netanyahu found himself positioned between the 
unbending Camp David camp and the movement's "left," which is 
represented by MK Me'ir Shitrit, who supports the agreement. In 
contrast to all the others, Netanyahu is portrayed as a 
politician who does not move too quickly but who also does not 
stay stuck in place. 
  Netanyahu's smoke-screen tactics have worked well on the 
issue of Gaza, too. Whether intentionally or not, Netanyahu has 
avoiding teaming up with Begin, Sharon, and Landau, who suddenly 
are all in the same boat on this subject and consider Gaza an 
inseparable part of the state (Begin calls the strip an 
"integral part"). On the other hand, Netanyahu has not kept 
aloof from the plan offered by Roni Milo to the Likud central 
committee in May calling for disengagement from Gaza. According 
to a number of sources, the Likud chairman even encouraged Milo 
to present his proposal. Netanyahu was heard in the past making 
perfectly moderate suggestions about Gaza. Now he wants to apply 
his security zone plan to Gaza as well, although he is ready to 
be generous with the Palestinian population during the 
negotiations over a permanent arrangement. 
  Inevitably, his office sometimes forces on Netanyahu 
middle-of-the-road positions, even if he secretly is against 
them. For that reason, Netanyahu, along with David Levy, Begin, 
Qatzav, Meridor, and others, promises to observe the agreements 
with the PLO even after the Likud returns to power. He knows 
that the Israeli public is still prepared to give the process a 
chance and that international public opinion will not tolerate 
abrogation of the agreements. Any talk of annulling the peace 
with the PLO, therefore, must be confined to the mouths of 
Ari'el Sharon, faction whip 'Uzi Landau, and Tzahi Hanegbi. 
Sharon is Sharon. Landau, an eccentric in a suit, forces his 
colleagues to begin every meeting with a rendition of the Betar 
[youth movement] anthem. Hanegbi announced this week that when 
the Likud returns to office, he will expel every PLO official 
and have 'Arafat executed. Hanegbi also gave assurances that the 
public would support a platform adopting these warmhearted ideas 
on the eve of the elections. 
  On a number of occasions, Netanyahu has stated that he would 
hold talks with whomever wins the elections scheduled to be held 
in the territories in another six months. If 'Arafat is elected, 
he will sit down with him. Netanyahu also said that he is in 
constant contact with Palestinians but, of course, he shares the 
opinion of most Likud central committee members, who showered 
jeers on MK Ya'aqov Shamai for his suggestion to open a channel 
of communication with the PLO to gauge its intentions. And when 
someone commits the grave infraction of crossing the Likud's 
ideological boundaries, Netanyahu does not put up with it. After 
Eli Levy, a member of the central committee, spoke about 
returning territories on the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan 
Heights, and sought to fly to Tunis for meetings with Yasir 
'Arafat, Netanyahu threatened to expel him from the movement. 
Not because of his opinions, explained the Likud chairman, but 
because Levy had not raised them in the proper forum. 
  And then there is Shamai. After a central committee meeting 
at which he made his proposal concerning a channel to the PLO, 
he had a conversation with Yitzhaq Shamir, the former prime 
minister. The two had a rather strange dialogue. 
  [Shamir] What's this proposal? Why do you need all this? 
  [Shamai] We need to talk with them. Even you, as prime 
minister, would have kept the agreement. 
  Shamir: Get out. No way. This agreement would have blown up 
a 
lot earlier. 
  Now that he has found his place in the Likud, over the past 
two weeks Netanyahu has renewed his attack for the middle of the 
political map in an attempt to displace the Labor Party. He had 
three excellent opportunities. It began, as noted, with the 
Golan Law, in which he was nearly burned by the right but scored 
points from the other side. Ra'anan Cohen said at a Labor 
faction meeting that his party has turned left and that the 
Likud has seized the center. MK Eli Goldschmidt called on Yosi 
Beilin to resign because he had stated that the Jordan River is 
not the security border. 
  Netanyahu also made a visit this week to the Jordan Valley, 
another place over which a consensus exists in the Labor Party, 
heard complaints from the residents and promised to work so that 
the settlements of the Jordan Valley do not fall under autonomy 
as a matter of law. Finally, there also came the announcement of 
support for a peace agreement with Jordan. Netanyahu, who, just 
like Sharon, has in recent years promoted the idea that the 
Palestinian state already exists in Jordan, was not bothered by 
the intrinsic contradiction. Jordan is Palestine, he explained, 
but that doesn't mean that the PLO has to take over there. 
  Rumors were heard around the Knesset this week that 
Netanyahu 
is preparing the ground for bringing the Likud into a national 
unity government in which he wants to serve as minister of 
defense. Netanyahu has vehemently denied that, claiming that he 
would go along with it only if the government changed its 
platform. Meanwhile, he is getting ready for the next elections. 
The municipal elections, mostly in the Jerusalem region, taught 
him that in a system of direct elections, the party is only a 
means, and not very important. Ehud Olmert heads the 
third-largest faction on the city council, only one of its 
members belongs to the Likud, and yet Olmert is mayor because he 
won public support. "You have to please the general public, 
satisfy everyone in some way," said Ruby Rivlin, one of David 
Levy's close supporters, this week. "Netanyahu now has to play 
to all the galleries. He just has to avoid losing all of them, 
and mostly, losing his way." 
  Bibi Netanyahu is walking a tightrope. That is precisely why 
he wishes the next elections were held tomorrow. He knows very 
well that many candidates can promise him the second round 
against Rabin, but that the war among the right-wing bloc 
contestants in the first round will utterly destroy him, 
particularly if Levy and Sharon are in the picture. In personal 
elections, he knows, there is no mercy. In this respect, one 
might consider the cases of Teddy Kollek and Ehud Olmert, and of 
Roni Milo and Avigdor Qahalani. And never forget that it was 
Netanyahu who got us into this whole mess. 
  To get down to simple truths, in the next elections 
Netanyahu 
is liable to bump into not just Raful but also many of those who 
are plotting his death in the Likud. By law, the prime minister 
will be elected for a period of two terms and his cabinet 
composed of no more than 18 ministers, half of them from outside 
the Knesset. Moshe Qatzav, Benny Begin, Ehud Olmert, and Dan 
Meridor can wait, and perhaps some of them will become members 
of Netanyahu's government, if there is one. All of them are 
desperate to replace him before the end of the next elections. 
Levy and Sharon know that the new system is taking them down a 
path of no return. Netanyahu did not find a senior post for 
Sharon in the Likud after the primaries; what about in a 
government? Netanyahu does not speak to Levy. At the faction 
meeting last April after the municipal elections, Levy 
congratulated faction chairman 'Uzi Landau but ignored the party 
chairman sitting next to him. 
  Levy, and even more so Sharon, are mercilessly grinding 
Netanyahu down and may already have begun their national 
campaign against him. Levy has said that he considered leaving 
the Likud after the elections for the local authorities, but 
there was some success in the meantime and he stayed in the 
Likud, waiting for Netanyahu to stumble again (the "amateur," he 
calls Netanyahu), particularly in social matters. 
  Sharon is flaying Netanyahu on practically every issue. He 
describes Netanyahu as "wringing his hands on television under 
the tutelage of slick personal image experts," claims that he 
has a secret fund, and says that he is financially supporting 
only his municipal candidates. In a letter to MA'ARIV published 
early in July, Sharon contended that Netanyahu has a history of 
clandestine recording. 
  This Sharon is so petty. During the primaries, he performed 
an examination and found that Netanyahu, in his mind, has 
accepted the Rabinite formula proscribing coming down from the 
Golan but not withdrawing from the Golan. This nuance has 
occupied Sharon's internal propaganda ever since. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59809 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001__l94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Plan To `Throw Zionists Into Sea' Said To Remain </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P50065A Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 12 Dec 93 
p 6--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94P50065A </F>
<F P=104>  Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Michael Freund: "Presence of Malice"] </F>
  [Text] "Do everything possible to inflict human losses on 
the enemy side. To make the sons of pigs taste the bitterness 
of losing a dear one, to make them swim in their own blood." 
  Such were the words of a spokesman for the Fatah Hawks, an 
armed gang in Gaza belonging to Yasir 'Arafat's Fatah faction of 
the PLO, as reported in the LOS ANGELES TIMES on November 30. 
The reference, of course, was to the Jews. 
  With the 13 Septembe signing of the Israel-PLO agreement, 
one would have expected the Palestinians to at least moderate 
the tone of their utterances. A look at the organization's 
rhetoric since the handshake on the White House lawn, however, 
reveals that it continues to wage a war of words against Israel. 
  The commander of PLO forces in Lebanon, Lieutenant Colonel. 
Munir Miqdah, told a Reuters correspondent on 8 October, just 
three weeks after the White House ceremony, "We will not lay 
down our weapons until complete liberation...sooner or later we 
will throw the Zionists into the sea." 
  The Voice of Palestine, broadcasting from Algiers on October 
24, six weeks after the handshake, reported: "Yasir 'Arafat 
stressed the continuation of the struggle until the Palestinian 
flag is hoisted over Jerusalem's walls." 
  Perhaps the most surprising aspect of these statements is 
that PLO spokesmen make no effort to hide their intentions 
regarding the future. They continue to speak openly of 
implementing the "phased plan" adopted by the Palestine National 
Council in 1975 and calls for the elimination of Israel in 
stages. 
  Indeed, Yasir 'Arafat himself, on 1 September, referred to 
the phased plan on Radio Monte Carlo when he said that the 
agreement with Israel, "will be a basis for an independent 
Palestinian state in accordance with the Palestine National 
Council resolution issued in 1974." He subsequently referred to 
the phased plan on several other occasions as well. 
  Faysal al-Husayni, the senior PLO figure in Israel, has also 
emphasized the phased plan repeatedly. Al-Husayni told the 
BEIRUT TIMES on 16 September that, "Gradually, stage by stage, 
we will reach an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as 
the capital." 
  The frequency and forcefulness of these statements lead one 
to conclude that the Palestinians have not put aside their 
dreams of destroying Israel. In fact, they clearly indicate that 
the agreement with Israel represents a change in the PLO's 
tactics, but not its goals. 
  Al-Husayni himself admitted this in a speech to Bi'r Zayt 
University on November 22, when he said, "Everything you see and 
hear today is for tactical and strategic reasons. We have not 
given up the rifle" (reported in MA'ARIV, 24 November). 
  Moreover, the PLO continues to resort to blatant 
antisemitism 
in its pronouncements. A leaflet distributed in Gaza by the 
Fatah Hawks in November asserted, "We will continue our 
rebellion against the governmnet of the dogs. We will escalate 
our military attacks everywhere against the Zionists" (AP, 29 
November). 
  In the lexicon of the PLO, Jews are "dogs and "sons of 
pigs." 
These can hardly be described as words of peace. 
  PLO spokesmen insist that the intifadah will continue. A 
statement issued just two weeks ago by 'Arafat's Fatah faction 
in Sidon said, "The revolution of stones is the only real face 
of our struggle to put an end to the Zionist presence. The 
intifadah is the Palestinian people's choice" (AFP, 18 
November). 
  On 13 September, just hours after shaking Yitzhaq Rabin's 
hand, 'Arafat gave a speech on Jordanian television in which he 
said, "Palestine is only a stone's throw away for a small 
Palestinian boy or girl." 
  Nothing has changed in the PLO's rhetoric--praise for the 
intifadah, virulent antisemitism, talk of throwing the Zionists 
into the sea. The political leadership in Israel is making a 
grave mistake if it continues to ignore the PLO's pronouncement 
on these matters. 
  True, actions speak louder than words. But these words are 
loud and clear enough. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59810 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001__l94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

<DATE1>  6 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Dissension in IDF; Settler Use of 
Weapons </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P50068A TeL Aviv MA'ARIV in Hebrew 12 Dec 93 pp 10-II--FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94P50068A </F>
<F P=104>  TeL Aviv MA'ARIV </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ron Shachner, leader of Mt. Hebron Council, </F>
by Nadav 
Ha'etzni; date and place not given] 
  [Excerpts] In recent weeks Ron Shachner, the head of the 
Mt. Hebron Council, has become conspicuous because of two 
apparently contradictory statements. On the one hand, he 
publicly condemned the attacks on innocent Arabs in the context 
of "revenge activities" by the settlers. One the other hand, his 
name and military rank--lieutenant colonel (res.)--appeared 
among the 47 signatories of the first petition that defined the 
settlement evacuation order as clearly illegal. 
  As deputy commander of a reserve infantry brigade, doing 
half of a job in the army since he is not mobilized, Shachner 
has been and will always be close to the establishment. It was 
difficult to draw provocative statements out of him that would 
contribute much to a journalist's stories. But in light of 
recent developments, Shachner has also changed his tune. 
Speaking to him in his office, what is particulary demonstrated 
is the sense of an internal rending within the public and the 
IDF [Israel Defense Forces]. In the course of the interview, he 
was required to summarize details because of the group of orders 
close to his brigade. Simultaneously he described scenarios 
capable of leading in the near term to a confrontation between 
the deputy brigade commander and those of his soldiers who 
listen to orders of the Rabin government. 
  "There is a terrible dilemma here," Shachner opens up. "I 
am a citizen and a soldier in the IDF and for me Israel is a 
sacred value. But I see before my eyes the Zionist enterprise 
is tottering, the state is falling from its values and 
everything sacred. In addition, the government is leading us 
toward a security disaster not taking recommendations from the 
IDF and about to abandon the residents of Judaea, Samaria, and 
Gaza to the Palestinian police. We have excellent relations 
with the army, but the government is passing over the red lines 
and is liable to place me and my friends in the army on both 
sides of the barricade." 
  "What we all fear most is civil war. But there are things, 
from my viewpoint, which go beyond the red line. For example, 
the evacuation of settlements. I have no doubt that the 
government is planning this evacuation and I, as a commander in 
the IDF, previously determined that this is an illegal and 
unethical order. The evacuation of the camps puts me in a 
quandry because I think a soldier must do all he can not to 
participate, for example, in the evacuation of camps in Gaza and 
Jericho." 
  As a member of the Yesha council administration and chairman 
of its security committee, Shachner is in charge of planning all 
their future activities, which will be published this week. For 
example, the establishment of the "Hashomer" organization to 
guard the settlements and preparations for the "multiplier 
operation," by which the settlements are supposed to take 
control of adjoining state lands. A heavy odor of confrontation 
and building an alternative to the IDF arose from these plans. 
  Ron Shachner sought to lessen the sting of his words: "The 
goal of the "multiplier operation" is to show concern that state 
lands will be preserved for the settlements and on this issue we 
are stubborn. We will go outside the fences and control the 
land that was planned for the settlements and is important for 
their defense. 
[Shachner] Regarding "Hashomer," the original idea was to join 
the population from throughout the country that would come and 
assist Yesha. Beyond this, such things as patrols on the roads 
likewise have still not been decided. It depends on what 
actually develops in the area. We are continuing to the the IDF 
as responsible. We also know that the demand that the IDF 
transfer security is probable. But it is no secret that those 
conducting the negotiations are insistent on the IDF 
establishing minimal terms." 
  [Ha'etzni] For example? 
  [Shachner] The IDF must ensure a security belt flanking the 
axes and to retain a minimal capability of pursuing attackers 
and frustrating their attacks in the area. It is known that 
those conducting the negotiations have already caved in on this 
issue. We are very concerned. There are severe signs that the 
government will not accept security recommendations, is not 
bringing in new senior officers, and is about to create a 
situation of abandonment. 
  [Ha'etzni] On what are you relying? 
  [Shachner] For example, the subject of weapons and control 
over them. We asked senior officer in private conversations how 
they would control 15,000 weapons that are about to be 
distributed to the Palestinians. We did not receive an answer, 
only a very grave expression. They told us in essence that they 
don't know. Today, there is state control over all weapons. In 
a short time they will deliver huge quantities of rifles without 
any ability to follow their being stolen or delivered to hostile 
elements. 
  [Ha'etzni] However, we're not hearing expressions like these 
from the military leaders, just the opposite. 
  [Shachner] I am receiving from senior military elements a 
feeling of confusion, concern, and dissatisfaction. They are 
not kept up-to-date and do not know what will happen tomorrow. 
I'll give you an example. We sat in a small forum made up of 
four members with the chief of staff. We asked him, for 
example, if after autonomy is established in Qalqiliyah, he 
receives information about a group of terrorists setting up a 
Katyusha opposite Kfar Sava and getting ready to fire, will the 
IDF go into Qalqiliyah to prevent this? I didn't get an answer. 
If there were one or two generals alive today placing their 
rank on the table and saying: We cannot ourselves accept the 
responsibility, on these terms, for what would destabilize the 
state system. To my sorrow, this still has not happened, but I 
think that this will indeed happen soon. [passage omitted] 
  [Shachner] If the Government of Israel doesn't understand 
what is about to happen vis-a-vis the Palestinian police, it 
doesn't understand anything. It is clear that there will be an 
explosion. I won't open fire just like that, but I won't listen 
to a Palestinian policeman. If he forceably detains me, I will 
oppose him with force, and if he draws his weapon, I'll draw 
mine. How can one nurture the blindness given what is 
happening? What other proof does the government need? Look, the 
Fatah hawks have already said they are renewing their attacks; 
Faysal al-Husayni talks about returning to the rifle; the rebel 
commander in Lebanon announced that he has infiltrated his men 
into the Palestine police force. And one of their penitents (as 
much as he was able) in Gaza fired at soldiers. So what do they 
expect us to do? We live here and we will continue to live here 
and defend ourselves. 
  [Ha'etzni] Are there others who are hoarding weapons such as 
has been ascribed to Rabbi Toledano? 
  [Shachner] I think it's forbidden to break the law. We have 
enough legal weapons and today we have no need to hoard. 
However, dealing with the Palestinian police force will be 
different. What is particularly bothersome are the signals from 
our government. The police have already confiscated weapons 
from the residents without justification. Shahal is also trying 
to set up a police force here whose primary purpose is to pursue 
us. Similarly, a grave situation is being created as I 
described. In these circumstances such as these, the acquisition 
of personal weapons for self-defense is legitimate. 
  [Ha'etzni] Where does all this lead? 
  [Shachner] Look, I condemned and am condemning attacks on 
innocent Arabs. We are not predators like they are and we have 
no need to act like that. But I warn the Israeli Government: 
they caused this situation. "The Committee for Road Security" 
does not exist. The government created this. The outburst that 
followed the murder of Mizrahi is an uprising that springs from 
a feeling of abandonment. If the government doesn't understand 
this and continues on its current path, this phenomenon will 
grow worse and lead to anarchy. In the face of Palestinian 
police force, the psychological barriers that we have today will 
disappear. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59811 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fadlallah Called Voice of Iran in Lebanon </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AS0056A London AL-MAJALLAH in Arabic 3 Oct 93 p 15 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0056A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-MAJALLAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] London--The silent battle in Lebanon that has been 
raging between Rafiq al-Hairiri's government and the Hizballah 
Party since this government was appointed last October has come 
to a head following the death of nine participants in the 
demonstration organized by the party in Beirut in order to 
declare its protest party against the Palestinian-Israeli 
agreement, according to the party. 
  The party has been describing al-Hariri's government in its 
statement as "murderer and killer." Although the official 
Lebanese stand is opposed to the agreement, similar to the 
Syrians', Hizballah was the only organization that chose to take 
the trouble to go out into the streets in order to proclaim its 
opposition. This has prompted President Ilyas al-Hirawi and 
Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri to wonder about whom this party 
is demonstrating against in Beirut streets since the government 
is already adopting the same stand the party itself is 
advocating. 
  The timing of the demonstration was significant. The party 
called for the demonstration following the return of Shaykh 
Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah from one of his frequent visits to 
Tehran during which he met with Iranian President Rafsanjani and 
the leader of the Islamic revolution Ali Khamene'i. The party 
sources said that discussions during this visit dealt with 
coordinating stands with regard to the new situation the area is 
entering under the title peace with Israel on all fronts. This 
has led to many questions being raised regarding the role the 
party should be playing in Lebanon at this stage, and how far 
this role clashes with the Lebanese government which closely 
coordinates its stands with Syria's. 
  Although Shaykh Fadlallah is called by party members 
"al-Sayyid" [master or lord], he does not have any official or 
organizational title. He introduces himself as a worker in the 
Islamic movement. Yet the great influence he wields in the broad 
intellectual field and the political and media contacts in 
Lebanon makes him the actual leader of the party whose secretary 
general is Shaykh Hasan Nasrallah. In his speeches and 
statements Shaykh Fadlallah rejects the coming peace and 
believes that if the Lebanese Government were to sign a peace 
agreement, its signature would be that of a government not 
recognized by its people. Therefore, whether the government 
signs an agreement or not is immaterial, because the people 
reject all that. 
  Shaykh Fadlallah has close ties with Iran that date back to 
school days in al-Najaf where he established close ties with 
Khomeyni when he was in exile there. He also established 
contacts with Iranian leaders of various inclinations. In 
al-Najaf Fadlallah was taught by leading Shi'ah scholars 
including Ayatollah Montazeri, Muhsin al-Hakim, and Abu-al-Qasim 
al-Khu'i. When he returned to Lebanon in 1966, when the Shi'ah 
tide was not what it is today, he began his social activities in 
an easter Beirut suburb (Hay al-Nab'ah). After the inhabitants 
of the area were evacuated from there, he moved to the southern 
suburb where he is still there. 
  Fadlallah was the target of an assassination attempt carried 
out by the CIA near his house in Harit Hurayk quarter, following 
the destruction of the Marines headquarters in Beirut. Hizballah 
was then accused of being the perpetrator. Fadlallah is 57 years 
old, was born in 'Aynata town in southern Lebanon. He is married 
with 11 children. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59812 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> EGYPT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Opposition Party Head on Vice Presidency </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AF0837D Cairo AL-AHRAR in Arabic 30 Aug pp 1, 3 </F>
<F P=103> 93AF0837D </F>
<F P=104>  Cairo AL-AHRAR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mustafa Kamil Murad: "The Vice President and the </F>
Political SituationI] 
  [Text] Article 139 of the Egyptian Constitution provides 
that the president of the republic has the right to appoint one 
vice president or more, to relieve them of their posts, and to 
determine their jurisdictions. Some of the constitutional 
articles refer to the duties of the vice president but do not 
specify such duties. Rather, they refer to them in general 
terms. The source of these jurisdictions is the president of the 
republic; that is, he assigns to his deputy whatever tasks he 
may deem necessary. Article 82 of the Constitution provides that 
if a temporary hindrance arises that prevents the president of 
the republic from carrying out his jurisdictions he will assign 
the vice president to act on his behalf. 
  But Article 84 of the Consitution says that in case the post 
of president becomes vacant or he becomes permanently incapable 
of carrying out his duties, the People's Assembly speaker 
assumes the post temporarily. If the Assembly is disbanded, he 
will be replaced by the chairman of the Higher Constitutional 
Court, on the condition that neither will be nominated for the 
presidency, as Clause 2 of Article 85 provides, until the vice 
president assumes the presidency temporarily pending judgment is 
passed on charge of high treason against the president of the 
republic or of committing a crime, on the basis of a proposal 
submitted by at least one-third of the People's Assembly 
members. The indictment shall be passed by a two-thirds 
majority, something that is almost impossible to happen. 
  On the basis of this, we draw the following conclusion: 
  First: The appointment of one vice president or more is 
optional for the president of the republic and not obligatory as 
it is in the case of appointing the prime minister, his 
deputies, the ministers, and their deputies (Article 141). 
  Second: It is the president of the republic who determines 
the jurisdictions of the vice president or vice presidents and 
relieves them of their posts. This means that the post of vice 
president, like that of the ministers, is appointed and relieved 
of his posts by the president of the republic. 
  Third: The vice president, if there is one, has no 
jurisdictions other than acting for the president in case of a 
temporary hindrance that prevents the president of the republic 
from exercising his jurisdictions. 
  Briefly, there is no justification for the appointment of 
one 
vice president of the republic or more under the present 
constitution, particularly since President Husni Mubarak did not 
wish to use his right to appoint one vice president or more. 
Rather, during the past 12 years he remained without a deputy, 
thus using his constitutional right to that. We believe that the 
new constitution could provide for the election of a vice 
president alobg with a vice president who would automatically 
take over powers in case the president is temporarily absent. He 
will assume the presidency until the expiration of the 
president's term, in case the post of president of the republic 
becomes vacant or the president will be permanently 
incapacitated. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59813 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> EGYPT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Announces Plans for Uranium Production </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AF0837C Cairo AL-JUMHURIYAH in Arabic 7 Sep 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 93AF0837C </F>
<F P=104>  Cairo AL-JUMHURIYAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muhammad 'Asim] </F>
  [Text] Dr. Nabil al-Hadhiq, head of the Atomic Energy 
Authority, said that four locations of granite rocks have been 
discovered and designated for the first time in Sinai and in the 
eastern desert. The rocks contain 15,000 tons of uranium, the 
production of which will begin at the end of the present 
five-year plan that ends in 1997. 
  He said that work on those locations has been going on for 
more than 15 years, during which time more than 70 locations 
were discovered in various parts of the republic. 
Infrastructures, including plants, research units, and equipment 
have been installed near those locations during this time. 
  He added that there is no alternative to the utilization of 
uranium, now that it is being employed in all peaceful aspects 
of life, including treatments in hospitals, fertilizing 
agricultural land, operating turbines for electric power 
generation. Egypt's electricity production does not exceed 60 
billion kilowatt hours annually, while a nuclear reactor can 
produce 600 megawatts with the power of 100 tons of uranium. 
  He said that so far Egypt did not produce any uranium. 
Uranium production no longer poses a danger after adequate 
safety measures have been created. 
  He said that the whole world now uses uranium in all fields 
of life. According to IAEA [International Atomic Energy Agency] 
estimates, world oil deposits will run out within 30 years, 
natural gas within 45 years, and coal within 200 years, while 
uranium deposits are sufficient to last 500 years on the basis 
of current utilization. 
  He said that while the search for uranium is being carried 
out, the Authority has been producing other minerals, such as 
rutile, which is used in manufacturing steel rods, paints, amd 
monazite, which used in manufacturing floor materials, and 
zircon in manufacturing ceramics. 
  He denied that Egypt came under foreign pressure over the 
production of urnaium, stressing that the IAEA only wants to 
know the magnitude and quantity of produced uranium and how it 
is being used. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59814 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Accused of Assuming Police Role for World </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0036A Baghdad AL-THAWRAH in Arabic 14 Oct 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0036A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad AL-THAWRAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hadi Tu'mah] </F>
  [Text] The U.S. defense secretary announced that Washington 
intends to establish a force consisting of 15 divisions of the 
special guard in order to carry out urgent intervention 
operations in "tension areas" in the world. This calls for a 
pause to examine what the United States is planning to do at the 
present stage. The report directly quotes the defense secretary 
himself, a proponent of creating the proposed divisions, saying 
that these will consist of highly trained, powerful, and fully 
equipped forces. 
  The usual excuse the American people are given as a 
justification for the creation of such forces is to support the 
"legitimate" U.S. stand. But the truth is completely the 
opposite. The truth is that the U.S. stand worldwide, beginning 
with Vietnam and Iraq and ending with Somalia, is so far 
motivated by the U.S. past defeats in battles against the 
peoples of these countries. Meanwhile the type of these defeats 
should not be forgotten. [sentence as published] 
  The U.S. defeat in Vietnam seems somewhat different, both in 
essence and in form, from the failure of the U.S. aggressive 
plan against Iraq. Now that Washington seems to be embroiled in 
another defeat in Somalia, it means that Washington is plagued 
by defeats in every place, location, and time. The arsenals of 
faith by which the people arm themselves will always remain 
stronger than the arsenals of destructive weapons by which 
American aggressors arm themselves. 
  Undoubtedly this is certain and stands no argument. It is 
also certain that the United States wants to create this type of 
military force in order to make up for the failure of the Rapid 
Deployment Force [RDF] it established shortly after the Vietnam 
war with the aim of imposing its hegemony on the world. Indeed 
its aim is also to wash the dirty American face of some of the 
mud of defeat and of the shame of failures of NATO plans against 
Iraq under the U.S. leadership. 
  It is also certain that the tasks of the new forces of 
aggression will be directed against the Third World countries 
but will not go beyond to tension areas in Europe. Therefore it 
is unlikely that the American forces will intervene in order to 
stop the unjust aggression against the people of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, for example. What Western commentators said 
regarding the objective behind establishment of the new 
aggressive forces is that it is to boost the American people's 
morale, end the embarrassment in which the U.S. forces found 
themselves in Somalia, and reassure the American people that the 
U.S. will not get involved in major conflicts. In fact, this is 
not all that lies behind creating the new aggressive forces. 
What lies behind it is something bigger and more serious, namely 
the greedy and covetous way the United States insists on 
imposing hegemony on the world. This is confirmed by the fact 
that Washington has categorically rejected the idea of 
establishing a joint European Corps, because it insists that 
there should be no other force sharing U.S. hegemony of the 
world. On the other hand, events have confirmed the implicit 
criticism by UN Secretary General Butrus Ghali--despite his 
well-known record and his accusing the United States of playing 
the role of world policeman. [sentence as published] 
  A quick glance at the tasks of the new U.S. aggression 
forces 
would readily show that their objective is not to support the 
"legitimate" U.S. stand, but rather to strengthen the role of 
the U.S. policeman on the international level so that the U.S. 
force will remain the world's number one force following the 
collapse of the cold war, as the U.S. defense secretary said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59815 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Alleged Support for Saddam by Kurdish Leaders, Citizens </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0015 Baghdad AL-'IRAQ in Arabic 10 Sep 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0015 </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad AL-'IRAQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] In the historic address that President leader Saddam 
Husayn delivered on 30 September 1993, when his excellency 
received the chairman and members of the Executive Office of the 
National Union of Iraqi students, he touched on the situation in 
the north and reviewed in detail the tasks our great people and 
the Kurdish people, in particular, are shouldering in order to 
overcome the tragic situation in the self-rule area in Kurdistan 
and to achieve our Kurdish people's objectives of preserving the 
land and the country and protecting its freedom, security, and 
the right to a free and dignified life. These objectives are 
being interfered with by the traitors and agents in 
collaboration with their American and Zionist masters. 
  AL-'IRAQ met with a number of Kurdish political and social 
personalities as well as other citizens who spoke about this 
historical event and the tragic situation that the area is 
experiencing. 
  'Ujayl Jalal, secretary general of the Economic and 
Financial 
Affairs Committee in the self-rule area, said: 
  The speech, which President leader struggler Saddam Husayn 
made to the chairman and members of the Executive Bureau of the 
National Union of Iraqi Students, particularly in the present 
tragic situation in Kurdistan self-rule area, is a living 
example of the great love our leader holds for the Kurdish 
people. It is also a confirmation of the major historic and 
shining role the Kurdish people played in building Iraq, their 
fight against the agents, colonialists, and the covetous ones 
who wanted and still want to harm Iraq's unity and purity of its 
soil as well as to obliterate the national identity of the Kurds 
who are genuinely seeking to consolidate Iraq's unity. A lot of 
water has passed under the bridge and little is left. These are 
hard times that will pass, and beloved Kurdistan will once again 
enjoy living in prosperity and total happiness under our 
triumphant leader Saddam Husayn, may God preserve him. 
  Dr. Sakfan al-Brifkani, secretary general of Social Affairs 
in Kurdistan region, said: 
  The Kurds are the children of this great homeland; they are 
part of the Iraqi people. They reject and fight against all 
suspect ideas. Iraqi Kurdistan is part of Iraq's glorious 
history, past, present, and future. No honest Kurd who is proud 
of the soil of his Iraqi homeland would accept that Kurdistan 
region becoming a ministate and an artificial entity, separate 
from Iraq and its glory, loftiness, and splendid culture across 
7,000 years. 
  He added: The Iraqis are one body joined by blood, spirit, 
intellect, thought, conscience, and common history. Can the soul 
be separated from the body? Will the Iraqi citizen, be he Kurd 
or Arab, accept to abandon his 7000-year-old history and ancient 
culture in order to be bound to weak entities that would be 
shared and divided among the major powers, the powers of 
oppression and tyranny. Our Kurdish people's adversity will not 
last long, God willing. The leader's speech to his children, the 
students, on 30 August is a proof of this fact. His mention of 
beloved Kurdistan and of every Kurd in Irbil, Sulaymaniyah, and 
Dahouk in this historical speech was like a healing balsam for 
the wounds. All the children of Kurdistan were overwhelmed by 
joy, happiness, and delight when they heard the speech of leader 
struggler Saddam Husayn. Victory is ours, God willing. 
  Zuhdi Ahmad, secretary general for Municipality Affairs in 
self-rule region of Kurdistan, said: 
  The mean and abominable actions being committed in Kurdistan 
self-rule region by agent and treasonous gangs will only reap 
frustration and defeat. The Iraqi, whether he is a Kurd or an 
Arab or from the national minorities, is extremely sensitive 
about his dignity and is proud of his character. This character 
drives him to cling to his Iraqi nationality and sacrifice 
himself for the sake of Iraq's dignity, independence, and 
sovereignty. The Iraqi people's national revolutions and 
uprisings are proof of this. Therefore, the struggle by the 
groups of agents and traitors in Kurdistan's self-rule region, 
who are trying to corrupt honest men among our steadfast and 
patient people, are trying to destroy the unity of the Kurdish 
people who are part of Iraqi unity. They also try to sow 
sedition and create disturbances in the area. All these attempts 
are bound to fail miserably, thanks to the efforts of our 
Kurdish people, their noble character, and the deep love for the 
homeland's pure soil. Kurdistan will become the fire that will 
incinerate all agent and treasonous groups. 
  Qasim Agha, from Irbil province said: The speech by leader 
struggler, Saddam Husayn, especially the part concerning the 
Kurdish issue, confirms the degree of love his excellency has 
and the pride he feels toward every Kurd in the cherished 
northern part of the country. 
  He added: Our Kurdish people recall more than ever the 
happiness, which Kurdistan region enjoyed previously. But now we 
are experiencing a difficult economic situation and lack of 
services. But our proud people in Kurdistan will frustrate the 
sick hopes and dreams of those people. Kurdistan will once again 
rejoin the pure and beloved homeland, our struggling Iraq, and 
our great protective shield so that we will once again enjoy the 
homeland's wealth and the protection of leader Saddam Husayn. 
  He said Iraq is the homeland of all. As the President leader 
said to the chairman and members of the National Union of Iraqi 
Students: The homeland is the place where we live and die. It 
is where we own things or do not own; when we own nothing in it 
is still our country. When we own anything in it we put it in 
the service of the people. This is the homeland. 
  Concluding, he said: Thanks to its triumphant leader's 
efforts, the honest people's efforts, and the rallying of the 
masses around its historical leadership--all this constitutes a 
thorn in the side of the enemies. Our noble Kurdish people will 
be able to thwart all evil and wicked conspiracies. 
  Husam Khadr Dawud, secretary of the Legislative Council and 
chairman of the People's Assembly in Irbil province, said: 
  The people of beloved Iraqi Kurdistan today are living in a 
really tragic situation. This is because it is targeted by the 
gangs of traitors and agents as well as by those serving the 
enemy in the area. Our Kurdish people today realize more than 
ever the magnitude of the great conspiracy that has been planned 
by the tyrants who are coveting Iraq's wealth. They have sold 
their honor to the foreign colonialist who serves only his own 
interests. They have accepted living in disgrace and treachery. 
  Continuing, he said: The tragic situation, which beloved 
Kurdistan is living, and the destruction and ruination it is 
suffering because of the actions and behavior of the midgets are 
exceptional conditions that will, God willing, vanish thanks to 
the efforts of the children of our great nation and all the 
honest and good people in the area. The children of our noble 
country will not accept humiliation and disgrace. They will not 
abandon their glorious history that abounds with dignity, pride, 
and glory. The day will come when our Kurdish people will say 
their true and sincere word. They are the loyal children of 
leader Saddam Husayn and his wise leadership. Iraq is one 
integrated unit regardless of how the forces of evil and 
aggression rally against it. 
  Jamal 'Aziz Shikhu, director general of education in Irbil 
province, said: 
  Self-rule is our solid national unity. It is the Iraq of all 
of us. Any concept or idea to the contrary is rejected. We will 
fight it in the mountains and valleys; all the Iraqis will fight 
it. It means sowing the seeds of division between the Iraqis, 
something the foreigner coveting Iraq's wealth wishes. Iraq's 
unity has always been targeted both in the past and present. We 
are extremely confident that our Kurdish people's love and 
loyalty to leader Saddam Husayn, architect of self-rule and the 
achiever of all our people's aspirations from the north to the 
south, will continue to be dedicated to Saddam Husayn and to 
nobody else. The tragic situation the area is now experiencing 
is only a summer cloud that will soon pass. 
  Muhsin Tahir al-Barazanji, member of the Political Bureau of 
the Kurdish Democratic Party, said: 
  The speech of struggler leader Saddam Husayn, may God 
protect 
him, to the chairman and members of the Executive Bureau of the 
National Union of Iraqi Students on 30 August 1993 expresses a 
principled and deep belief in the Kurdish people. This was 
evident in his excellency's mention of every Kurd in the 
northern part of the country. 
  He added: Imperialism believed and still believes that the 
Kurdish problem is a trump card, which it can play to bring 
pressure on the political regime in Iraq in order to realize 
gains for itself, contrary to the real interests of the Kurdish 
people. This was clearly demonstrated in its boundless support 
over many years for the agent and suspect groups. But then it 
made a volte face when its interests dictated that. 
  We absolutely believe that the foreign umbrella over beloved 
Kurdistan will not last and the black clouds shall vanish soon, 
God willing, and Kurdistan will once again return to what it 
always used to be, a part of great Iraq and our people will once 
again be linked to the rest of the people. 
  The leader's speech has opened new opportunities for those 
who strayed from the right path and cooperated with the 
foreigner in one way or another. He called on them to return to 
the bosom of the homeland. They should realize that leader 
Saddam Husayn is understanding toward everybody and that his 
love is much greater than their sins. 
  We are confident that our Kurdish people will tear the 
foreign umbrella and expel enemies of the people. It will thus 
participate in building the great and united Iraq under the 
banner of "God is Great," which triumphant leader Saddam Husayn, 
God protect him, is carrying. 
  Ahmad Muhammad 'Inayat, member of the Central Committee of 
the Kurdish Revolutionary Party, said: 
  Our proud Kurdish people is an indivisible part of the great 
Iraqi people, joined by a long common history and joint struggle 
in defense of the homeland and its dignity. As for those who are 
now in the same trench with the traitors and embrace the enemy 
represent only themselves. Their end is near at the hands of our 
Kurdish people, which daily confirms their absolute rejection of 
their criminal actions. Let all the criminals and agents in 
Iraqi Kurdistan learn the essential fact that our people have 
devoted themselves to the great Iraq since ancient times. The 
people still maintain this pledge. The banner "God is Great," 
which struggler leader Saddam Husayn is carrying will never 
suffer a setback because it is the banner of right and justice. 
It is surrounded by the hearts of brave Iraqis and Kurds and all 
the brotherly minorities within the framework of a united and 
integrated homeland. 
  Sabri Ghulam, branch secretary of the Kurdish Revolutionary 
Party. said: 
  I would like to remind the agents and hirelings in Kurdistan 
Iraq of an essential and manifest fact--that no matter how many 
promises the colonialist makes, he honors them only as far as 
they serve his illegitimate interests. And if his interests are 
exposed to danger, he will dump his lackeys on the heap of 
history. Our people both Iraqis and Kurds have for long 
experienced this. 
  We are greatly confident that masses of our Kurdish people 
in 
Iraqi Kurdistan are aware of their responsibility in confronting 
the agents and saboteurs who are wreaking havoc in the self-rule 
region. Our people will not be misled by their false slogans and 
will forever continue to fight the traitors and the turncoats 
until final victory is achieved which, God willing, is near. 
  Ahmad Hasan 'Uthman, deputy secretary general for the 
Administration of Municipalities, expressed his astonishment and 
surprise at the falsehoods disseminated by international news 
agencies regarding the living conditions the Kurdish people are 
experiencing in the self-rule region in Kurdistan under these 
extraordinary circumstances. The life our Kurdish people are 
living is very difficult. The realities of the hardship, which 
our people are suffering, should not be glossed over. The masses 
will soon say their just word by expelling all the agents and 
traitors and turn every grain of beloved Kurdistan's soil into a 
firebrand that will burn the enemies and all the traitors. 
  Mahmud Muhammad Dizih'i from Irbil province, said: Our 
Kurdish masses will not remain silent over the hardships. The 
conditions they are living at present are exceptional and will 
vanish thanks to the efforts of all the honest and noble Kurds. 
The forces of aggression will not be able to suppress our 
Kurdish people's resolve to live a free and dignified life. The 
love for beloved leader Saddam Husayn will continue to be 
cherished in the hearts of all the honest Kurds. 
  Mrs. Samira Fadhil pointed out to the popular unrest in the 
area and the denunciation by the people of all the antipatriotic 
and antinational actions the agent cliques and colonialists 
lackeys carry out. Their aim, she said, is to implement the will 
of their masters, and to spread backwardness and destruction in 
the area rather than prosperity and progress that we have 
enjoyed under our triumphant leader Saddam Husayn. 
  Nayif Karim Muhammad and 'Aziz Mahmud al-Zibari said that 
the 
tragic situation, which the masses in Iraqi Kurdistan are 
experiencing, is due to the terrorist and repressive actions of 
the agent groups that have defiled Kurdish honor, violated the 
land of beloved Kurdistan, and turned the self-rule area into an 
arena for committing all kinds of immoralities, a spy den, and a 
drug market. Our Kurdish masses will never accept this and will 
not remain quiet no matter how long it is going to take. The 
honest Kurdish people reject the reckless actions that leaders 
of the so-called Kurdish parties commit. Falsehoods of these 
parties have been exposed. The masses are waiting for the great 
rebellion against the treasonous leaders. The coming few days 
will confirm the inevitability of the triumph of the masses. The 
agents will only reap disgrace and humiliation and Kurdistan, 
God willing, will be the graveyard for whomever tried or tries 
to subdue the Iraqi people's will and steal the achievements of 
the glorious 17-30 July revolution under the leadership of our 
triumphant leader Saddam Husayn. Children of his Kurdish people 
have confirmed and continue to confirm their deep love for him 
and to rally under the banner of his wise leadership. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59816 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Negative Role, Objectives of Orientalists Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0034A Baghdad AL-THAWRAH in Arabic 6 Oct 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0034A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad AL-THAWRAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sinan 'Abd-al-Jabbar Abu-Kalal] </F>
  [Text] Iraq and the Arab nation are experiencing, in these 
very days, a unique state of nationalist awakening and national 
awareness, and a feeling of historical steadfastness in a nearly 
unique way. It is different from other such instances in our 
contemporary history. This awareness, sincerely and 
enthusiastically eager to know past patriots and to learn from 
their heritage, values, and influence, is the inevitable result 
of scientific understanding and a total grasp of the movement of 
history and its philosophy. 
  One of the most dangerous pests to which our combatant 
nation 
has been exposed is the attempt of enemies, in their different 
languages and varieties, of their diverse sects and beliefs, to 
create a state of anarchy and confusion among the people of a 
single community, and to feed the spirit of dissension and 
hostility among its individuals. It has tried to perpetuate 
dissension and religious strife among their ranks and distort 
the historical realities of Arab Islamic culture. All this was 
in order to halt the renaissance and reawakening that had 
reached its peak in this decisive juncture in the history of our 
nation, and there must be a response. 
  Among them are the orientalists who devoted themselves to 
studying the Crusades, with many points of view, both praising 
and blaming, among them both men fair and those who avoid the 
truth. Researchers studying orientalism and the Crusades are 
unable to find the many sources of this movement, so it is not 
easy for them except the trivial part of it which might conceal 
these two subjects. This presents researchers with real 
difficulties, so they add their own touches to make a clear 
picture of orientalists and the Crusades. 
  To demonstrate this, the fair-minded German orientalist 
Sigrid Hunke [?] gave an example of what we are saying when she 
said, "I have found nothing in the articles but trivialization, 
which does not satisfy a researcher's thirst." 
  We will make an effort to point up the truth of what these 
fair-minded ones believed, to show the refinement and role of 
the Arabs in human civilization. We will also touch on 
orientalism and make its concept and aims clear. We will examine 
the orientalists' ideas and learn their views on thhe Crusades, 
and make an effort to respond to the orientalists with the 
meager sources available to us. 
  We will, of course, focus on sources containing the points 
of 
the orientalists who treated the Arabs and their culture fairly 
first of all. Then we will turn to the unfair orientalists who 
were prejudiced against the Arabs and Islam, under the influence 
of many motives and factors, lacking the spirit of objectivity 
and fairness. 
  Research depends upon the book of German orientalist, Dr. 
Sigrid Hunke [?] in her valuable book The Arab Sun Shines 
on the West and the book of orientalist Anthony West 
The Crusades, in addition to the books of Gustave 
Lebon, of researcher Subhi 'Abd-al-Hamid (The Arabs' 
Decisive Battles) and Montgomery Watt (The Influence 
of Islam on Europe), and Dr. Salih Muhammad al-'Abid's 
article "The Crusades: Causes and Motives" in AL-MAWRID magazine. 
<H5>  The Concept of Orientalism and Its Goals </H5>
  Orientalism, as a term, is a science devoted to studying the 
languages, heritage, culture, past, and present of the Orient. 
Linguistically, orientalism is the east, the place where the sun 
rises. 
  The studies that involve the oriental world have been 
labeled 
"orientalism," and the Westerners who undertake these studies 
are termed "orientalists." 
  Orientalism grew and thrived side by side with the 
imperialism that Europe experienced in the era of industrial, 
military, and cultural development; every country sought to 
compete with its neighbors for the greatest possible number of 
colonies, to exploit them for political and economic ends. Among 
these was the Vatican, in which orientalism grew and developed, 
making the Vatican a small-scale religious state with an army of 
priests. It led Europe politically, militarily, and religously, 
from the Crusades down to the present day. One example of its 
interest in orientalism was the founding of the Maronite College 
in 1754, which was dedicated to graduating orientalists, and 
still graduates students interested in orientalism in the 
present day. 
  And the orientalists, they are those who are involved in the 
affairs of the Islamic east, who have eagerly devoted themselves 
to studying it and following its cultural, historical, 
religious, and social topics. 
  One might remark that it has no specific beginning point. 
Some researchers pinpoint its having begin in the first century 
AD; others say it began with the Crusades, while we find that 
the Christian west dates the beginning of official orientalism 
with the publication of the clerical decision of the Vienna 
Conclave, in 1312, to endow numerous professorial chairs in the 
Arabic, Hebrew, and Syriac languages at European universities 
such as Paris and Oxford. 
  It is likeliest, however, that the real establishment of 
orientalism was in the 18th century, when the west colonized the 
Muslim world and gained control over its properties, usurping 
manuscripts and taking them for their own libraries. 
  In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the first 
orientalist conference was held in Paris in 1873. And 
orientalist conferences have continued to be held. 
<H5>  Motives and Goals of Orientalism </H5>
  The principal motive of orientalism is rooted in the 
struggle 
between the Islamic and Christian worlds in Muslim Spain and 
Sicily. The Crusades, in particular, got the Europeans 
interested in learning about Islam and its practices. 
  Orientalism has many aims, perhaps most of all the 
prevention 
of the spread of Islam in Europe, and the attempt to estrange 
Muslims from their faith and spread dissension in their ranks. 
The orientalist establishment also seeks to appropriate 
religious ideas from Islam in order to base the principles of 
the church on rational religious ideas, since Europeans shunned 
clerical logic that flew in the face of science. 
  The orientalist movement turned its attention to serving 
colonialism by revealing the mentalities, moods, and weak points 
of the orientals preparatory to missionary and imperialist 
campaigns. 
  Among the aims of orientalism is the destruction of the 
intellectual unity of the Islamic community by spreading 
doctrinal disputes to divide and sectarianize, for a 
fragmentation throughout the community. It also fragmented the 
linguistic unity of the Islamic community and weakened the 
Islamic personality, creating a spirit of disunion and feelings 
of inferiority in the souls of the orientals. It spread doubt 
about the values, principles, and ideals they cherished. The 
orientalists also sought to make orientalist studies a source 
for educating Muslims about Islam. 
<H5>  Phases of Orientalism </H5>
  A. The first phase began when the clergy moved the theology 
and philosophy of Greece from the Arabs to Rome, as the church 
in the west was backward and intellectually wanting. 
  B. The second phase was when orientalism became manifest in 
the 17th century, forming a distorted idea of Islam in Europe. 
It was largely based on the writings of the orientalists of the 
first phase, after the Crusades. This phase was notable for 
obscuring the eastern Arab world of Muslim Arabs with a motive 
of hidden hatred, contrary to what it tried to claim about being 
impartial and scientifically objective. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59817 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Islamic Al-Da'wah Party's Ideology Analyzed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0021A London AL-HAYAH in Arabic 22 Oct 93 p 19 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0021A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-HAYAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ghassan al-'Atiyah, Editor in Chief of AL-MILAFF </F>
AL-'IRAQI (The Iraqi File), London] 
  [Text] The Islamic al-Da'wah Party [IDP], which was founded 
in 1957, is now considered (after the break-up and splitting of 
the Communist Party) the foremost opposition party in Iraq's 
political arena. 
  Since the end of World War II, the Iraqi opposition has been 
dominated by three Iraqi party organizations in succession. The 
Communist Party, which was persecuted by the government during 
the monarchy period, played a leading opposition role during 
'Abd-al-Karim Qasim's tenure. Later, it allied itself with Qasim 
and began to persecute the opposition, then led by the Ba'th 
Party. When the Ba'th Party obtained power in 1963, and later in 
1968, it became the hangman of the opposition. During the 
Ba'th's first stint in power, the Communist Party was its 
victim. When the Ba'th came to power again in 1968, the IDP 
became its victim. 
  The Communist Party, the Ba'th Party, and the IDP do share 
some characteristics, despite the great differences between them. 

  -  Each has suffered at one time from persecution and has had 
to adopt covert action to avoid repression and torture. This 
situation has precluded the practice of democracy within their 
respective ranks. These parties' leaders have thus engaged in 
autocratic decisionmaking, arguing the need for such methods 
because of exceptional circumstances. 
  -  Each of these parties claims to possess a comprehensive 
ideology--be it Marxism, nationalism, or Islam--which confers on 
its members the characteristic of an elite acting on behalf of 
the proletariate, Arabism, or religion. 
  -  In relating to the people, each of these parties views itself 
as the guardian of the people, believing that it knows best what 
is in the people's interests. 
  -  Each of their ideologies extends 
beyond Iraq's borders. In many cases, their ideological and even 
organizational authority is abroad: in Moscow in the name of the 
International, in Damascus or Cairo in the name of Arabism, or 
in Tehran in the name of Islam. 
  -  Each of these parties has used force to achieve its 
objectives, 
thereby entrenching the principle that the ends justify the 
means. As soon as they attain power or come to share power, they 
liquidate others and persecute allies of yesterday. The 
Communist Party fought the Ba'th, which was its ally in the 
National Front opposing the monarchy. The Ba'th has begun to 
persecute clerics to whom it had frequently appealed in its 
fight against the Communist Party and communism during 
'Abd-al-Karim Qasim's tenure. For example, the family of Muhsin 
al-Hakim, the supreme, Shiite religious authority, who issued a 
religious ruling prohibiting communism in 'Abd-al-Karim Qasim's 
tenure, later became the first victim of Ba'thist rule. 

    If political persecution creates its antithesis, the 
organization's secret is its incubator. 
  The IDP's literature is limited. The lectures and writings 
of 
the martyr Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr remain an important reference 
in this regard. Al-Sadr advocated mutual understanding and 
dialogue with other forces. The statement of mutual 
understanding issued by the party in the early eighties, before 
the Iraqi-Iranian War, is an example of this thinking. It 
appears in a pamphlet issued by the party in London in March 
1992 entitled "Our Program": "This statement of mutual 
understanding issued in the early eighties makes allowance for 
the numerous special characteristics of the Iraqi people's 
social composition and active political forces. It calls on all 
of these political groups to take up the mission of saving the 
Iraqi people and preserving Iraq's independence and territorial 
integrity." This positive, political tendency changed after the 
Iraqi-Iranian War broke out. The IDP dropped its efforts to 
achieve an alliance with secular Iraqi forces. Instead, it 
adopted the Iranian formula, as represented in the Supreme 
Islamic Revolution Council in Iraq in 1982, in which the IDP was 
an active member. 
  During the Iranian-Iraqi War (1980-1988), the IDP adopted an 
organizational and ideological trend--perhaps in keeping with 
political currents in Iran at the time--of hostility to any 
un-Islamic Iraqi political party or force. In this regard, it 
borrowed some notions, quoted below, from a book published in 
Iran to indoctrinate IDP members entitled Islamic Call 
Education, Political Section (published by the IDP, first 
edition 1984). 
  Under the heading of "Theory of Political Action in Islam," 
the following is stated in said book: 
  "It was natural that the IDP--like other sincere, Islamic 
movements and groups--would find the political environment 
contaminated with accusations, vanities, and attempts to mislead 
public opinion, the most important of which are the following: 
(...) 
  "6. The propagation of a flood of parties, theories, 
concepts, terms, and entities based on nationalist or patriotic 
democratic, capitalist programs, or on theoretical Marxist and 
socialist principles. Such parties, politicians, educational and 
cultural academies, and political thinking are all designed to 
run counter to Islam and to fundamentally destroy and weaken 
Islam's influence among the people through various techniques 
and means. 
  "7. Several emaciated entities linked to European and 
American colonialism, which purport to be Islamic or to promote 
Islamic government. 
  "8. Political entities and leaders who claim to be sincere, 
to defend the nation's causes, and to act to liberate and 
develop the nation. They side with the procession of colonialism 
and are linked with it ideologically and politically. Examples 
of this type of ruler and entity are 'Abd-al-Karim Qasim, Gamal 
Abdel Nasser, and national and crusader movements, e.g., the 
Ba'th and the like. 
  "It was incumbent upon al-Da'wah to make plans to confront 
this aggregate and these circumstances and thus bring the people 
of the nation through the clouds and blocked visibility to 
clarity, understanding, and sound political awareness." (pp 
16-18) 
  Under the heading, "Capitalism's Means for Implementing Its 
Goals," the following is stated: 
  "[Among these means are] the fabrication of regimes, 
parties, 
and international organizations to safeguard colonialist 
interests. Examples of this include parties throughout the 
Islamic world and Latin America that have adopted European 
thought and capitalist culture--including laws, regulations, and 
morals--as a foundation and modus operandi. Other examples are 
provided by parties that have adopted change by introducing 
ideas and slogans consistent with the people's environment and 
nature, e.g., socialism, nationalism, patriotism, and perhaps 
false Islamic slogans at times. Examples of international 
organizations and laws that serve colonialist interests are the 
United Nations, the Arab League, the Nonaligned Movement, the 
OAU (...) and international law, the law of the veto...etc." (pp 
32-43) 
  Under the heading, "Foundations and Premises of Islamic 
Political Thought," is the following: 
  "[In taking] a wary, skeptical view of what is issued by 
movements, entities, and personalities which are non-Islamic, 
anonymous, or which have a disquieting past, the principle 
regarding those which are non-Islamic is that they are suspect 
and untruthful in their action. The principle in dealing with 
someone of doubtful identity and intentions, who acts, or seeks 
cooperation, under the heading of Islam, is caution and 
circumspection in circumstances in which we fear infiltration 
and political deception, in the absence of evidence that proves 
his sound intentions and pure identity." (pages 57-58) 
  Under the heading, "Theoretical Goals of Political Action," 
it is said that "the IDP has identified infiltration after 
analyzing the types of agents and infiltrators. It concluded 
that anyone who has not propagandized Islam and promoted its 
slogan truthfully and sincerely is a linked agent, whether or 
not he is actually linked, because he must always swim in an 
international environment created by colonialism, act on the 
basis of the arrogant powers' policy and interests, and advocate 
the colonialist imports of democracy, socialism, nationalism, 
communism, etc. In any case, he is only a part of the political 
equation dictated by the colonialist policy planners." (p 77) 
  The second Gulf war was a turning point for Iraqi political 
action in general and Islamic parties in particular. These 
forces had hoped that the second Gulf war would succeed where 
the first Gulf war had failed by toppling the dictatorial regime 
in Iraq. The Islamic forces pinned great hopes on the March 1991 
revolt. However, the international and regional calculus 
precluded the success of that revolt. In its review of the 
revolt, the IDP states, regarding the position taken by 
countries in the region: 
  "The regional position was not better than the international 
position. Some governments in the region took pleasure in the 
tragedy that occurred in Iraq. Others displayed anxiety over the 
people's revolt; they feared the next regime, because it would 
represent the Iraqi people's will." 
  Regarding Iran's position, the IDP states in its review: 
"Countries which the Iraqi people had hoped would hasten to 
support it in its trial during the revolt, especially those 
countries which were a victim of the regime's crimes and hostile 
policies, did not rise to the occasion by providing what was 
essential to a people being harmed by hunger brought on by a 
bloody, savage regime" (the pamphlet, "Our Program," March 1992, 
p 39). 
  This analysis reflects the IDP's difference with Iran, which 
apparently goes back to before the second Gulf war, when Iran 
selected Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim instead of the IDP to head the 
Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, which was set 
up as a framework for political action in opposition to the 
Iraqi regime. The IDP continued to be a member of the council, 
though only nominally. 
  After the second Gulf war, the IDP opened--under the heading 
of flexibility--to the neighboring Arab countries, specifically 
Saudi Arabia. A delegation of IDP leaders visited Saudi Arabia 
on more than one occasion to meet with senior Saudi officials. 
In consonance with the orientations of Syria, Saudi Arabia, and 
several other Iraqi political forces, the party joined the 
preparatory committee laying the ground for a congress of the 
Iraqi opposition in Beirut in March 1991. It subsequently became 
an active member in the joint action committee and cooperated 
with the group that attended the Vienna congress (in June 1992). 
However, at the last minute, it announced that it would not 
participate in the congress for procedural, formal reasons 
pertaining to the timing of the congress and allocation of 
[representational] proportions among the political forces in the 
committees. Nonetheless, the IDP continued to cooperate with the 
parties that participated in the Vienna congress, which was 
crowned, at the Salah-al-Din and Shaqlawah meeting on 22-27 
September 1992, in a joint agreement to hold an enlarged Iraqi 
opposition congress with the participation of the Islamic 
parties, including the IDP. In October 1992, the Iraqi National 
Congress was held at Salah-al-Din, Irbil, with the participation 
of the IDP, which joined the congress's executive council under 
the chairmanship of Dr. Ahmad Chalabi. 
<H5>  The IDP Withdraws From the National Congress </H5>
  In late August 1993, the IDP announced that it was 
withdrawing from the Iraqi National Congress, a move that had 
been hinted quietly for some time. 
  This announcement, and statements made by party leaders, 
were 
general and avoided specifics, which prompts a number of 
observations: 

  -  Because the Iraqi National Congress was known for its 
alliance with the West, specifically America, before the Irbil 
congress was convened, some Iraqi political forces and 
personalities boycotted the congress, but the IDP attended it. 
  -  The IDP's reservations regarding several leaders of the 
Congress can be overcome through the application of internal 
regulations and the holding of free elections. In this regard, 
one asks why the IDP did not wait for, or request, the 
convocation of the congress's national assembly to discuss all 
of its reservations candidly and clearly, instead of alluding to 
unaddressed reservations? For the Congress leaders' failure to 
convene the national assembly, or their refusal to convene it 
for any reason, would be a mistake that would put the National 
Congress on the popular, democratic touchstone to which it lays 
claim. 
  -  The IDP's solitary exit from the Congress, without 
coordinating 
with the other participating forces, at least the other Islamic 
forces, weakens the IDP movement, especially in the Islamic 
milieu. Moreover, it entrenches division within the Islamic 
house. Here, a question arises: How can one speak of the 
opposition's unity when a primary group in the Islamic movement 
fails to at least unify Islamic ranks? 
  -  Since the second Gulf war, accessibility and political 
flexibility--which are necessary at times, provided that the 
party and its leaders are clear about their objectives--have not 
been seen in the IDP's course. The party is intransigent in 
negotiations and in indoctrinating its members, and it rejects 
others. However, publicly, in the Arab world and 
internationally, it speaks of unity and a consolidation of 
forces. At the same time that it rejects colonialism and all 
arrogant powers, it seeks justifications for cooperating with 
Western powers and America, and it enters into political 
alliances with forces that are proteges of the West and America. 
These contradictions must necessarily be reflected in the 
party's ranks and bases. It may be that the main reason for the 
IDP's withdrawal from the Unified Iraqi National Congress is its 
desire to overcome an internal crisis. 
  -  Some IDP leaders justify cooperation with the Congress, 
despite 
its Americanness, with the argument that it is the only 
available auspices for toppling Saddam Husayn through a military 
coup that ushers in a transitional government that moves Iraq 
toward popular, Islamic rule. Therefore, the IDP agreed to a 
role in the National Congress that is not in proportion to its 
popularity, and it is also speaking moderately in the hope of 
eliminating the charge of "terrorism" against it, all of this in 
the hope that the U.S. administration will continue Bush's 
declared course of calling for Saddam's ouster. However, today, 
after Bill Clinton's advent, Saddam's ouster no longer tops the 
U.S. agenda. Consequently, the IDP no longer sees any 
justification for remaining in the Iraqi National Congress. 
  -  The IDP's options have shrunk. Iran recognizes the Supreme 
Council of the Islamic Revolution and is interested in the 
survival of the Iraqi National Congress, which, for the first 
time, has given a Shiite political current a preeminent position 
in the Arab sphere. Also, the Kurds' approval of the National 
Congress formula means that they will stick with the Iraqi 
formula and not realize Iran's fear of Kurdish separatism. On 
the other hand, by withdrawing from the National Congress, the 
IDP loses an effective opposition pole represented by the Kurds. 
Action in the field in Iraq is impossible without these two 
arenas, unless Syria agrees to undertake active political 
action, which is not substantiated by events, inasmuch as Syria 
is now occupied with the Israeli, Palestinian, and Lebanese 
file, and any uncalculated change in Iraq might result in an 
alternate [regime] or political situation that does not serve 
Syria's current interests. In conclusion, re-examination, 
review, and new formulae for taking action are needed. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59818 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Al-Tikriti Aristocrats Attacked, Killed by Regime </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AE0580A London AL-HAYAH in Arabic 7 Sep 93 pp 1, 4 </F>
<F P=103> 93AE0580A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-HAYAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kamran Qarah Daghi] </F>
  [Text] London--Well-informed Iraqi sources confirmed to 
AL-HAYAH, following reports regarding a campaign of arrest and 
executions of scores of people in the wake of aborted a coup 
attempt in Iraq that took place last July, that the majority of 
those targeted by the campaign were influential personalities 
that belong to the al-Tikriti aristocracy. But these sources 
explained that these people were the target of repression not 
because they actually staged a coup, but also because they held 
meetings and contacts during which they discussed the 
deteriorating situation in the country. Some sources added that 
these people probably addressed a memo to Saddam Husayn calling 
on him to step down from power. 
  In the meantime French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said 
that 
his government supports maintaining UN sanctions against Iraq 
until it implements all the UN resolutions, including Resolution 
688. He added that Paris supports sending UN observers to Iraq 
in order to monitor human rights violations. 
  With regard to developments in Iraq, Iraqi sources said one 
of the victims was 'Ali 'Abd-al-Rahman Ahmad al-Dawud 
al-Hamadani, who was a security officer in the national command 
of the ruling Socialist Arab Ba'th Party who was arrested last 
Saturday. 
  The sources said that Safar Mawlud Mukhlis and his cousin 
Jasim Amin Mukhlis were among the victims. The first was a 
retired lawyer and was considered one of the traditionally 
eminent personalities in the Tikriti circle. His father, Mawlud 
Mukhlis was one of the leading personalities in the area and one 
of the early pioneers who cooperated with late King Faysal I in 
establishing the state of Iraq in the twenties. Because of this 
background his family enjoyed special respect and influence, 
even among the ruling al-Tikriti family, particularly during the 
era of late president Ahmad Hasan al-Bakr. But the family's 
influence diminished in Saddam's era. 
  Persons arriving in Amman from Baghdad said it was customary 
of Safar to talk in his regular private meetings about Saddam 
Husayn with sarcasm, sometimes calling him "this 'ajay," which 
in al-Tikriti slang means scoundrel, as an expression of 
contempt, which the al-Tikriti aristocrats feel toward al-Majid 
family, to which the Iraqi president belongs. As for Raji 'Abbas 
al-Tikriti, he, too, is considered an "aristocrat." In the 
seventies he was the commandant of al-Rashid military hospital, 
then director of medical affairs in the defense ministry. He was 
doyen of the doctors' association in 1990-92. 
  On the other hand, Iraqi experts and opposition members told 
AL-HAYAH yesterday that bringing Husayn Kamil, President Saddam 
Husayn's son-in-law, back into the government and appointing him 
minister of industry and minerals; and appointing Safa' Hadi 
Jawad al-Habbubi minister of petroleum; is an indication that 
the Iraqi president intends to concentrate further on mobilizing 
the country's resources to serve military industrialization. 
  The sources said that al-Habbubi (47 years), whose family 
name did not appear in the list of the new ministers, was an 
undersecretary for the ministry of military industrialization, 
which was headed by Husayn Kamil and was responsible for the 
Iraqi armament program, including nuclear and chemical programs. 
Up to that time he was director of the British Matrix Churchill 
company, which supplied Iraq with equipment for the manufacture 
of a giant gun. He is one of those accused in the case of the 
BNL Bank and in February 1991, he was charged with fraud. 
  The sources noticed that even up to last year's winter he 
frequently traveled to Tunis via Amman in order to follow-up 
contacts with European companies specialized in armament. He 
invested his money in Jordan in order to buy a company for metal 
manufacturing. But he stopped traveling after he was involved in 
a car accident after which he was taken to the Amman Surgical 
Hospital. Husayn Kamil sent a squad of bodyguards to protect 
him. The sources said that the WASHINGTON POST in the United 
States reported then that al-Habbubi, who is in Jordan, is 
wanted for justice in the United States. 
  In London, chairman of the executive council of the Iraqi 
National Congress, Ahmad al-Chalabi was informed through a 
message from the French foreign minister that Iraq has been 
urged to implement all the UN resolutions, including Resolution 
688 that forbids the regime from repressing civilian 
inhabitants. He pointed in this regard to France's participation 
in the Western force to protect the Kurds. 
  He said Paris's demand to ease sanctions on Iraq depends on 
Iraq's implementation of all the Security Council resolutions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59819 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Role of Cooperatives in Economy Reviewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0014A Baghdad AL-'IRAQ in Arabic 11 Sep 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0014A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad AL-'IRAQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Shakir Mahmud al-Mashhadani, vice-chairman </F>
of the General Federation of Cooperatives, by Jabbar Tarrad, 
place and date given: "The Cooperative Movement Between 
Proponents and Opponents of Its Role in Our Daily Lives"] 
  [Text] It is the hard times, rather than those of 
prosperity, that truly test people's mettle. Hardships harden 
people and hone their abilities to confront challenges. 
  Our country has gone through a difficult experience that 
gave 
rise to other experiences. Some of those experiences have been 
beneficial and others may be written off as negatives. 
Cooperatives have been one such experience. 
  The cooperative movement was launched in Iraq with the 
promulgation of Cooperatives Law No. 22 of 2/7/1922. The first 
consumer cooperative was founded in 1937 in Baghdad's 
al-Za'franiyah district. 
  Cooperatives Law No. 202 of 1970 was promulgated by the 
glorious 17-30 July revolution to define the parameters of 
cooperative action. Cooperatives have continued to proliferate 
and their number grew to 203 by 10/6/1991. Did those 
cooperatives live up to their raison d'etre by helping citizens 
endure the infamous economic boycott imposed upon our steadfast 
country? Or were they a merely a means for lining the pockets of 
certain individuals who infiltrated that vital sector with 
commercial agendas designed to serve their personal interests? 
  The proponents and opponents of the cooperative sector have 
been debated that question back and forth. There are even those 
who accuse that sector of failing to achieve the well-publicized 
economic objectives that prompted its creation. 
  To ascertain the workings of that sector and the problems 
and 
difficulties that beset it, causing many citizens to express 
dissatisfaction with cooperative organizations and their 
activities, AL-'IRAQ interviewed those charged with 
responsibility for that sector whose motto is: "Serving Citizens 
Is Our Objective, The Prosperity of Society Is Our Goal, and 
Breaking the Unjust Siege Is Our Quest." 
  We interviewed Mr. Shakir Mahmud al-Mashhadani for this 
comprehensive discourse, which is not devoid of frankness. 
  [Tarrad] The federation has existed for sometime now and has 
enjoyed the support and patronage of the [country's] leadership. 
Has it realized the aspirations of the revolution and the 
patriotic objectives with which it is charged? 
  [al-Mashhadani] Yes, were the country living under 
conditions 
of normalcy. We will not, however, use the siege as an excuse 
for not achieving programs and objectives in their ambitious 
forms. We point out, however, that this sector deals directly 
with the public, be it in the fields of consumption, service, 
production, or housing. As such, we face many obstacles. It is 
common knowledge that cooperative sector purchases for 
consumption can only be of products available in domestic 
markets, of whatever else we can buy on commercial markets, and 
of other essentials supplied by the Ministry of Trade such as 
sugar, rice, and small quantities of tallow. Our sector has no 
recourse but to sell at government-set prices and can not 
deviate from them whereas goods available on commercial markets 
are governed by factors that run contrary to government-fixed 
pricing. Our outlets therefore have little to offer and we can't 
meet the needs even of one-half of cooperative members. 
  [Tarrad] How do you plan to deal with that situation? The 
siege is a fact of life. Are you going to deal with it sitting 
on your hands when the citizenry expects you to supply its needs? 
  [al-Mashhadani] Indeed we have strategies and have begun the 
search for alternative sources of basic goods in order to supply 
members enrolled in the cooperative sector. Merchants are the 
only problem we now face since they control the market. If only 
they would cooperate with us we would be able to maintain 
stability. They should be content with a reasonable profit on 
their transactions with us. We believe that this is a difficult 
equation that be achieved only through the efforts of the good 
and honorable sons of our beloved fatherland. 
  [Tarrad] A vast network of cooperatives has sprung up 
throughout the country but the federation's efficacy and its 
oversight function are nowhere to be seen? 
  [al-Mashhadani] This is a valid indictment. We have 
established representative offices of the cooperative movement 
in all the governorates and have bolstered the efficacy of 
internal oversight to keep pace with the proliferation of 
cooperatives. We also conduct unannounced inspections, 
especially of new cooperatives, and we allow people's groups 
supervisory roles when distributing building supplies and other 
subsidized essential goods. 
  [Tarrad] Cooperatives are charged with negligence in 
assuring the needs of their members, that their boards 
appropriate their offerings, and that their employees undermine 
the [cooperative] movement by their belligerency towards 
member-shoppers. 
  [al-Mashhadani] There may be some truth to that. We, as a 
federation, issue direct guidelines as well as circulars to 
convey the instructions given by the leader President Saddam 
Husayn, may God keep him and nurture him, when he honored the 
cooperative movement with an audience. He impressed upon us the 
importance of treating citizens with dignity and justice. We 
consider that an order to be obeyed and have circulated [that 
directive] to all our cooperatives and conveyed it to them in 
face-to-face meetings. We take immediate and direct action 
against those cooperatives that do not rise to that directive. 
[In that,] we depend not only on written reports but also on 
those that are phoned in and that we immediately investigate. We 
are delighted that all the reports and complaints we received 
had merit and that prompt and immediate remedial action was 
taken. 
  [Tarrad] Would you cite an example? 
  [al-Mashhadani] A lady contacted me personally to inform me 
that the chairman of one cooperative and its secretary-general 
obtained a refrigerator and a freezer without benefit of 
lottery. We investigated the matter and took appropriate action 
against those individuals. I would like to mention something 
positive for the record. Our citizens have reached such a state 
of understanding that they report all the aberrations that they 
witness. 
  [Tarrad] Many members are discouraged from shopping at their 
cooperatives because of their distant locations and because 
there are no established shopping hours. Consequently, those who 
live in their vicinity get the lion's share and those who are 
not get nothing. 
  [al-Mashhadani] Our objective in the cooperative movement is 
to achieve justice. As far as cooperative are concerned, we 
have two types of cooperatives: professional and geographic. For 
example, al-Zawra' consumer cooperative whose membership is 
composed of journalists, has to dedicate one shopping day for 
employees of AL-'IRAQ and another for employees of AL-THAWRAH. 
The same holds true for the cooperatives of physicians, 
engineers, etc. Geographic cooperatives are meant for retirees 
who are not issued central market cards and who do not belong to 
professional cooperatives. I would like to point out here that 
those with central market cards are not allowed membership in 
federation cooperatives. We are serious about this rule and 
violators will face the consequences. We hope to raise the 
awareness of those individuals because this is the only way to 
ward off violations. Frankly, violating that rule effectively 
means stealing somebody else's rights. We will be deferring to 
the findings of a member's precinct and of the People's Council. 
The federation shall continue to be on top of that. 
  [Tarrad] What action do you take against those [violators]? 
  [al-Mashhadani] We have instructed the Oversight and 
Inspection Organization to make unscheduled inspections of 
cooperative society books. Those found in violation would be 
dropped from membership and their precincts notified. I would 
like to point out that cooperative chairmen and 
secretaries-general are directly accountable to us for such 
incidents. We have indeed found a number of cooperatives to be 
in violation and have, as a result, dismissed their boards and 
merged them with other cooperatives or turned them into 
cooperative markets for other cooperatives whose boards function 
properly in a manner consistent with our primary objective of 
service to citizens. 
  [Tarrad] Do you have a specific strategy to develop 
cooperative action and to keep out opportunists? 
  [al-Mashhadani] This is both very difficult and easy at the 
same time. The secret lies in how aware cooperative general 
assembly members are. General assemblies have to elect honest 
and competent members and this is our only guarantee against 
opportunists who manage to infiltrate cooperatives as they 
proliferate. We are serious about holding conferences to renew 
confidence in members of administrative assemblies. 
  [Tarrad] What happened to the year-end statements of 
cooperatives and why haven't the members received their share of 
the profits? 
  [al-Mashhadani] I am the one to answer to this. Professional 
federations and all service cooperatives have forwarded their 
statements with the exception of three societies in the 
production sector and the books of the latter are already in the 
hands of [the accountants]. It was impressed upon those 
cooperatives that unless their statements are completed within 
two months their boards would be dismissed and their managers 
held to task. 
  [Tarrad] What are the activities of the professional housing 
cooperative federation. Does it have strategies for dealing with 
the economic problems that burden the citizenry? 
  [al-Mashhadani] We follow the leader's directives on the 
housing sector in that its function should not be limited to the 
distribution of building lots. This can be handled by the state. 
The housing sector has therefore begun to prepare studies on 
low-cost housing in coordination with architects and 
specialists. We received studies and models from several sources 
and have begun looking into these models. Cost accounting, 
however, showed that they are very costly and we are therefore 
proceeding slowly for the time being in view of the onerous 
siege. We have distributed several building lots in the 
governorates and are obliging citizens to build on them in 
conformity with the award-winning prototypes models made 
available by the Ministry of Housing and Reconstruction. 
  [Tarrad] And the service cooperative federation--what is its 
purpose and has it won the satisfaction of those whom it serves? 
  [al-Mashhadani] The function of that federation is to 
provide 
services to the inhabitants of housing complexes and to offer 
household services through equipment repair and mass 
transportation cooperatives. This year, it is transporting the 
employees of 13 ministries on 1034 busses of which 758 are 
currently in operation, 145 in need of major repairs, and 131 in 
need of minor repairs. We have been able to resurrect some 
busses that were completely broken down. We are grateful to the 
Ministry of Industry for supplying 300 batteries and we 
anticipate the delivery of tires for those busses. As to 
services for housing complexes, the competent federation 
responsible for 12 such complexes in Baghdad and in the 
governorates, has its problems. Those are not easy and they 
relate primarily to subsidized transit fares which fall short of 
providing permanency and sustainability. We are optimistic about 
the future, though. 
  [Tarrad] What pragmatic working plans does the federation 
have for supplying future citizen needs? 
  [al-Mashhadani] We have ambitious plans and programs and it 
is our hope that the cooperative sector would attract aware and 
educated elements that would help bolster its relations with 
other populist organizations in the effort to achieve our 
primary objective of securing for citizens a better quality of 
life. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59820 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Relocation of Institutions in Baghdad Called Political </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AE0617A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 13 Sep 93 p 13 </F>
<F P=103> 93AE0617A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Khalid al-Qashtini: "Al-Karkh: Baghdad's Gate to </F>
the Bedouin Arabs; al-Rasafah: The Capital's Gap for Foreign 
Invasion"] 
  [Text] London--The relocation of government 
institutions from al-Karkh to al-Rasafah had important political 
and human significance, denoting the transfer of the center of 
influence from Arabs to non-Arabs; the Tigris guards Baghdad 
from the south and west against the semidesert (Arabs) and opens 
it from north and east to Iran and Central Asia 
  I have dwelt too long on Baghdad, on the two sides of 
al-Rasafah and al-Karkh, and on why storks landed on the 
al-Rasafah side and why people from Najd settled on the al-Karkh 
side. I have received a variety of comments on this issue, which 
is worth examination because of the place that Baghdad has 
occupied in Arab literature. The names of al-Karkh and 
al-Rasafah are mentioned in numerous creative works of verse and 
in entertaining anecdotes. This is something that has aroused in 
me the wish to tackle the various aspects of this issue, even if 
with some brevity. 
  An interesting thing about the Arab conquerors is that 
wherever they went, they took with them their nomadic character, 
embodied in their camels, their date palms, and their Bedouin 
traditions. They were eager to maintain their intellectual and 
material contact with the desert. All peoples send their 
children from the countryside to urbanized cities to learn 
refined language and civilized ways, except for the Arabs, who 
sent their children from urbanized cities to the desert to learn 
refined language and the Bedouin ways of life. This is what the 
Arabs did with the Apostle Muhammad, God's peace and prayers be 
upon him, when they handed him over to Halimah al-Sa'diyah. 
<H5>  Arab Strategy </H5>
  When the Arabs established their capitals, they located them 
on the brink of the desert, as in the case of al-Basrah, 
al-Kufah, Wasit, Damascus, and al-Ramlah. This was part of the 
Arab strategy developed by Abu-Bakr, the first caliph, may God 
be pleased with him, when he instructed his commanders not to 
allow water to separate him from the Muslim armies. This 
strategy was the secret behind the impregnable Arab power. If 
Arabs wanted to raid the enemy, they could catch him. But if the 
enemy wanted to raid them, they withdrew into the desert's 
belly, and so he could not catch them. 
  In accordance with this strategy, Caliph Abu-Ja'far 
al-Mansur 
built his circular city, Baghdad--the city of peace. He chose 
for it the western bank of the Tigris River, thus letting the 
river stand as a defense line separating his capital from the 
other peoples to the north and the east and leaving his back 
open to the desert. This is the geographic position of the 
al-Karkh side, or of al-Karkh when approached from Baghdad. 
  But Baghdad's growth compelled its inhabitants to move to 
the 
opposite side of the river, or in the direction of al-Rasafah. 
Soon, this side became the bigger of the two. Nearly two 
centuries later, the caliphs moved their palaces and their 
governments to this side of the river and allowed the circular 
city that had been built by al-Mansur to disintegrate and 
collapse, and to let all traces of its walls disappear. There is 
no doubt that the circular city was not big enough to 
accommodate the capital of a major empire, which Baghdad was 
destined to be. 
  The transfer of government from al-Karkh to al-Rasafah was 
politically and humanly significant, denoting the transfer of 
the center of influence from Arabs to non-Arabs. Consequently, 
the Tigris River protected the city's southern and western 
flanks from the desert (Arabs) and opened it from the north and 
the east to Iran and Central Asia. From that time on, the caliph 
became a toy in the hands of non-Arabs. Perhaps we can consider 
the move to al-Rasafah to be one of the biggest military 
mistakes committed by the Abbasides. Soon thereafter, Hulago 
invaded Iraq and found nothing to obstruct his way to an open 
Baghdad. 
  This geographic position of al-Karkh and al-Rasafah has had 
an important impact that has continued to exist to this day and 
that has played its role in our modern history. The al-Karkh 
side has continued to be inclined toward the desert. It has also 
been the home of Arabism and Islam, whereas al-Rasafah became a 
cosmopolitan city (multinational, multireligious, and 
multiethnic). It became a haven for non-Arabs and foreigners, a 
playground for entertainment and a place of song, dance, and 
opulent and sophisticated living. This is the situation 
currently. There is hardly a non-Arab and non-Muslim home in 
al-Karkh, whereas al-Rasafah is divided into varied cosmopolitan 
quarters. It has the Christian Quarter, the Jewish Quarter, the 
Kurdish Section, the Armenian Camp, and so forth. 
<H5>  Tolerance Versus Fanaticism </H5>
  Lifestyles have also been divided along the above lines of 
division. Al-Rasafah is characterized by tolerance, and al-Karkh 
is characterized by clannishness and by clinging to tradition. 
To this day, unveiled women have continued to avoid passing 
through al-Karkh. When Salwa, my sister, went to visit our old 
homes in al-Suq al-Jadid with her face unveiled, a storm of 
protest rose against us, and my sister did not visit the area at 
all for years. A similar storm rose when the quarter's 
inhabitants noticed poet Naji al-Qashtini, my uncle, in a 
carriage, with his unveiled wife sitting next to him. 
  We moved out of al-Karkh in the 1930s, which saw the start 
of 
the process of a class emigration. Many people, including my 
father, may he rest in peace, noticed that the area's sternness 
and clannishness were no longer compatible with the developments 
of the time. So they sold their homes and moved to the new 
development areas in al-A'zamiyah, al-Battawin, and al-Karradah. 
  However, the majority stayed. With time, al-Karkh turned 
into 
a stronghold of the advocates of pan-Arabism, such as 
'Abd-al-Salam 'Arif, 'Abd-al-Rahman 'Arif, and Naji al-Suwaydi. 
  Inversely, leftist activity spread on the al-Rasafah side, 
and it is from this side's school that numerous communist, 
socialist, and democratic leaders graduated, such as Zaki 
Muhammad Busaym and Husayn Jamil. 
  In 1958, 'Abd-al-Karim Qasim staged his coup, which resulted 
a few days later in a bitter conflict between the Communist 
Party and the Ba'th Party, and between the advocates of 
separatism on the one hand and the advocates of Arab unity on 
the other. In that conflict, Iraq, and the Arabs generally, 
faced another chapter of the Karkh-Rasafah polarization. 
'Abd-al-Karim Qasim, Wasfi Tahir, and al-Mahdawi were from 
al-Rasafah and were supported by the advocates of regionalism 
and the leftist philosophy. These men were countered by 
'Abd-al-Salam 'Arif and al-Shawwaf from al-Karkh, and these two 
were supported by the advocates of pan-Arabism and Arab unity. 
  There was some sort of a psychological conflict between the 
two sides. Al-Rasafah people characterized al-Karkh people as 
fanatic and savage, and al-Karkh people characterized the 
Rasafah people as corrupt and dissolute. My father was from 
al-Karkh and my mother from al-Rasafah. Whenever he got into an 
argument or had a quarrel with her, he cursed the hour when he 
married a woman from "that direction," which is the phrase the 
al-Karkh people give to the al-Rasafah side. They even refuse to 
refer to al-Rasafah by name, calling it "that direction." 
  This bias is, in fact, a part of the lengthy historical 
development of the city of al-Mansur and al-Rashid, and of the 
inflow of non-Arab and non-Muslim peoples to the al-Rasafah 
side, which is open to the north and the west, and the inflow of 
the sons of Arab tribes to al-Karkh, the side that is open to 
the south and the west, i.e., to the desert. 
  This explains why the people of Najd have persistently 
emigrated to and landed on the al-Karkh side. This side is not 
only the closest to them, but is also the side of Arabism, 
Islam, Bedouin values, and an absence of the elements of 
diversion that are found on the other side. This is the answer 
to my question as to why the Najd people settled in al-Karkh and 
avoided al-Rasafah. 
  We encounter the reverberations of this makeup even in the 
city's economic life. One secret behind al-Rasafah's expansion 
is the presence of craftsmen's markets and vocational markets on 
this side, in addition to the presence of government offices and 
courts, of course. This is confirmed by the names of some of 
al-Rasafah's markets, such as the Goldsmiths Market, the Weavers 
Market, the Brass Founders Market, the Tailors Market, and the 
Cobblers Market. Arabs despise crafts and vocations. 
Consequently, no significant presence of such markets is found 
in al-Karkh. What one finds there are some crafts that are tied 
to Bedouin life, such as articles needed for camels and horses; 
Bedouin clothes, such as robes, gowns, and headgear; articles 
needed for tents, and similar stuff that is sold in 'Alawi 
al-Hillah. 
<H5>  One City </H5>
  The two sides are not, of course, separated totally, because 
they form one city. This city's caliphs and rulers have 
constantly tied the two sides, first with one bridge and then 
with two bridges, to which various modern governments added more 
bridges. These bridges have played a major role in Baghdad's 
social, literary, political, and even military life. Ibn Batutah 
visited the city and referred to its two bridges, saying, 
"Baghdad has two bridges tied in the fashion we described when 
we mentioned the al-Hillah Bridge. People, both men and women, 
cross them day and night. In this regard, they are on an endless 
picnic." 
  From Ibn Batutah's description of the al-Hillah City Bridge, 
we conclude that the Baghdad Bridge was built on a number of 
vessels tied by iron chains to a wooden pole on each side, as he 
says. As for his reference to an endless picnic, it reminds us 
that the bridge area has continued to be to this day the area of 
fashion, display, and watching. It is in this area that young 
men watched young women. We conclude this from numerous literary 
anecdotes. 
  It is said that 'Ali Ibn Jahm appeared before Caliph 
al-Mutawakkil when he, 'Ali, had just arrived from the desert 
and proceeded to praise the caliph with these coarse words: 
  "You are like a dog in your loyalty and like a billy goat in 
butting heads with difficulties; 
  "You are like a bucket, may God preserve you for us, and 
some 
big buckets are full of sins." 
  Al-Mutawakkil was a wise man, who realized the man's poetic 
potential and who, at the same time, realized that Ibn Jahm 
meant well and that he was praising him in the ways he was used 
to paying tribute in his Bedouin life. So the caliph ordered 
that Ibn Jahm be given a home on the bank of the Tigris, right 
next to the bridge. He then summoned the poet six months later 
and asked him to recite some of his verses. Ibn Jahm proceeded 
to utter this verse, which is truly famous for its sweetness: 
  "Deer's eyes between al-Rasafah and the bridge have hit me 
with love from every direction." 
  All this change only six months after watching the eyes of 
Baghdad's women! A lot has been said about these women's beauty. 
Ibn Batutah drew attention to this beauty when he said, "Between 
Baghdad's water and her air, feminine beauty arises." About 
Baghdad's women, one poet has said: 
  "My heart yearns for its Baghdad and its Iraq; for its 
gazelles and for the beauty in their eyes; 
  "They strut in paradise as if platonic love were part of the 
city's qualities." 
  Narrators recount that a woman from the al-Rasafah side was 
crossing to the western (al-Karkh) side when she was accosted by 
a young man, who said to her, "God's mercy be upon 'Ali Ibn 
Jahm." She responded, "And may God's mercy be upon Abu-al-'Ala' 
al-Mi'arri." Then each went his way. People asked the man what 
it was that he had said to make her give him this answer. He 
said that he had asked God to have mercy on 'Ali Ibn Jahm, thus 
reminding her of his verse, "Deer eyes between al-Rasafah and 
the bridge...." She responded by asking God to have mercy on Abu 
al-'Ala' al-Mi'arri, thus reminding him of al-Mi'arri's verse: 
  "Oh how sad, she lives nearby, but the path to her home is 
strewn with horrors!" 
  Thus, the Baghdad Bridge was a playground for lovers, 
flirts, 
and for perfume and medicine vendors; a meeting place for ulema 
and jurisprudents; and a pavement for Koran reciters and 
beggars. But even beggars were of a special kind, according to 
Abu-Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Ja'far al-Bur'i who has said, "I passed 
by a beggar sitting on the bridge. He was saying, 'A poor blind 
man.' I gave him a coin and said to him: 'You have wished me 
nothing in return.' The beggar answered: 'For your charity, it 
is: Have mercy.' 
  With time, the Baghdad Bridge gained extreme political and 
military importance. Al-Mansur made the right strategic 
calculations when he selected the location, considering that the 
city is situated at the point that represents the shortest 
distance between the Tigris and the Euphrates and at the center 
of the route that separates the Syrian semidesert and Najd from 
Kurdistan's mountains and Iran. For many centuries, the Baghdad 
Bridge was the only crossing point between the eastern and 
western sides of the Tigris. It is, of course, the crossing 
point between al-Karkh and al-Rasafah, each of which represents 
a human polarization point, as we have already pointed out. 
Control of this bridge became a major mobilizational objective. 
A number of skirmishes and battles were staged on this bridge, 
and I was witness to some of them. 
  In the final days of Rashid 'Ali al-Kaylani's uprising in 
May 
1941, British forces approached the rebellious city. The Iraqi 
military command hastened to fortify the bridge with some barbed 
wire, machine guns, and one single, miserable tank. But the 
bridge surrendered when al-Kaylani's government collapsed and 
fled. The British then proceeded to open the route, through this 
bridge, to send supplies to the Soviet Union. 
  The successive governments feared that the "savage" al-Karkh 
people would cross into al-Rasafah (the seat of the government) 
whenever a crisis developed. Thus, the government hastened to 
secure the bridge with soldiers to prevent al-Karkh people from 
crossing over when Rashid 'Ali al-Kaylani's government fell. 
<H5>  The Al-Farhud Operation </H5>
  The al-Farhud operation erupted in Baghdad. As a result, 
some 
people were killed and their homes and shops were looted, 
because they were considered sympathizers with the British. I 
was in al-Karkh at the time. So, I came out to watch this 
al-Farhud that was running in the direction of al-Rasafah. But 
police detachments, which had been deployed on the bridge, 
opened fire in the air in a desperate attempt to stop the 
"savage" al-Karkh people from crossing over to al-Rasafah. 
  The same kind of operation recurred in the 1948 uprising 
against the Iraqi-British friendship treaty (the Portsmouth 
treaty). This time, I was on the al-Rasafah side, and I saw the 
police open fire on the al-Karkh crowds, also to stop them from 
crossing to al-Rasafah. Blood flowed copiously on the Baghdad 
Bridge. One of the people killed in that incident was Ja'far 
al-Jawahiri, the brother of poet Muhammad Mahdi al-Jawahiri. 
Ja'far's death was the occasion for a magnificent poem, of which 
every educated Iraqi has memorized some verses: 
  "Do you or do you not know that victims' wounds are a mouth; 
A mouth that makes no claims and that asks for no mercy; A mouth 
that tells the starving destitute: Sacrifice your blood, be 
generous." 
  I attended the funeral of Ja'far al-Jawahiri, and I heard 
the 
lines of people escorting the funeral reiterate in 'mass frenzy:' 
  "It was on the bridge, on the bridge; the battle took place 
on the bridge." 
  This government fear of al-Karkh people has its historical 
justifications. The al-Karkh side has often created problems for 
the government, especially after numerous members of the 'Aqil 
tribe settled in al-Karkh. In 1834, the 'Anzah tribe clashed 
with the forces of 'Ali Rida Pasha, the Ottoman ruler, and 
emerged from the battle triumphant. Consequently, the tribe 
gained control of the entire area south and west of Baghdad and 
camped in the area known as 'Akarkuf. As soon as the 'Aqil 
tribe, which lived in al-Karkh, heard of the 'Anzah tribe's 
victories against the Ottoman Army, it felt stronger and was 
emboldened. So it rebelled against the ruler, took control of 
the coffee shops overlooking the bridge, and cut off the bridge. 
A heated, day-long battle then ensued between al-Karkh, which 
was controlled by 'Aqil, and al-Rasafah, which was controlled by 
the Ottoman forces. But the ruler's forces were not able to 
prevail in that battle until they borrowed the British consul's 
boat and used it as a military boat against the al-Karkh people. 
  In his book, "Social Glimpses of Iraq's Modern History," Dr. 
'Ali al-Wardi says, "But something worse than the battle started 
then. Soldiers rushed into the al-Karkh side to indulge in 
whatever they wished to indulge in. So they plundered the 
markets and set fire to them. Then they marched into homes and 
started looting them. They then proceeded to violate women and 
to offend them in indescribable ways. Women's screams could be 
heard from the al-Rasafah side. In one scandal, an Albanian 
soldier tried to rape a woman who resisted him, so he killed 
her. The woman's body was taken to Shaykh 'Abd-al-Qadir 
al-Kaylani's shrine and was deposited at the shrine's doorstep. 
There, the head of Prophet Muhammad's descendants ordered that 
she be buried as a martyr." 
<H5>  A Little of What Baghdad's People Have Experienced </H5>
  It seems that the al-Karkh side has also played the role of 
safe haven and refuge for outlaws who have fled to the area and 
from there to Bedouin tribes and to semidesert villages. Thus, 
the authorities were unable to pursue and arrest them. 
  Saddam Husayn is, of course, considered a living example of 
this fact. After he tried to assassinate 'Abd-al-Karim Qasim, 
Saddam crossed to the al-Karkh side and fled from there to the 
Arabian Peninsula and then to Damascus and Egypt. The same 
happened with Mufti 'Abd-al-'Aziz Jamil Zadah, who led on 28 May 
1832 the inhabitants of Qanbar Quarter of al-Rasafah in an armed 
rebellion against the Ottoman ruler. At the time, Abu-al-Thana' 
al-Alusi went to al-Karkh to urge its inhabitants to join the 
rebellion. But the ruler's troops were able to suppress the 
rebellion by turning their guns on Qanbar Quarter and setting it 
afire. The soldiers then proceeded to loot the mufti's home and 
to burn its library, which contained nearly 7,000 volumes. 
  When that uprising failed, the mufti crossed over to 
al-Karkh 
and took refuge with al-'Aqil tribe, which was able to smuggle 
him, along with his companions, to the village of 'Anah on the 
upper Euphrates River and the heights overlooking the Syrian 
semidesert. 
  The Baghdad Bridge has witnessed momentous historical events 
in its long history. It has its tragic aspect, which is embodied 
in the massacres perpetrated on both its sides; in the 
executions that have been carried out at its ends; and in the 
suicides that some Baghdadi people (mostly women) commit by 
jumping off the bridge into the river running under it. But the 
bridge has its funny side also. Numerous jokes and anecdotes are 
told about the bridge and about those who cross it, both man and 
beast. 
<H5>  Escaped Bridge </H5>
  Frequently, the violent flow of the Tigris River during the 
flood days in the spring have torn the bridge away from its 
moorings and dragged it downriver, with the people atop the 
bridge screaming and imploring heaven for their safety and the 
safety of their bridge. The bridge used to be carried away by 
the current for long distances before the authorities could get 
hold of it and return it to its location. People used to bring a 
band to the river bank to play certain tunes that were supposed 
to return the bridge to its place, as if this bridge were a 
living creature who could hear their tunes and respond to their 
call. The late Haqqi al-Shibli told me that he saw the unmoored 
bridge pass through the al-Karradah Quarter with amazing speed. 
Suddenly, a man standing on the drifting bridge gestured with 
his hand and called Shibli at the top of his lungs, telling him, 
"O man whom I don't know and who doesn't know me, look at me and 
tell my mother, may God have mercy upon your parents, that the 
bridge got untied with her son on it and that he doesn't know 
where he is going!" 
  Oh, what words with which to sum up the aimlessness in which 
Baghdad's people have lived throughout their tragic history! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59821 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Taha Yasin Ramadan Opens Arab Teachers' Union Meeting </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0038A Baghdad AL-THAWRAH in Arabic 3 Oct 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0038A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad AL-THAWRAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sa'ib 'Abd al-Muhsin] </F>
  [Text] Meetings of the Council of the Arab Teachers' Union 
began yesterday morning under the aegis of President leader 
Saddam Husayn and the slogan "The Arab Teachers' Union Struggles 
for the Nation's Bright Future." The meeting is hosted by the 
Iraqi Teachers' Union and will last five days. 
  The President leader Saddam Husayn deputized Vice President 
Taha Yasin Ramadan to attend the council meetings on his behalf. 
  Upon the arrival of the vice president, the band played the 
national anthem. The council meeting opened with a recital from 
the Koran and an invocation in memoriam for our and the Arab 
nation's martyrs. 
  This was followed by a speech by the vice president. He 
said: 
"I have the pleasure to act on behalf of President leader Saddam 
Husayn, may God preserve, in opening the meetings of the Arab 
Teachers' Union Council. I have the pleasure of conveying to you 
the greetings of his excellency and his wishes to you and for 
the success of your conference." 
  The president's representative added: "Convening your 
conference in Baghdad, the Baghdad of Arabism and victory, 
during the critical times your nation is passing through, 
abounds with evidence and proof that confirms that the sons of 
Arabism always rally in support of their lofty national 
objectives in which they believed, adhered to, and struggled for 
their sakes throughout the ages. All the treasonous and 
treacherous methods have failed to thwart them, nor aggression 
and betrayal did. On the contrary, the wider the circle of 
treason and conspiracy becomes the more resolved and the 
stronger they become. 
  Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan added: "The enemies, the 
Zionists, the imperialists, and the henchmen from among some of 
the traitorous Arab rulers and midgets believe that stepping up 
their conspiracies and aggression against Arab nations will 
achieve their ulterior objectives and designs for them. These 
people have forgotten that they all have joined hands against 
one particular Arab country, namely strong and powerful Iraq, in 
order to obstruct its path and inhibit its leadership." 
  He said that they believe that destroying all the economic, 
educational, service, cultural, and social structures, which the 
Iraqi people have built will break their resolve and will force 
them to abandon their principles and raise their hands in 
surrender. 
  He added: "It would perhaps benefit your conference to 
become 
acquainted with President leader Saddam Husayn's personal 
interest in teachers' affairs and the educational sector, 
beginning with kindergarten and ending with university. It is 
also to get acquainted with the resolutions passed by the 
leadership providing benefits for the teachers and university 
professors in order to raise the educational standards of 
schools and universities and realize a compressive educational 
progress. This is in addition to creating the right educational 
atmosphere for our students. It is to be borne in mind that the 
conditions of the siege and its difficulties did not diminish 
the concern to continue to promote education and knowledge." 
  The secretary-general of the Arab Teachers' Union made a 
speech in which he said: Your brother members of the Central 
Council of the Arab Teachers' Union are honored to be holding 
their meeting on this pure soil, the soil of proud Iraq, the 
Baghdad of Arabism, and the Baghdad of challenge under the 
banner "God is great." 
  He added: "Your brother teachers throughout the Arab arena 
have stood with you in support of your cause, which is the cause 
of us all. Iraq has been the target of treacherous aggression by 
30 countries [al-thalathini, reference to coalition forces] and 
of the shameful stands the Security Council adopted against Iraq 
with its unjust and iniquitous resolutions against the steadfast 
Iraqi people." 
  Fahd al-Shakrah, chairman of the National Union of Iraqi 
students, made a speech on behalf of popular organizations 
welcoming the Arab teachers participating in the conference. He 
wished the conference success in the country of the triumphant 
leader Saddam Husayn. 
  He was followed by Hatim al-'Ukaydi, doyen of Iraqi 
teachers, 
in which he said the glorious mother of battles will forever 
remain a bright page in our contemporary history. 
  He added: "The educational sector in Iraq, Iraq of 
education, 
Iraq of knowledge, and Iraq of inspired leader Saddam Husayn, 
has enjoyed special care in that the great revolution has 
provided this important and vital sector with all the means of 
success and comprehensive scientific progress. It also charted a 
bright future for this proud nation." 
  The republican anthem was then played marking the end of the 
opening ceremony of the conference. Separate meetings were then 
held. The first meeting was held last night to discuss research 
papers submitted to it. 
  Those who attended the opening ceremony included heads of 
popular organizations, the governor of Baghdad, and a large 
number of teachers. 
  13305 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59822 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Alternative Palestinian Agreement Offered </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019C Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 29 Nov 93 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019C </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafi Eytan] </F>
  [Text] Is there a chance that the agreement of principals 
will hold up? Is there a chance that the result will bring about 
stability in the system of relations between Israel and the 
Palestinians? In my estimation, no. 
  The agreement of principals was signed with 'Arafat alone, 
and 'Arafat does not have a majority on this issue in the 
Palestinian National Council. Most of the Palestinian 
organizations represented in it, including significant parts of 
Fatah, are opposed to the agreement of principals and stand for 
a continuation of the armed struggle against Israel, in 
accordance to the Palestinian Convention. They all have a 
smashing majority in Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza, especially among 
the young generation, which is the leader. A new generation has 
arisen that cannot reconcile with a co-existence with Israel, 
even in the borders of the Green Line. Most of them are steeped 
in, and believe in, the righteousness of the Palestinian 
Convention as it is, without change. 
  'Arafat, as chairman of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization 
(PLO), succeeded in surviving only by right of compromises with 
the extremists in his camp. In other words, he enabled them to 
continue on a practical, extremist line and did not go out 
against them with weapons. He cannot and would not want to 
absolutely prevent terrorist acts. We saw how he operated in 
Lebanon at the end of the 1970's and the early 1980's: The PLO 
reached a series of repeatedly changing agreements on 
co-existence with the Christians and Shi'ites; 'Arafat did not 
honor a single one of them. There is no reason that he would 
change his ways now. 
  The future Palestinian police, whose job it will be to 
preserve the peace and the citizens of Israel, according to that 
which is indicated up to now, will be comprised of a loyal 
section of the Palestinian population. That is, there will also 
be elements that formally or informally belong to extremist 
camps. To this day, these elements have few weapons, and, 
despite this, the acts of terrorism and shootings are relatively 
many. The weapons that will be given to the Palestinian police 
will increase their arsenal, intentionally as well--under the 
guidance of Yasir 'Arafat, in order to preserve his position, as 
well as by officers and individuals in the police--because of 
organizational or emotional involvement with terrorist 
organizations, as well as by means of acquisition or theft. 
  Under these conditions, how will the economic vision of the 
architect of the agreement of principals, Shim'on Peres, be 
realized, when Israeli businessmen who will have to meet 
colleagues in Ramallah or Gaza will have to risk their lives? 
  And on the matter of the settlers. The settlers of Judaea, 
Samaria, and the Gaza district, by the authority of the 
decisions of the governments of the left and right, feel that 
they are in danger. Our sages of blessed memory said that the 
duty of saving life overrides everything, and from the aspect of 
one who sees himself as a potential sacrifice--he overrides 
democracy as well as the "rule of law." Anyone who feels that 
his life is forsaken in any case will be astonished--where is 
the law [sentence as published]. The settlers, who suddenly 
stand before a wave of hatred, whose barricades were burst in 
the wake of the agreement of principals, cannot not avoid 
defending themselves. It should be remembered that the Israel 
Defense Forces is also made up of fathers and sons whose 
position on Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza district is not 
necessarily that of the Israeli government. If so, Israel is at 
risk of a civil war. 
  All of these factors, and many others, when they accumulate 
at the moment of crisis, like around the division of Jerusalem 
or the removal of a settlement or a severe attack, have no 
chance that they will make possible the realization of the 
agreement as it stands. 
  So, what is the solution? In the situation that has been 
created, it seems to me that the only possible solution is "the 
separation of the mosaic." The Israeli Government must adopt the 
slogan that every Jew, wherever, "is holy, holy in his place, 
and his land is holy." That which was holy to al-Sadat in the 
Sinai, is all the more holy to us in the land of Israel. The 
agreement must be undermined, and, in the event that it cannot 
be reached, it must be effected unilaterally. Leaving under 
Israeli sovereignty all of the Jewish settlements, including 
open access roads. By a rough calculation, we are speaking of 
about 3,500 square km for the autonomy and about 2,500 for 
complete Israeli rule. There would be a separation between them, 
and a fence if need be, giving Palestinians free passage to 
adjacent countries and between different regions. This is a hard 
separation, necessitating efforts and the investment of 
resources, but, in my estimation, only this can succeed, and 
only it should be achieved on the basis of a national consensus. 
  The writer is one of the leaders of the intelligence 
community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59823 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Formation of Palestinian Police Force Discussed </TI></H3>
<H4>   Israeli Participation Explained </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0018A Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) in 
Hebrew 26 Nov 93 pp 1-3 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0018A </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tzvi Gilat] </F>
  [Text] On learning of the killing of 'Imad 'Aqel, the 
commander of an 'Az a-din al-Qasem cell, the first thing the 
Fatah leadership in Gaza did was to declare three days of 
mourning and call a strike throughout the strip. During those 
three days of mourning, dozens of youths, regardless of 
political affiliation, would clash with troops. Both Fatah and 
the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] had an interest in assuring that 
those confrontations did not get out of control. The ceremonies 
held would offer speeches in his memory, his courage would be 
extolled and many tears, some of them, at least, crocodile 
tears, would be shed at the funeral home in the Jibalya refugee 
camp. 
  If 'Aqel's name had not been erased from the IDF's wanted 
list, if he had remained in resistance and refused to submit 
himself to the local leadership, he would have been put at the 
top of Fatah's wanted list on 14 December. In calling for 
mourning in his memory, Fatah is attempting to show that a local 
hero is everyone's hero. 
  But there are lists. The lists of wanted Fatah hawks are 
being crossed out these days. Their names have been erased by 
the Israeli-Palestinian agreement. Whoever appears on the list 
goes to the offices of the Palestinian delegation in the Rimal 
quarter, receives the honor due him, leaves his weapons and is 
accompanied by a young local leader to a final meeting, so it is 
hoped, with General Security Service [GSS] personnel. Some Fatah 
wanted men still resist. It is not that they will not turn 
themselves in, they say, but only after the 13th of the month, 
and only to Fatah. 
  Fatah is already preparing, very energetically, to take 
control of the area. What is not clear is whether Fatah/Gaza and 
Fatah/Tunis see this exactly eye to eye. The interface with 
Israel, if it can be put that way, has been made in a number of 
ways: Fatah/Tunis-Israel; Fatah/Gaza-Israel; 
Fatah/Tunis-Fatah/Gaza; Fatah/Gaza-Hamas/Gaza. These connections 
sometimes have become entangled. That is what happened during a 
visit to Gaza early this week by 'Abdallah al-Faz'a, who is set 
to become the local inspector-general of police. 
  His visit was coordinated through Fatah/Tunis with the civil 
administration. Senior commanders escorted him and showed him 
the facilities and road axes that will be under his control. The 
youths who control the offices in the Rimal quarter were not 
permitted to accompany him. They did not hide their rage at the 
arrangement. "He goes around the area like a prisoner of the 
IDF," they said, but meant someone else: 'Arafat, who sent him, 
thinks that we are his captives. 
  For the moment, it seems that Palestinian security forces, 
like everything in the IDF, will be divided into three: a police 
force, which will deal with civil matters (property crimes, 
traffic, neighbors' quarrels). It will not lack for work. 
A-Faz'a will be in charge of it. 
  A larger force, which will be composed mostly of men from 
the 
Palestine Liberation Army, under the command of Yusuf Naser, 
will be responsible for security--the autonomy area borders, 
guarding the roads and general security, including 
responsibility for seeing that men like 'Imad 'Aqel do not 
continue their activities against Jews in the strip. If they try 
to attack Jews in Tel Aviv, that will be Israel's 
responsibility. It looks as though the physical base of this 
force will be the installation that the IDF division stationed 
in the center of Gaza used as its headquarters. 
  There will also be an intelligence service, a "GSS" as it is 
called by young Gazans, many of whom have encountered the 
original up close. To the general security force will be 
attached a unit for protecting people. Twenty-two of them 
returned this week from official training in Egypt. 
  In most Third World countries, official bodyguards also 
serve 
as a status symbol. Among other things, they are living proof 
that you are a leader. When he served as a minister, Avner Shaqi 
demanded a bodyguard. At the time, some said that Shaqi wanted 
to feel important. It will be a little different in Gaza. The 
bodyguards assigned to Dr. Zecharaya al-'Ara, for example, do, 
indeed, mark him as a leader, but as a leader of a particular 
type, someone not in favor with everyone. 
  Who will be the commander of the GSS? That question draws an 
enigmatic laugh at the delegation's headquarters in Gaza. "It 
will be someone, don't worry, and the Palestinian GSS will 
definitely work long hours. Everything here will be GSS," one 
key activist tells me. 
  Aharon Domb and his colleagues on the Yesha council claimed 
this week that the GSS will work against them. Through 
information that they provided the media, they attempted to 
portray the GSS as a political tool, but they painted it as a 
bungling organization, installing easily discovered listening 
devices and trying to recruit Gabi Butbul, chairman of the 
Qarney Shomron council. The Palestinian GSS, it seems, will not 
use bugs. It will tell people to spill the beans. 
  Will you also work against Hamas? I ask my man in Gaza. 
  "That's not the problem," he says. "We know perfectly well 
who's who in Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement]. If someone 
hides and refuses to obey, we'll found him in a few hours. The 
street can expose him." 
  Do you know, for example, who murdered the lawyer 
Abu-Sha'aban As'ad Siftawi? 
  "Whoever knows knows," says my contact. "It's true that the 
killer is still free at large, but after we take control, 
whoever needs to decide will decide what to do with him." 
  Hamas members well know that the period approaching will not 
be easy for them. The optimists among them are afraid that 
they'll sit behind bars in the coastal prison, which will soon 
be turned over to the Palestinians. The pessimists fear a more 
vicious script. A PLO man, Tufiq Abu-Husa, tries to put me at 
ease. "Hamas is against the agreement but not against Fatah." 
  It is known that Fatah and Hamas have stable understandings 
in Gaza that, until now, since the signing of the agreement on 
principles, have been strictly observed. Now, when the PLO must 
take responsibility for the security of Jews as well, but the 
goal of Hamas is precisely to undermine that security, a 
confrontation is likely to be created. It can be expected that 
Hamas men will keep their heads down. They are wily and 
sophisticated, they want a share of the administration, and more 
than a few of them will look forward calmly and confidently to 
reaping the fruits of the internal rivalry foreseen within Fatah 
itself. 
  "The only way we'll be able to work peacefully in all of 
Palestine," says Abu-Husa, "is through the route of democracy 
and the rule of law. We learned democracy in the Israeli prison. 
We were all there, we all understood that without democratic 
decisions among ourselves and without obedience to those 
decisions, we wouldn't achieve anything. I'm sure that everyone 
knows that." 
  It still is not clear how the law will be seen or who will 
issue orders. It is clear, however, that "whoever breaks the law 
will be judged by the law," as Abu-Husa says. One month ago, he 
tells me, the Shati and Jibalya camps, through democratic 
elections, selected local representatives for the Fatah 
leadership. "'Arafat might be able to tell me to leave my office 
in the delegation," one of the activists tells me, fearing that 
might actually happen, "but that won't do him any good. Instead 
of going to my office, people will just come to see me at home." 
  The offices are packed with people just now. People with 
problems. One has a relative who has been arrested, another has 
a property dispute with a neighbor, a third wants to turn 
himself in. Most of the problems are solved efficiently. When 
the Fatah youths speak about the need for democracy, one can 
interpret is as a veiled threat to Hamas. It can also be 
interpreted as something else--a broad hint for 'Arafat, not 
exactly someone people see as a pillar of democracy. 
  Rehav'am Ze'evi said in the Knesset this week that if he is 
stopped by an armed Palestinian policeman, he will shoot to 
kill. Ze'evi and a faction of the settlers apparently still do 
not grasp what is going to happen on the ground. Before they are 
stopped by a Palestinian policeman, they will be stopped by an 
Israeli officer or soldier. 
  Residents of Gush-Qatif will be permitted to travel only on 
certain roads. The IDF will prevent them from entering Gaza city 
and will occupy the same control points at the entrances to the 
strip that it mans now. A substantial border fence will mark the 
boundary. The IDF will patrol the bypass route to Gush-Qatif. 
Some of the military outposts on that road will remain in place, 
some will be dismantled and some will handed over to the 
Palestinians. So far, the residents of Gush-Qatif have opposed 
the installation of an IDF base on the settlement. They have 
contended that it would impinge on their quality of life. They 
seemed to be softening last week. Even now, although they have 
not noticed it, they live behind a fence. 
  At the civil administration offices on 'Omer al-Mukhtar 
Street, the entire civic system will be managed in a sort of 
government compound. It will be staffed at the professional 
level by the same Palestinians who provide most of the services 
today. It is possible that the bosses will come from Tunis to 
get a secretary and an official car. 
  Contacts are now under way between local representatives and 
the civil administration concerning computers. The IDF will take 
with it all the hardware, which was bought with tax revenues 
collected from residents of the strip, who also financed the 
administration's operations. The current discussion is over 
software. A complete work-up of the strip's residents lies 
within the administration's computer, including economic data, 
tax collection accounts and property holdings. There is also 
information of a security nature, which is the source of the 
discussion. If the administration doesn't give us the data, say 
delegation officials, no great loss. Our own information is just 
as good. 
  Most branches of the administration will cross over to the 
Israeli side of the Erez checkpoint. Instead of 
"administration," it will be called the "coordination team." A 
need will exist for coordination between the local and Israeli 
authorities. The level of coordination on civil matters is 
already high; the hope is that it will remain so. It must be 
assumed that the two sides also have an interest in fostering 
coordination in secret services. The Palestinians were very 
angry when they found out that Israel had planted agents and 
bugs in the PLO's offices in Tunis. It is doubtful whether they 
would refuse to share information. 
  The Palestinians learned more than democracy in Israeli 
prisons; some of them also acquired the fundamentals of their 
professional training. 'Abd al-Salam Abu-'Asab and Sa'ud 
Abu-Ramadan slept in beds side by side in the tents of the 
Antzar 2 camp in Gaza. Both were "Shabiba" activists. In prison, 
they were ordered by the leadership to prepare a daily newspaper 
roundup for the prisoners. Their comrades would comb garbage 
dumps, scavenging Israeli newspapers thrown away by the 
soldiers, which the pair then translated and edited. 
  Today, on the outside, they are very busy professionals. One 
works for THE WASHINGTON POST, the other for a European 
television network. One works for MA'ARIV, the other for YEDI'OT 
AHARONOT. They have a competition. One is known for his scoops, 
the other for his skilled writing and analysis. You can see them 
together at most events. 
  The pair received instructions this week to go to Jordan for 
six weeks advanced study in television in preparation for the 
start of operations of the autonomy broadcast network to be run 
by Radwan Abu-'Ayish. The pair jointly refused the behest. The 
timing is inconvenient for them. Between 7 and 14 December, they 
are swamped with requests from foreign networks for assistance, 
translation, escorting and even for booking local hotel 
accommodations for the television crews. 
  "There's going to be a lot of work in December," says 
Abu-Ramadan. As a journalist, he cannot allow himself to listen 
to lectures in Aman while the story of his life is taking place 
at home: the start of the IDF's withdrawal and the beginning of 
autonomy. There is also a practical aspect--the foreign networks 
will pay him and his colleagues hundreds of dollars a day. What 
they will do during the week of December 7 to 14 cannot be 
compared to what they have earned over the entire past half year. 
  Campaigns, the biography of Hafiz al-Asad, came 
out in Hebrew this week. It was written by Patrick Seale, the 
official biographer of the Syrian ruler. The military 
publication has an interesting timing. Shortly after the 
outbreak of the intifadah, a Hebrew translation was done of 
Alistair Horan's book on the Algerian war of liberation. This 
highly relevant book has since been distributed to all generals 
on the general staff. Is this a sign that someone high up 
believes that al-Asad's time has come? 
  Indeed, although Rabin is stepping on the brakes, his 
formula, "withdrawal in proportion to peace," is also acceptable 
to the Syrians. More than a small portion of his talks in 
Washington was devoted to this subject. Mubarak sent a message 
early this week, and Warren Christopher, who will arrive here 
next Friday, will try to come up with a creative idea to budge 
the negotiations out of the rut they are stuck in. It is for 
precisely that reason that he has already spent a week lowering 
expectations, but unofficial meetings recently held between 
Israelis and Syrians in Europe indicate that there is something 
to talk about. The current catchphrase is "Israeli recognition 
of Syrian sovereignty over the Golan." 
  Does this mean that al-Asad is now ready to let settlements 
stay on the heights? Al-Asad will not say. Al-Asad first wants 
to hear that Rabin is ready, but from the Americans, not from 
Rabin himself. The idea of leaving Israeli settlements under 
Syrian sovereignty gets a bitter laugh at the settlement council 
on the Golan. What is the purpose of getting the Jews of Syrian 
out of Damascus when we're going to add 13,000 people to the 
community? 
  "I'm sure that if Rabin weren't prime minister, he would be 
running our lobby," says Yehuda Wolmann, chairman of the 
regional council and a Rabin man in the Labor Party. Someone in 
the prime minister's office has told the Golan settlers that 
Peres' foreign ministry will not handle the Syrian deal. That 
will reassure some people. Wolmann is calmed by work ("You 
really can't say that I'm calm," he says. "I'm still not 
sleeping well at night because of the political climate"), by 
the fact that development plans and investments on the Golan 
have not been disrupted. 
  In fact, a new mall, Lev Qatzrin, recently opened in 
Qatzrin, 
new roads have been built all across the Golan Heights, 1,700 
housing units are nearing completion, a new holiday village has 
just been finished in Neveh-Ativ, 46 new cow barns have been 
erected and there are also plans for construction of a tourist 
resort, a volcanic park in the hill country. The plans call for 
vista points, hiking trails, camping cabins and a visitors 
center. 
  The problem is that unlike other ministers, Minister of 
Tourism 'Uzi Bar'am, apparently for reasons not unrelated to his 
political outlook, is somewhat reluctant to pour in money. 
"Eventually, we'll take this from him," Wolmann vows. He is also 
sure, and relatively calm as a result, that there will be no 
arrangement over the Golan without elections or a national 
referendum, in which it is clear that most of the nation would 
vote against withdrawal. He is also certain that the Labor Party 
will not abandon the banner of security and settlement. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59824 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Formation of Palestinian Police Force Discussed </TI></H3>
<H4>   Infrastructure Remains </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0018B Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) in 
Hebrew 26 Nov 93 p 5 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0018B </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arye Qizal] </F>
  [Text] A little more than two weeks remain before the start 
of the withdrawal from Gaza, but preparations on the ground this 
week went almost unfelt. PLO security men arrived by grace of 
the IDF [Israel Defense Forces], closely examined military 
installations, conferred, took notes and marked their maps. But 
aside from the first reserve duty orders going out to transport 
and logistical units, and construction started on a fence by the 
Erez checkpoint at the northern entrance to the strip, real 
movement has yet to be seen. The trucks stand idle. Even the 
kitchens are not being disassembled, nor are the men packing up 
the stores of office equipment at field command posts. Israel is 
signaling the PLO that nothing will move until the end of the 
negotiations in Cairo and other secret channels. 
  The detailed plan drawn up by the general staff's planning 
and quartermaster branches calls for transferring bases, posts, 
observation points and units from the heart of Arab settlements 
in the strip, particularly in Gaza city, Dir al-Balah, Rafiah 
and Han-Yunis, to locations close to the strip's Jewish 
settlements. 
  The reserve units that received call-up orders this week 
will 
start to "fold up" everything they can at the end of 
December--transport and communications units, operations 
offices, medical units and storerooms. The first to break camp 
will be the logistical units; the combat echelon will go only at 
the end of the process. The military courts and advocate general 
units will also be "folded up." 
  A number of IDF outposts and lookout points within the 
refugee camps will be evacuated last. The picture is already 
clear: Israeli soldiers leaving and young Palestinians 
overrunning the turrets with the Palestinian flag in their hands. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-NEA-001C-21A>           Map </FIG>





    The IDF forces will redeploy in a coordinated operation, 
whose timetable has recently been fixed, in three enclaves close 
to the strip's Jewish settlements. It is scheduled to take place 
in April, 1994. For deploying forces outside the strip, the IDF 
has been equipped with mobile housing units that will be set up 
in a number of places yet to be finally decided. 
  From the north, the IDF will guard the Erez checkpoint and 
the Nativ-Ha'ashara-Nisanit bloc of settlements and control a 
coastal observation post in the region. There, as in the other 
enclaves, the army will put up new outposts, observation points 
over the roads and intelligence stations. 
  Near Netzerim, deep in Gaza, the IDF will station a 
reinforced contingent whose sole purpose will be protection of 
the settlement. The same arrangement will be made at Kafr-Drom, 
a sensitive point in the southern part of the strip. 
  IDF command posts will be transferred to a central HQ in the 
Gush Qatif region, the site of the greatest concentration of 
Jewish settlements. The bloc will be protected by a series of 
outposts and lookout stations, some of which will form a barrier 
between it and neighboring Han-Yunis to prevent infiltration of 
the bloc from the refugee camp. 
  Eytan Hadari, security coordinator for Ganei Tal, says, "We 
worked with a senior field commander this week on marking out 
the places where army camps and lookout posts will go between 
Han-Yunis and Gush Qatif. Some of the positions in Ganei Tal and 
Netzer-Hazani have already started to be built." 
  The redeployment of the IDF, explains a senior army 
official, 
is based on the following principles: providing maximal security 
to Jewish residents using bypass routes, traffic "as minimal as 
possible" on the strip's main roads, and maximum control of the 
coastal border through shore observation points and regular 
naval patrols to prevent infiltration by terrorists and 
smuggling. 
  The plan devised in the Planning and Quartermaster branches 
calls for large forces around the Jewish settlements and 
reinforced units on the roads. The presence of massive army 
forces around the settlements will be felt at night. Netzer and 
Kafr Drom will look like closed camps surrounded by heavy 
military traffic. 
  IDF teams are now busy drawing up new operational techniques 
for the "Samson" unit, which operates in the strip. The IDF is 
very worried by the possible conversion of the autonomy areas 
into havens for terrorists. Senior defense officials had no 
unequivocal answers to that this week. "That worries us more 
than those fringe elements who are making a fuss over the 
call-up orders we sent out this week. Our main problem is how to 
catch a terrorist who carries out an attack and flees into 
Palestinian territory." 
  The IDF agreed this week to make additional concessions to 
the Palestinians. A document setting forth Israeli security 
views stated that Israel does not see any role for UN forces or 
observers in Gaza and that no need exists for a foreign or 
international presence on matters affecting relations between 
Israelis and Palestinians. In the Cairo talks, however, the 
sides agreed that an international observer force might be 
introduced into Gaza. Its composition and location are still not 
clear. 
  The Israeli demand for scattered security zones, in which 
entry by Palestinians for construction and farm work would be 
prohibited, also has softened. Palestinians will be able to stay 
in some of these areas on a limited basis. Israel has also 
promised a gradual release of Palestinian prisoners and 
detainees. Further, the IDF has agreed to hand over Gaza's 
central prison to the Palestinians, who will take control of the 
300 criminals now incarcerated there. 
  Dozens of television crews will arrive in the coming weeks 
to 
record the withdrawal from Gaza for posterity. Every truck 
driving out on its way to Israel will be accompanied by hoots 
from the locals and sighs of relief from the soldiers. 
  The IDF estimates that the cost of redeployment will be half 
a billion dollars. Most of the investment will be in improving 
the fence system and isolating the strip, rebuilding bypass 
routes and shifting command posts. Some structures will be 
handed over to the Palestinian police. There is no intention to 
leave scorched earth. 
  The defense establishment this week was even considering 
selling arms to the PLO to provide the Palestinian police an 
initial base for operations. The settlers are very touchy about 
that, but a senior source in Southern Command said this week, 
"I'm even for giving them some armored cars so they can quickly 
get a strong grip on the territory." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59825 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Outlook for Economic Growth in Region Detailed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019E Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 30 Nov 93 p 15 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019E </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 30 Nov 93 p 15 </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105>Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sever Plotzqer] </F>
  [Text] Time is working against them. Against the Arab 
Middle East, our neighbors. The changeover of the economy of the 
liberal market--which started Asia and is currently promoting 
South America to its spot--passed over the Middle East. 
  In Iraq, Syria, and Jordan, the same elite dominate who 
dominated 15 years ago, with the same outdated and fossilized 
perception of the world. 
  Even in Egypt, an undesirable process of retreating from the 
modernistic ideas ("the open-door policy") of Anwar al-Sadat has 
begun. 
  Husni Mubarak is more cautious, more conservative. 
  It is likely that the guilt lies with the oil. The abundance 
of oil has created, in all of the Arab Middle East, the delusion 
of easy money. Why make the effort, compete, be enterprising, 
if, anyhow, the desert land is saturated with black gold? 
  But the demand for oil has shrunk, a little in the 
beginning, 
and now, very much--and the producing countries, with the 
exception of the shining Gulf emirates, have begun shortages and 
moderation. 
  And it is likely that the guilt lies with the Muslim 
hostility to the West. The regimes in the Arab countries around 
us, especially in large portions of the public opinion there, 
are closing themselves up in a conceptual and cultural bubble 
that repels the "Western" economic ideas as "unsuitable" to the 
Arab-Muslim uniqueness. 
  Asia began to flourish when it became freed from the feeling 
of isolationism and opened to the world; this is happening now 
in South America and Eastern Europe. This is not yet happening 
in the Middle Eastern Arab world. 
  The longer the Arab Middle East continued to cook in its own 
juices, the further it got from the unavoidable economic 
decisions, and it sunk in hostility and pollution. 
  The result: Regression and regression once again. 
  Recently, with the aid of a number of friends from the 
Middle 
East Department of the World Bank in Washington, I made a 
comparison between the economic strength of Arab countries and 
that of Israel, from the years 1977 to 1992. 
  What happened in the 15 years between al-Sadat's visit to 
Jerusalem and the Oslo accord? 
  The answer: Israel has become an economic Middle East 
superpower, which puts all of the countries surrounding it in a 
deep shadow, all of them together, including Iraq. 
  And these are the data: 
  In 1977, the domestic product of the three countries hostile 
to Israel--Jordan, Syria, and Iraq--was $27.4 billion. Egypt had 
a product of an additional $12.1 in the same year, and, in all, 
the domestic product of the four Arab countries came to $40 
billion in that year. 
  Israel had a domestic product of only $10 billion in 1977. 
  The joint economic strength of the four most important Arab 
countries next to us--Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Jordan--was four 
times that of Israel's economic strength 15 years ago. 
  In 1992, the domestic product of the three countries hostile 
to Israel--Jordan, Syria, and Iraq--was $27.7 billion. That is, 
their current product did not grow at all, despite inflation and 
despite the 50-percent increase in population. 
  Egypt had a product of $30 billion in 1992. The total 
product 
of the four Arab countries reached $58 billion last year. 
  Israel alone had a product valued at $67 billion in 1992. 
Our 
economic strength rose by 20 percent over the joint strength of 
Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Jordan. 
  The Israeli economy is more than three times greater than 
the 
economies of Syria and Jordan, and more than double the joint 
economies of Syria, Jordan, and Iraq. 
  This vast gap to our benefit stands out even more when one 
looks at the product per capita, the accepted indicator of 
productivity and prosperity. 
  The growth of the product in current dollars also includes 
the inflation and devaluation components of the local currency. 
In real terms, only Egypt has succeeded, since 1977, in 
maintaining the economic prosperity of its residents. In the 
other three Arab countries, the real product per capita 
declined--between 10 percent (in Jordan) to 70 percent (in 
Iraq). In Israel, the real product increased by 50 percent per 
capita. 
These economic developments have strategic and political 
ramifications: 

  -  Even when all of the defense expenditures of Israel are 
limited to 12 percent of the domestic product, they cost at 
least five to six times--and perhaps even 10 times--more than 
the defense expenditures of Jordan and Syria together (Iraq does 
not currently have measured defense expenditures). 
  -  There is no apparent danger to Israel's survival or even a 
real 
military risk from the "eastern coalition" of Syria, Jordan, and 
Iraq. The clear economic weakness of these three countries has 
turned them into dwarfs opposite Israel. This is a situation 
which is unlikely to change before the year 2015. 
  -  The only chance for the Arab countries near us to get on the 
track of rapid economic growth is a change in perception and 
method: A sharp transition to the economics of a liberal, 
competitive, open market. 
  Except that such a transition invites democracy--and this, 
from the point of view of the traditional Arab regimes, is the 
problem. 
  There is no other model of economic success except for a 
developing competitive and democratic market. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Domestic Product of Israel and Nearby Arab Countries(in billions of dollars) | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1977                     |1992                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Iraq                     |18.3                     |9.3                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Syria                    |7.1                      |14.5                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Israel                   |10.0                     |67.0                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jordan                   |2.1                      |3.9                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Egypt                    |12                       |30.0                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Arab countries have been learning this from experience 
during the past 15 years. Even though the population grew from 
60 million residents to 88 million residents, they lost the 
economic race with Israel and retreated far behind. 
  Have they learned something? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59826 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Council To Promote EC Business Opportunities Formed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019A Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 28 Nov 93 p 14 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019A </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Navit Zomer] </F>
  [Text] At a festive dinner, which was held in Brussels 
during the weekend, the establishment of an economic 
European-Israeli council was announced. The council will work 
along with Common Market institutions, and its role will be to 
promote and assist in the economic affairs of the Israeli 
business sector in the Common Market. 
  The initiative to establish the Israeli-European council is 
that of the coordination bureau of the economic organizations in 
Israel. The council will be headed by two chairmen--the Israeli 
one will be Dan Proper, president of the coordination bureau and 
president of the Industrialists' Association. Dani Gillerman, 
president of the Society of Commerce Bureaus, will serve as his 
deputy. The European chairman has yet to be selected. 
  The council's administration will include 12 members who are 
representatives of economic organizations and representatives of 
the business world from Israel, and 12 addition ones from among 
the Common Market countries. 
  The council, which will serve as a sort of lobby to promote 
Israel's dealings in the market and vice versa, will open its 
office in Brussels, and a portion of the financing of its 
activities will be executed by institutions of the European 
Community (EC). 
  Present at the festive meal in Brussels were Foreign 
Minister 
Shim'on Peres; Common Market President Jacques Delors, who 
welcomed its establishment; Dan Proper; Yoram Blizovski, 
director-general of the Industrialists' Association; and Marcel 
Shaton--Israel's commerce representative in Brussels. 
  The leadership of the Industrialists' Association stayed in 
Brussels for three days for talks with representatives of the 
Common Market and administrators. 
  "We feared a significant change in mood toward us," Proper 
related upon his return. "The market revealed a willingness for 
a series of benefits for Israel's position. Among other things, 
we reached an understanding on the subject of their extremist 
declaration regarding the disgrace of the Arab boycott," he 
added. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59827 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> KUWAIT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Report on Liquidation of Foreign Assets </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0050A London AL-HAYAH in Arabic 27 Nov 93 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0050A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-HAYAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Al-Shal's Weekly Economic Report: Kuwait Might </F>
Resort To Liquidating Some of Its Foreign Assets"] 
  [Text] "Al-Shall's Weekly Economic Report" surmised that 
hearing the embezzlement case of the Kuwaiti oil tanker company 
in court would pave the way for some movement on the question of 
Kuwaiti investments abroad. The report referred to a news story 
in the British newspaper, THE SUNDAY TIMES, about Kuwait's 
effort to liquidate part of its foreign assets ($3.6 billion a 
year) so that it can meet its debt obligations. The report 
indicated that "the news story was prompted by the fact that the 
first payment on the $5.5-billion loan to the international 
financial markets had become due." The report stressed that 
Kuwait could resort to liquidating some of its foreign assets 
every now and then. The text of the report follows: 
<H5>  The Discount Rate </H5>
  The Central Bank of Kuwait announced for the fourth time 
this 
year, 1993, that it was lowering the discount rate by half a 
percentage point: from 6.25 to 5.75 percent. The Central Bank of 
Kuwait had lowered the discount rate last April from 7.5 to 5.7 
percent, and it had lowered it in July from 7 to 6.75 percent, 
and again in September, to 6.25 percent. 
  We still believe that the bank's conduct has been proper and 
consistent with the trend in the advanced world of lowering 
discount rates to stimulate growth rates while inflation rates 
are still under control. 
  The full benefit of lowering the discount rate could be 
achieved if the Central Bank were to forgo its intervention to 
set limits on interest-rate ceilings on deposits and loans. 
Market forces can thus be permitted to interact, and banks would 
be able to discriminate among their clients so they can realize 
a higher profit margin. This is possible because the low cost of 
borrowing as an incentive to borrowers and a stimulant for 
growth is not one of the primary considerations in making a 
lower discount rate in Kuwait beneficial. On the other hand, 
lowering the discount rate could reduce the reliance of banks on 
public financing. 
  It is known that in 1992 the Kuwaiti Government paid more 
than 300 million Kuwaiti dinars [KD] to local banks in interest 
on hard currency bonds, and it may have paid another KD140 
million Kuwaiti approximately for treasury bonds and 
certificates. The government's domestic debt amounts to KD7.4 
billion Kuwaiti ($25 billion). It is believed that the debt 
figure was reduced by about KD1 billion Kuwaiti as a result of 
the fact that KD1 billion Kuwaiti from hard currency bonds were 
paid to extinguish the debt. The fact that the discount rate 
fell by about 1.75 percent during the current year and the 
reduction in the magnitude of the debt in Kuwaiti dinars will 
reduce obligations from public funds arising from interest 
payments made on the debt. That could result in a slight 
reduction in current and anticipated public budget deficits. 
<H5>  Foreign Investments </H5>
  The London newspaper, THE SUNDAY TIMES, published a news 
story about Kuwait's efforts to liquidate some of its foreign 
assets so that it could have $3.6 billion a year to meet its 
needs and its foreign currency debt obligations. The 
determination of that amount seems to have been the result of 
the fact that the due date for the first payment of the $5.5 
billion loan was approaching. Kuwait had borrowed that amount 
from money markets worldwide after the liberation. Although we 
believe that Kuwait may have to liquidate some its assets every 
now and then unless it deals with the problem of the budget 
deficit by controlling spending and laying the foundations for 
increasing the volume of nonoil revenues and reducing the 
government's role in economic activity, there is no policy, to 
our knowledge, for the gradual liquidation of foreign assets. 
There may be some resistance to these piecemeal liquidation 
procedures, but the reorganization of the Foreign Investments 
Department actually guarantees the survival of the London 
office. That reorganization makes the office dedicated to its 
specialization in liquid investments. The need for some 
liquidity or for having some investments moved from one market 
to another may have been behind the news story in the British 
newspaper. 
  Kuwait's Council of Ministers may conclude this week its 
review of the government's report on progress in confronting 
investment problems and the uncertainty about infringement on 
the effort that is being made to confront those problems. There 
is a general feeling that the measures which should be taken 
about investments are not being taken because investments 
involve the inviolability of public funds during the time of 
occupation, and an infringement on public funds has political, 
social, and moral consequences. We believe, however, that this 
is an extremely complicated and sensitive issue for anyone 
dealing with it for the first time. We believe that we have to 
wait for the government's report on this issue. The movement of 
the entire case may lie in having the embezzlement case in the 
Oil Tankers Company presented in court soon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59828 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hizballah Leaders, Motives, Troubles Scrutinized </TI></H3>
<H4>   Introduction </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0020A Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 27 Sep 93 p 15 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0020A </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Hizballah: Dreading the Countdown </F>
Phase?"] 
  [Text] Many informed observers are attributing Lebanon's 
existing tensions, which are brought about by Hizballah's 
confrontational positions against officials and the government, 
to a variety of reasons, which have nothing to do with the 
circumstances and the timing of the Gaza-Jericho First 
Agreement, which was signed in the White House on the 13th of 
this month [September]. 
  These observers believe that the al-Ghubayri demonstration, 
along with the regrettable and unjustifiable loss of life, which 
accompanied it, was not the cause of the confrontational 
posture, which Hizballah and all those who move in its circles 
assumed. It was rather a product of that confrontational 
posture, which all those who have been working with Hizballah 
and those who have been striving to run it also assumed. [These 
incidents] show, as the observers add, that grief or anger over 
the loss of life was not the essence of the problem for those 
who "burned their bridges." Nor was their attitude toward the 
'Arafat-Israeli agreement the essence of the problem or the 
reason for the sharp and hard-line positions that were taken and 
expressed in the rhetoric of the previous hateful war. The 
people who took those positions were trying to throw the country 
once again into the gloom of internecine fighting and 
divisiveness. 
  The essence of the problem, which uses the blood of victims 
as its slogan, has to do with feelings of dread about the 
countdown phase. Hizballah leaders fear that this phase might 
have started and that its onset could signal the end of what the 
party has been representing over the past years since it was 
founded. 
  There are reasons for those feelings of dread, and the most 
notable of them have to do with the new equations that are 
emerging in the region. These equations do not show Hizballah 
having the same regional prestige that it had over the past 
years. 
  Another notable reason for those feelings of dread has to do 
with developments in Lebanon under a state of peace. The 
direction in which these developments are moving tends to 
highlight the real magnitude of those forces that, like the 
Lebanese forces for example, rode the wave of war in Lebanon and 
appeared to be larger than they really were. Today, the Lebanese 
Forces appear to be like one of the ordinary partisan Christian 
forces, whereas in the past their prestige and influence made 
them appear to be representing Christians in Lebanon. 
  This factor applies to Hizballah, too. In a state of peace 
Hizballah cannot possibly represent more than 10 percent [of the 
population] under the best of circumstances, particularly when 
we learn that Hizballah pursues its activity among Shiites, and 
most Shiites, like other sectarian groups in Lebanon, tend to 
renounce the previous war in all its forms. 
  Another salient reason for those feelings of dread has to do 
with Hizballah's brittle organizational and political makeup. 
The tight, or rather rigid, form of that organization is 
considered an indirect indication of the confluence of various 
tendencies, each with its own nature, characteristics, and 
interests. Hizballah's makeup is also considered an indication 
of the fact that the party has brought together groups who are 
dominated by pressure from Iran and driven by interests and 
politics. 
  Other than those reasons for Hizballah's dread there are 
other reasons that have to do with Iran. Iran is always sending 
out signals indicating that it would soon abandon its support 
for Hizballah, the party that was basically founded by Iran. 
Hizballah has relied on the enormous financial assistance, that 
it has been and is still receiving from Tehran. It is this 
financial assistance, which enabled Hizballah to expand its base 
and build and strengthen its agencies. 
  In this regard everyone remembers the statements made by 
'Ali 
Akbar Mohtashemi, Hizballah's founder and the former interior 
minister of Iran. Mr. Mohtashemi, whose statements were critical 
of Iran's policies, called upon Hizballah to be vigilant and to 
reach beyond what the state of Iran was trying to forge in its 
international relations. 
  All these feelings of dread came to a head the moment when 
the 'Arafat-Israeli agreement was reached. It was a moment, 
which suggested that doors leading to the resolution of issues 
in the Arab-Israeli conflict were being opened. New conditions 
would then ensue, and Hizballah would find no place for itself 
under those new conditions. Hence, it became evident that 
Hizballah was losing no time in its quest for a confrontation. 
It was doing that by becoming the driving force behind what 
happened during and after the al-Ghubayri demonstration. In 
doing that, Hizballah is seeking guarantees for its survival. 
  AL-SHIRA' discusses in three articles in this issue these 
designations for the feelings of dread, which are being felt in 
Hizballah. The first and second articles, which are AL-SHIRA's, 
discuss details, which have to do with the party, with the 
positions of its leaders, and with the circumstances under that 
the party acts. The third article, which is by Amir Taheri, was 
published by our fellow newspaper, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT. That 
article discusses the reality of Iranian politics today. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59829 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hizballah Leaders, Motives, Troubles Scrutinized </TI></H3>
<H4>   Fadlallah's Role, Motives Questioned </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0020B Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 27 Sep 93 pp 16-17 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0020B </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Process of Sorting Out Matters in </F>
Hizballah Begins; Fadlallah Under Microscope"] 
  [Text] "From now on no one in Damascus or in Tehran is to 
rein Hizballah." Was this an emotional slip of the tongue 
prematurely articulated by one of Hizballah's representatives in 
Lebanon's parliament, or was it part of a new tactic set forth 
by the party to get out of the cycle of deadlines, namely, the 
coming agreements with the Zionist enemy? Hizballah must now 
either respond to that situation, or it must break the hold, 
which that situation has over it. If it tries to break the hold, 
it could use force. But if it goes along with those agreements, 
Hizballah will have to use political methods. The al-Ghubayri 
demonstration was Hizballah's dress rehearsal for breaking out 
of this cycle. 
  Was this calculated "slip of the tongue" an indication of a 
new distribution in the balance of power in Hizballah? Did it 
come out to indicate a new beginning [in the party]? And if 
there is a new distribution of power in the pro-Iranian party, 
who is the preeminent power now? 
  Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah contends that he controls 
70 
percent of Hizballah's power, policy, and decisions. Does this 
mean that Hizballah's decisions are actually Fadlallah's to make? 
  We will not join the chorus of those who are questioning the 
significance of the denial that always accompanies the Sayyid's 
utterances when reference is made to his relationship to the 
party. That denial is now considered by some to be confirmation 
of the Sayyid's relationship to the party as well as an 
indication of the fact that the reference to the 70 percent 
[which he claims to control] did not come out of nowhere. 
  We will not question [the significance of the denial] 
because 
behind the Sayyid's control of the party is something that 
reaches beyond the boundaries of the geographic decision between 
the party's Consultative Council and the Sayyid's home. Both are 
located in Bi'r al-'Abd, a few meters apart. 
  Sayyid Fadlallah is setting himself up to become something 
more than the party's spiritual guide in Lebanon. He is setting 
himself up to become the marja'iyah shi'iyah 'ammah [the supreme 
Shiite source of emulation: marja'-al-taqlid]. His reach, of 
course, would extend beyond the boundaries of Lebanon where 
Shiites make up more or less one-third of the population. In 
Iran, however, Shiites make up more than two-thirds of the 
population, and that same percentage may also exist in Iraq and 
in some Gulf countries. 
  The Sayyid printed his treatise to set the stage for 
establishing a link between him, the treatise, and the 
muqallidin [emulators of a mujtahid]--if they wanted to have 
such a link. That link would also be established with disciples 
or persons who want to meet their obligations by paying khums 
and zakah [tax and alms tax, respectively, paid by Shiites to 
the source of emulation, that is, marja'-al-taqlid]. These 
payments provide enormous amounts of money, which the budget of 
each institution of a supreme Shiite source of emulation has to 
have to ensure the success of its role. 
  The fact of the matter is that there is a thin line linking 
Fadlallah's statement about controlling 70 percent of the party 
with his efforts to set himself up for the institution of the 
supreme Shiite source of emulation. After all, Hizballah is 
Iran's most prominent foreign tool, and as such, its importance 
stems from its effectiveness in one of Iran's most dangerous 
areas of activity. That is an area where Shiites have a popular 
presence; it is an area that has borders with Palestine (the 
control of the Zionist enemy); and it is an area where the 
struggle in the Palestinian question has gone into a new phase. 
The course of that struggle for many years in the future will 
be determined by the West and through direct contact with the 
West, primarily the United States of America. 
  Iran established Hizballah so that it can play an effective 
role in Lebanon. But when Iran established Hizballah, it had to 
have a leader for the party whose religious and political nature 
was the same as that of Iran. At the time Iran found that leader 
in Lebanon's Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah, an official of 
al-Da'wah [Islamic Call] Party. It made a deal with him 
according to which Fadlallah joined Hizballah in return for the 
public dissolution of al-Da'wah [the Islamic Call] Party. 
  Although the dissolution of the Lebanese chapter of 
al-Da'wah 
[Islamic Call] Party created problems and difficulties for him 
with the original party in Iraq, which was founded by Sayyid 
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, Sayyid Fadlallah managed to deal 
promptly with those problems. The dissolution of that chapter 
made it possible for the Sayyid to play a distinguished role in 
Lebanon throughout the period of the confrontation between Iran 
and the West. Hizballah, which needed a spiritual guide in 
Lebanon, was the vehicle by means of which Fadlallah played that 
role. Furthermore, Sayyid Fadlallah did not offer his positions 
to the party free of charge. He rather tried to implant himself 
within the party by using the cadres he was grooming. Those 
cadres, who made up the student organization of al-Da'wah 
[Islamic Call] Party, were known as the Association of Muslim 
Students. 
  During the period of Imam Khomeyni's presence Sayyid 
Fadlallah played the part, which Iran wanted him to play. At the 
same time he was preparing himself for the post-Imam Khomeyni 
period. After all, he turned out to be the most fortunate party 
in the confrontation, which occurred between supporters of Imam 
Khomeyni and Shaykh Hoseyn 'Ali Montazeri, Khomeyni's successor. 
That confrontation ended in the ouster of Shaykh Montazeri from 
the position of succession. 
  Sayyid Fadlallah was fortunate in this confrontation and its 
outcome because a principal obstacle, which could have 
obstructed his private plan to set himself up as the supreme 
Shiite source of emulation had been removed. Shaykh Montazeri 
was the last mujtahid in Iran [a religious leader who makes and 
issues independent interpretations of theological questions] who 
was also source of emulation. He was the last such religious 
figure to uphold the notion of a jurisconsult's guardianship. 
With him out of the picture and then with the departure of the 
imam, proponents of an Islamic republic and of the guardianship 
of a jurisconsult found no one to perform the part of a 
spiritual guide but Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i, who had not yet 
completed his treatise. This meant that Sayyid Fadlallah was no 
longer under the obligation of following Khamene'i. Since 
Fadlallah had completed his treatise, he was more learned and 
more knowledgeable than Khamene'i, and he was not required, 
therefore, to follow his guidance. (AL-SHIRA' had published in a 
previous issue that Fadlallah had printed his treatise and had 
placed it for safekeeping in a warehouse.) Accordingly, it was 
Fadlallah and not Khamene'i who deserved to become the supreme 
source of emulation in the context of accepting a Khomeyni style 
guardianship of a jurisconsult. 
  Sayyid Fadlallah was even more fortunate in the departure of 
Sayyid Abolqasem Kho'i, the world's supreme Shiite source of 
emulation, who had objected to the universal application of a 
Khomeyni-style guardianship of a jurisconsult. Sayyid Kho'i had 
also objected to the establishment of an Islamic government, 
particularly since the person who was favored by most Shiite 
Muslims to become the supreme source of emulation was Seyyed 
Reza Golpayegani, a man who was over 90 years old and who was 
also opposed to the Khomeyni-style guardianship of a 
jurisconsult. Iranians had consented to his proposal that Seyyed 
Khamene'i be nominated to succeed Seyyed Golpayegani as the 
supreme source of emulation until circumstances are straightened 
out. 
  The fact that Sayyid Fadlallah and Iran parted company on 
this matter seems normal here because Sayyid Fadlallah himself 
wanted to become the supreme source of emulation. That Khamene'i 
should become the supreme source of emulation before completing 
his own ijtihad [independent interpretation and judgment in 
theological questions] treatise was something that Fadlallah 
could not rationalize. 
  What would Fadlallah do if Tehran were to decline supporting 
him or if it were to confine the source of emulation to its 
borders or show that Fadlallah had departed from its policy? 
  Would he, the man who controls 70 percent of Hizballah, 
resort to inciting the party against Tehran? 
  Was this the context for that slip of the tongue by 
Hizballah's representative in parliament? 
  Will other forces within the party remain silent about 
Fadlallah's pro-al-Da'wah Party stance? Will they remain silent 
if Fadlallah decides to present and circulate his treatise and 
accept the position of becoming the source of emulation? 
  Whereas Lebanon has exposed Fadlallah to confrontations 
stemming from Hizballah's defiance of the Lebanese state's 
decisions and the state's determination to prevent Lebanon from 
becoming an arena for conflict and for the settlement of scores, 
Hizballah from now on will be exposed to more incompatible 
positions, which have already started to manifest themselves. At 
first, the cost of these incompatible positions in the 
al-Ghubayri demonstration seemed high. (See the previous issue 
of AL-SHIRA'.) The sorting that became evident in that 
demonstration was between the different slogans of Sayyid 
Fadlallah's supporters who had lined up together in a manner 
that distinguished them from others, and between the Party's 
fundamentalists who are led by Shaykh Subhi al-Tufayli. More of 
this sorting will take place in the coming days, and the 
position of Sayyid Fadlallah himself will be scrutinized 
locally, regionally, and internationally. 
<H5>  Why Fadlallah? </H5>
  Because Fadlallah, according to his own assessment, is the 
one who controls the party, he is the one who will use this 
control to get the party to block an agreement between Lebanon 
and Israel, that is, if he takes no action about any agreement, 
which Damascus might reach with Israel in the context of the 
prescribed settlement. 
  Will he decide to confront Israel's coming agreements with 
Lebanon and with Syria? Will he object to them and fight against 
them, or will he be satisfied with the lesson of the al-Ghubayri 
demonstration? Will he give his political concerns a religious 
dimension, which he will be careful to extend beyond the 
boundaries of Lebanon? 
  An answer to that question will not be long in coming. From 
now on let us watch Lebanon much more closely than we did any 
time in the past. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59830 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hizballah Leaders, Motives, Troubles Scrutinized </TI></H3>
<H4>   Hizballah-Islamic Call Party Link </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0020C Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 27 Sep 93 p 17 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0020C </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Al-Da'wah Party Put Things in Motion </F>
From al-Ghubayri"] 
  [Text] The Association of Muslim Students, a student 
organization that is a cover for al-Da'wah [Islamic Call] Party 
in Lebanon, launched its action from al-Ghubayri. Shaykh Hasan 
'Awwad was the students' imam in the regional mosque. 
  Shaykh 'Awwad was not a member of al-Da'wah Party because, 
he 
said, he did not want to commit himself to any one party, 
regardless of what that party was. If he did, [Shaykh 'Awwad 
thought], his conscience would be subject to the party's 
decisions and not to the credibility of faith. 
  At that time the most prominent figures of al-Da'wah Party 
were Shaykh Na'im Qasim, the party's current shaykh; Muhammad 
Ra'd, his current deputy; Muhammad al-Khansa; and Mahmud 
al-Qimati. In Lebanon their immediate loyalty was to Shaykh 'Ali 
Kurani, who was the brother-in-law of Sayyid Muhammad Husayn 
Fadlallah. Kurani, who is married to the sister of Sayyid 
Fadlallah's first wife, was preoccupied with the concerns of 
wealthy Shiites in the Gulf countries. He was therefore unable 
to maintain a harmonious relationship with members of Lebanon's 
al-Da'wah Party who, at the same time, were frequenting a 
turbaned member of al-Da'wah Party from al-Najaf. That man from 
al-Najaf, namely, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah, had pledged 
to Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, the man who founded al-Da'wah 
Party in Iraq between 1957 and 1959, that he would become his 
representative in Lebanon. Sayyid Fadlallah, who started his 
activity in the Brotherhood Society in East Beirut, was forced 
by the civil war to leave East Beirut and go to the southern 
section of the city where he started his activity in the mosque 
of al-Sallum Quarter (al-Karamah Quarter). 
  The activity carried out by Sayyid Fadlallah as a member of 
al-Da'wah Party did not prevent him from speaking out on certain 
occasions as the representative of Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi 
Shams-al-Din, president of the Supreme Shiite Islamic Council. 
  Hizballah's most prominent leaders now may have been members 
of al-Da'wah Party. Among them we mention Shaykh Na'im Qasim, 
who serves as vice president of Hizballah. At the same time 
Shaykh Qasim serves Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah in a role like that, 
which was played by Saddam Husayn when Saddam served as deputy 
to then Iraqi president Ahmad Hasan al-Bakr. And there is 
Muhammad al-Khansa who functions in the political office. 
Actually, he is the one who runs that office in the presence of 
its chief, al-Hajj Husayn Khalil, one of Sayyid Muhammad Husayn 
Fadlallah's two former attendants. 
  Mahmud al-Qimati serves as the officer who is responsible 
for 
Hizballah's central funds. 
  Hasan Nasrallah, Na'im Qasim, and Muhammad Ra'd make up the 
trio in Hizballah's Consultative Council, which represents the 
fanaticism in al-Da'wah Party. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59831 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hizballah Leaders, Motives, Troubles Scrutinized </TI></H3>
<H4>   Problems Within Party Viewed </H4>
<F P=102> 94AA0020D Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 27 Sep 93 pp 18-20 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0020D </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Hizballah: Feelings of Muddling </F>
Through an Incurable Disease"] 
  [Text] An incongruous observation was made during the 
memorial service that was organized by Hizballah for the victims 
of the al-Ghubayri demonstration incident. This observation 
attracted attention when one of the shaykhs of Hizballah took it 
upon himself to change the significance that is associated with 
the life of [Imam] Husayn by presenting that life without 
mentioning the name of Imam Husayn or any member of his family. 
Not even Karbala' was mentioned. Instead, the person who was 
conducting the aforementioned memorial service proceeded to 
relate the story of al-Ghubayri incident in a mournful stammer, 
replacing the term, nonbelievers, with the term, Lebanese 
regime. Instead of speaking about Karbala', he spoke about 
al-Ghubayri and about the casualties of that demonstration. He 
spoke about the demonstration, which occurred early this month 
in 1993 instead of speaking about Imam Husayn and the martyrs 
who supported him and who lost their lives approximately more 
than 1,000 years ago. 
  This is actually the first time in the history of political, 
Shiite Islamic movements that an infringement is made upon what 
Shiites consider a sacred ritual, one that is always performed 
on all their religious occasions. That ritual is performed every 
year on the occasion of 'Ashura'. In this sense the life of 
Husayn is read in a mournful tone to offer oneself consolation, 
to seek a blessing and a reward, and, at the same time, to stir 
the emotions by arousing feelings of affection for al-Husayn and 
for members of his family. When presented in this manner Imam 
Husayn's life and its significance constitute an important part 
of the Shiites' heritage, that heritage in which the political 
and the social are to a certain extent mixed with the religious. 
Accordingly, changing the significance of Husayn's life in the 
manner that occurred during the memorial service for the victims 
of the al-Ghubayri incident is considered reprehensible 
according to the standard Shiite Islamic practice in this 
regard. After all, a large segment of Shiite Muslims still 
refuse to make any change, even in the manner in which a 
memorial service is conducted. It is known that the aim of those 
who have been calling for change in the manner in which memorial 
services are conducted is to highlight the significance of these 
occasions by adopting an up-to-date manner. But the irony here 
lies in the fact that Hizballah has always taken a hard-line 
position, opposing all those calling for change, even those 
advocating that the gory ritual be changed so that the essence 
of the occasion can be presented in a new way. Now, however, 
Hizballah is boldly infringing on the essence of these occasions 
with one of its shaykhs [religious elders] presenting the life 
of Husayn during the aforementioned memorial service without 
making any mention whatsoever of either Imam Husayn or Karbala.' 
  Hizballah's action appears to be bold. Not only does it 
suggest that Hizballah has the legal and moral right to put its 
casualties on an equal par with the martyrs of Karbala', but it 
also has the legal and moral right to regard the al-Ghubayri 
incident an occasion in its own right equivalent to the Karbala' 
incident. Accordingly, Hizballah's actions suggest that the 
party would have no objection to adding the al-Ghubayri incident 
to those traditions, which are considered sacred by Shiite 
Muslims. 
  And yet, does Hizballah have the right to take such actions, 
which suggest that it has not only "the right" to impose a 
political point of view, but also "the right" to attach to it 
the religious justifications for making it sacred? Is it right 
for Hizballah to require not only the party's followers but also 
all Shiite Muslims to comply with that point of view? 
  In the past Hizballah introduced some political slogans into 
the Husayniyahs [buildings where Shiites gather for the recital 
of the sufferings of the Imams], which are recited by Shiite 
Muslims in Lebanon in an Iranian, not an Arabic accent. And yet, 
none of the incidents that the party had encountered in the past 
were placed on an equal footing with the battle of Karbala'. The 
al-Ghubayri incident was, however, when the life of Husayn was 
unabashedly incorporated into that incident. The party's 
leaders, who know quite well the standing that Husayn's life has 
in the hearts and minds of the Shiite public, found no 
difficulty in doing that. There is no doubt that the party 
deliberately wanted to show that Shiites in Lebanon were 
confused about the difference between the implication of 
infringing upon the party's standing and that of infringing upon 
the standing of Karbala'. Hizballah wants to use this 
"confusion" to create the illusion or to suggest that 
contradicting the party will be tantamount to contradicting the 
Shiite Islamic sect in its entirety and not only Hizballah. The 
party also wants to suggest that it is not possible to 
contemplate the military elimination of Hizballah because 
Hizballah, the underdog, will be around and will be coming 
around every year and assuming crisis proportions, just as the 
death of Imam al-Husayn in Karbala' comes up every year and is 
also mentioned on every Shiite occasion. 
<H5>  An Incurable Disease </H5>
  It seems clear that Hizballah's aim in pursuing such conduct 
is ultimately to cover itself in a Shiite Islamic cloak in an 
attempt to make itself appear larger than it really is. The 
question of Hizballah in Lebanon would then become a Shiite 
question and not a fundamentalist one or a partisan one. The 
notion of what lies behind this approach seems to be the crisis, 
which Hizballah is going through at this stage during which 
circumstances around the party are changing and threatening to 
make the party useless from the point of view of all which had 
hitherto justified its existence. Such a crisis would have 
severe psychological effects on Hizballah similar to those that 
would be endured by a patient who senses that his disease is 
incurable and that his days are numbered. Hizballah is actually 
experiencing such psychological sentiments, and these sentiments 
are growing every day and after each new incident. They are 
pointing out that the region is moving closer to the point of 
putting yesterday's Arab-Israeli conflict behind it in a manner 
that falls short of what is required on the possibilities of a 
rapprochement between Iran and Washington and also on the matter 
of extending the reach and range of the state in Lebanon. 
  The problem with Hizballah is that it is the product of 
these 
equations. Its significance and its role are also in part 
products of interactions among these equations. That is why 
Hizballah and the part it has been playing will undoubtedly drop 
out of the picture when these equations become history. In this 
regard the most dangerous matter facing this party is the fact 
that its internal makeup and its ideological concepts prevent it 
from renewing itself intellectually and organizationally in a 
manner that would make it a viable party in the new stage that 
is coming. The party would then have a new role to play and a 
new approach to take, both of which would be compatible with the 
spirit and the prospects of the new stage. For Hizballah renewal 
would mean abandoning its origins, and that means becoming a 
party without an identity. In the best of cases Hizballah would 
become another version of the Amal Movement, and it is known 
here that a second Amal Movement is not needed here on the 
Shiite Islamic scene. But even if Hizballah were to succeed in 
renewing its performance and its ideology--and that is an 
optimistic assumption--it would be exposing itself to violent 
internal upheaval that would lead to its dissolution and 
breakup, as its original component parts move away from each 
other within the party. Hizballah would once again revert to 
groups made up of small independent tendencies. Among these 
groups, for example, would be the al-Da'wah Party, Fadlallah's 
group, the group, which has security ties with Iran, and so on. 
Generally speaking then, the party would face dissolution and 
disintegration, and that means it would cease to exist. 
  Faced with all these probabilities, the best of which 
signifies the dissolution and demise of Hizballah, leaders of 
the party are trying during this eleventh hour to do something 
extraordinary to avoid that destiny. Their actions in this 
regard, however, have been so tense and nervous that they 
believe that everything that is taking place around them can be 
regarded as a conspiratorial political plan against Hizballah. 
On the basis of such suspicions, which are like the hypochondria 
that often afflicts elderly patients and those who are on their 
death beds, the party cannot become convinced that after being 
fattened for the past 11 years--the time during which it was 
exploited politically--it will be prepared for slaughter and 
sacrificed soon like a sheep on the altar of the settlement, on 
the altar of a new stage of relations in the region, or on the 
altar of relations between the region and international powers. 
It is this sentiment that explains why the party sees any 
dispute between it and the state as an attempt by the latter to 
liquidate it. It is known that the threat of Hizballah's 
liquidation comes neither from the state nor from any other 
internal party, but rather from the nature of its organizational 
and political makeup. And that was one of the tools that 
Hizballah used during the foregoing stage. But when the sun does 
set on the last act of that stage in the region, it will also 
set on all its effects and its entire rationale. 
  There are observers who believe that there is a tendency 
within Hizballah's leadership, which realizes that the party's 
crisis stems from the nature of the challenges of the coming 
stage, a stage that rejects Hizballah's role and makeup. And yet 
that tendency is trying to conceal that fact so that it can 
prolong the party's life. It is trying to create within the 
party's ranks a passive unity that is not based on "harmony 
within the party." Instead, that passive unity draws its 
lifeblood from the assumption that "what is outside the party is 
to be feared." That is why this tendency is magnifying the sense 
that exists primarily within the party at this stage, and that 
sense is that there is an enemy lying in wait for the party. 
This tendency is magnifying the sense that the party is also 
being targeted by a conspiracy. 
  This tendency is counting on getting the party's ranks and 
all its groups preoccupied with the subject of security and that 
of getting ready to confront "the other." That would keep them 
from devoting their attention to the new conditions around them 
and subjecting those conditions to scrutiny and analysis. After 
all, such scrutiny and analysis, should they take place, would 
create within the party a debate, which the party's current 
leadership would not be able to contain. Such scrutiny and 
analysis would also expedite the internal dissolution of the 
party because in facing the question about the party's destiny 
rather than any other tactical or supplemental question, each 
one of the centers of power within the party will be trying to 
apply pressure to the others so that its own view might prevail, 
become the view that the other centers of power must adhere to, 
and provide it and the party with a way out. In pressing its 
point of view, each center of power will indicate that it will 
drop out of the party if its point of view is not adhered to. 
These centers of power say that they will walk away from the 
party since they do not have to stay in it simply because the 
other powers in the party have a different point of view. They 
say they will not wait voluntarily for what is thought will be 
the party's liquidation. 
  Postponing such a discussion under the pretext of having the 
party devote itself to getting ready to confront outside 
conspiracies is actually tantamount to pursuing a policy, which 
cannot be pursued indefinitely. Having conceded that, postponing 
this discussion is nevertheless considered an ideal policy for 
the party in its current position, given the nature of the 
party's principal character and leader, namely, Sayyid Husayn 
Nasrallah. Although the vast majority of Hizballah's members and 
cadres who had been Nasrallah's partners in intense field work 
have confidence in his approach to security and organization, 
the party's elders do not have that much confidence in him. Even 
those who like to use theological standards in dealing with him 
do not have much confidence in him. It is this quality that is 
associated with the secretary general of Hizballah that makes 
the matter of starting an intellectual, political discussion 
related to jurisprudence within the party a precarious step, 
given the absence of a leader who can make an intellectually 
decisive statement. And yet, having the party confront security 
deadlines at this stage requires that its organizational 
readiness be upgraded, and that is consistent with Sayyid 
Nasrallah's capabilities because the party has confidence in the 
skills he has in this regard. 
<H5>  Running Away to the Imam </H5>
  And yet, running away from the problem to the imam within 
the 
party is countered in some segments by a clear inclination to 
think calmly and deliberately about what the party has to do to 
get out of its crisis safely. These segments that are affiliated 
with Hizballah, especially those that have funds, are of the 
opinion that the party has to be diligent in [its efforts] to 
acquire Shiite characteristics so that fundamentalism in Lebanon 
and the new, rising political Shiism would become synonymous. 
Thus, it would become impossible for any internal or external 
power to think of doing away with fundamentalism in Lebanon as 
it is represented by Hizballah, because to think along those 
lines would be like thinking about doing away with a sect, not a 
[political] party. To think along those lines would endanger the 
fundamental balance of the country, not just one number in a 
political game. 
  There are several reasons why making this equation workable 
in the material world does not appear to be easy. Most 
important, there is the Amal Movement whose presence represents 
a dominant Shiite tendency, on the one hand, and a substantial 
national tendency, on the other. There is, therefore, a bold 
line of distinction between rising political Shiism, as 
represented by Amal, and partisan fundamentalism, which can be 
found among Shiites, as represented by Hizballah. Although these 
facts are keeping Shiites from becoming a rising fundamentalist 
[movement] in Lebanon, providing Hizballah with a cover or a 
religious front, their importance is not diminished by the fact 
that Shaykh 'Abd-al-Amir Qabalan, the distinguished Ja'fari 
mufti, linked what Hizballah might face to what is being planned 
for Shiite Muslims as a sect in Lebanon. He made that link in 
the speech he delivered at the memorial service for the victims 
of the al-Ghubayri incident. In the eyes of the vast majority of 
Shiites this link will appear to be emotional and unjustified. 
In fact, what Shaykh Qabalan said is being thoughtlessly cited 
in a manner that would move Shiites in Lebanon to become a 
sect-like entity whose existence will be contingent upon new and 
developing political factors. And yet, what must be believed is 
that the presence of Shiites in Lebanon is not the subject of a 
wager about whether a new political incident will or will not 
occur. It is instead something that has to do with the survival 
of Lebanon as an entity. The presence of Shiites in Lebanon is 
something that draws its lifeblood from matters that go beyond 
changing and alternating political equations, no matter how 
far-reaching these equations might be. 
  At any rate, Hizballah, for a variety of reasons that have 
to 
do with its interests, will be compelled to apply pressure so 
that it can protect itself behind a Shiite front. Furthermore, 
there is a tendency within Hizballah that is trying to open its 
doors to other Islamic and Christian Lebanese sects. Proponents 
of that tendency are of the opinion that at this stage the party 
has to abandon the shrill positions it has been taking in 
Lebanon so that it can become a Lebanese party rather than a 
fundamentalist party, which can be attacked easily. And yet that 
approach continues to be weak because of the party's makeup, 
role, and hardline concepts, all of which have been reviewed 
above. 
<H5>  Two Possibilities </H5>
  While proposals within Hizballah for the party's development 
and renewal continue to be tantamount to cries in the 
wilderness, those within the party who have more influence are 
those who lay out the choices for the situation in the future, 
using the same standards, which the party has been using to 
weigh the positions that it must take. The standards that are 
being referred to here are those which attempt to play the game 
of regional considerations, particularly as they manifest 
themselves in Iran. Accordingly, proponents of that way of 
thinking who have the lion's share of influence on the party's 
decisions argue about which one of two possible occurrences is 
more likely. 
  The first possible occurrence involves Tehran and Ankara. 
Recently, it became evident to both Iran and Turkey that Soviet 
Asia will not become the new area where they can exercise their 
regional influence because the republics in that section of Asia 
continue to look at Russia as their big brother who can solve 
their problems. Accordingly, Tehran and Ankara, particularly 
Tehran, will find themselves compelled to intensify the process 
by means of which their regional policies would be steered 
toward the Arab East and concentrated there. That will breathe 
new life once again into Hizballah as a factor in Iran's foreign 
policy that is to be weighed in. Consequently, the party will 
have new regional reasons to help it surmount the dividing line 
of having its role terminated in the coming stage. 
  The second possible occurrence is one that can be noted with 
pleasure, but it is one that calls for reservation and caution. 
This is because Iran could be persuaded with regional gains or 
with desperately needed economic gains, provided its foreign 
policies in the region are held in check. If Iran is persuaded 
by these temptations, Tehran might either tell Hizballah to take 
a step backwards, or it might cut it off and let it face its 
destiny all by itself. 
  But why would Tehran respond now to temptations such as 
those 
that have already been mentioned? 
  In answering that question proponents of the second possible 
occurrence in Hizballah say that there are several reasons why 
Tehran would respond to these temptations. Most important, 
economic conditions in Iran are deteriorating, and there is a 
desperate need for foreign assistance. Actually, Japan has been 
playing an active role for quite some time to persuade Iran to 
accept the following proposition: Tokyo will try to help Iran 
internationally by persuading the West to ease the blockade 
placed around Iran. [Toyko said] "You, Iranians, however, will 
have to help us prove that you have abandoned those foreign 
policies that provoke the United States of America." 
  It seems that Tehran has been trying, even as we speak, to 
deal with this Japanese proposition with much attention. It is 
going along with it little by little. However, the prime 
minister of Japan recently approached Iranian leaders and spoke 
to them courteously. He told them, "If you want the assistance 
we give you to be more effective in ending the undeclared 
international blockade against you, you will have to refrain 
from actions that oppose the Gaza-Jericho First Agreement." 
  And now the Japanese are waiting for Iran's answer, and the 
answer that Iran will give Tokyo will be one that we, of course, 
will not hear. If Iran's answer is "yes," that will undoubtedly 
mean that Hizballah has lost the basic dimension it has had in 
the region for a decade. During that time that dimension has 
been the secret of Hizballah's survival. When that time comes, 
Hizballah may find that the only thing it can do to serve its 
own purpose is to proclaim the slogan, "Death to Japan." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59832 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Future Hizballah-Hamas Operations Proposed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0021C Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 25 Oct 93 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0021C </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Hizballah: Resistance in the Future </F>
To Involve Hamas (Islamic Resitance Movement) and Extend Beyond 
It"] 
  [Text] Informed sources indicated that organized and 
intense talks have been going on in Hizballah for several weeks. 
Although these talks are not being held in one room, the work 
that is being done while these talks are being held is similar 
to holding a general conference. Key figures in Hizballah have 
been exchanging working papers and proposals about a specific 
subject, namely Hizballah and the coming stage. 
  The same sources add that the discussion about the working 
papers, which are being exchanged is focusing on what Hizballah 
should do to overcome the critical deadlines that it will have 
to face in the coming stage, that is, in the post-settlement 
stage. 
  The dominant tendency in the party is advising the party and 
telling it that to avoid becoming a victim of this coming stage, 
it needs to adapt its intellectual, political, and security 
concerns to the coming stage. 
  In this regard that tendency is setting forth the following 
proposals: 
  First, a condition is to be created whereby Hizballah would 
open its doors to the various Lebanese parties and sects so as 
to prevent anyone from isolating the party on political or even 
on security matters. To achieve that, broad national slogans 
will have to be set forth, and these slogans will have to be 
beyond the religious or the sectarian. 
  Second, a solution to the challenge facing the party is to 
be 
found in case continuing the resistance can no longer be 
justified. It is the opinion of this tendency that letting the 
resistance slogan live on is a matter that touches upon the 
party's strategy and involves the party's strength and its 
continued momentum. Accordingly, dropping the resistance slogan 
for any reason whatsoever would weaken the party's political 
propositions and undermine the continued rise of its popularity 
among the ordinary classes. To put it briefly, Hizballah would 
turn into a ritual-practicing religious society, and the 
financial red tape within the party would grow. Over the medium 
term Hizballah would be exposed to the danger of financial 
scandals coming to light. [In this regard] Hizballah would 
experience something like that that the Islamic condition in 
Egypt experienced during the eighties. 
  In this regard this tendency is suggesting that the party 
will have to accept that resistance operations, which are 
launched from Lebanon, be frozen after the settlement, provided 
the party maintains its commitment to the resistance slogan. And 
yet, the party will have to do this according to a new strategy 
based on putting Hizballah's resistance against Israel in the 
hands of Hamas, thereby involving Hamas [Islamic Resistance 
Movement] in coordinating, planning, and carrying out certain 
kinds of security operations. 
  It is the opinion of this tendency that this strategy would 
spare the party [the ordeal] of appearing to be alone and 
vulnerable in rejecting the settlement. This tendency also 
associates the resistance, which it sees as equivalent to 
distinct political survival, with the survival of the Islamic, 
Palestinian resistance. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59833 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sadiq Al-Musawi Denounces Hizballah Leader Nasrallah </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0021A Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 8 Nov 93 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0021A </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mr Sadiq al-Musawi: "Beware of Mr Hasan </F>
Nasrallah's Wiles"] 
  [Text] If swindling people, tricking the gullible, and 
being hypocritical with the people are among the conditions for 
leadership in Lebanon, let us declare that Sayyid Hasan 
Nasrallah has outdone the competition in those areas. How else 
could a young man under the age of 37 who has not even mastered 
the externals of religious subjects move ahead so swiftly? 
Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah, who has no social assets, has set no 
precedent by formulating independent interpretations of 
theological questions and has not risen to any level in his 
thinking. And yet, he rose swiftly from serving as a group 
official in al-Da'wah [Islamic Call] Party to serving as an 
official in the Amal Movement. Then he became Hizballah's 
mobilization officer in al-Biqa', served as commander of the 
party's fighters against the Amal Movement in Iqlim al-Tuffah, 
and [eventually] became the secretary general of Hizballah in 
Lebanon. Nasrallah managed to move ahead of outstanding scholars 
as well as leading formulators of independent theological 
interpretations, masters of thought, and our predecessors in the 
quest for Islam. How was he able to move ahead of all these 
people so swiftly? 
  Let us mention the following facts to support our 
allegations: 
  1. Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah, group official in al-Da'wah 
Party, 
managed to persuade people that he had never joined the 
aforementioned party. Some people in the Islamic Republic of 
Iran fell for that ploy and believed him. Sayyid Hasan thus 
became the clean man whose personal and social history was 
untarnished. It is worth noting that Sayyid Nasrallah's name was 
cleared by key figures of al-Da'wah Party who denied his 
affiliation with the party because they knew how much the young 
people who were fond of Imam Khomeyni's approach, may God be 
pleased with him, hated al-Da'wah Party. They hated it because 
the party had made fighting Imam Khomeyni's approach its 
strategic goal. That had been the party's goal ever since the 
Holy Imam Khomeyni arrived in the holy city of al-Najaf 
following his exile from Turkey, where he had lived after the 
late Shah exiled him from Iran in 1963. By clearing Nasrallah's 
name the key figures of al-Da'wah Party were able to set the 
stage for Nasrallah to gain access to the decisionmaking 
position. Nasrallah would gain such access after gaining the 
confidence of sincere young people and after officials in the 
Islamic Republic of Iran were persuaded that his background was 
spotless. 
  2. Sayyid Hasan has held in Hizballah, ever since it was 
founded, a position from which he could deal directly with the 
party's elements. He became the mobilization officer in the 
party, and that gave him the opportunity to present himself to 
those elements as a humble person and to portray himself as 
someone who empathizes with the dispossessed and their concerns. 
But it was the cadres of al-Da'wah Party who had penetrated 
Hizballah who took part in polishing Sayyid Hasan's image and 
presenting it to these gullible youths. Consequently, a large 
segment of the party's elements became fond of Sayyid Hasan 
because they believed he was a humble man, indifferent to the 
objects of this world, and troubled by the concerns of the 
toiling classes. Some of these young people even preferred 
Sayyid Nasrallah to his professors, the late Sayyid 'Abbas 
al-Musawi, may God have mercy on his soul; Shaykh Subhi 
al-Tufayli; and Shaykh Muhammad Yazbak. These were the men who 
preceded Nasrallah in associating themselves with the blessed 
Islamic Revolution after its victory in 1979. In this regard 
suffice it to point out that after Sayyid Nasrallah received a 
majority of the votes of the members of the Consultative Council 
in the elections, which followed the expiration of Shaykh Subhi 
al-Tufayli's term as secretary general, he yielded to the late 
Sayyid 'Abbas al-Musawi, claiming humility as his motive. 
Nevertheless, he held control of the party's finances and 
military matters, thereby restricting the movement of the 
secretary general completely and turning himself into the real 
decision maker. 
  3. Sayyid Nasrallah went to Iqlim al-Tuffah to lead 
Hizballah's fighters against the Amal Movement. He assumed an 
ultra-extremist position, and he showed so much enthusiasm for 
the fighting to continue that he refused to adhere to Ayatollah 
Khomeyni's unequivocal order, banning fellow Muslims from 
fighting each other. That turned him into a symbol of the 
resistance in the eyes of the party's elements who had strong 
feelings of hostility for the Amal Movement. In fact, Sayyid 
Nasrallah even traveled to Iran after the agreement between the 
party and the movement [to express] his objection to stopping 
the war between fellow Muslims. But his aim in going to Iran was 
to create some distance between himself and the media under the 
pretext of seeking knowledge in Qom, the center of learning. 
When he was in Iran, however, he tried to project the image of 
someone who was in full compliance with the wishes of officials, 
and he expressed his willingness to do everything that he was 
asked to do. When Sayyid 'Abbas al-Musawi, may God have mercy on 
his soul, was killed by the criminal Zionists, everyone acted 
quickly so that Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah could be installed 
secretary general and Shaykh Na'im Qasim blocked from that 
position. Shaykh Na'im Qasim, who served as deputy secretary 
general during the lifetime of Sayyid 'Abbas al-Musawi, is known 
for his affiliation with al-Da'wah Party. That is how Sayyid 
Hasan Nasrallah, a key figure in al-Da'wah Party, got to the 
position of secretary general of Hizballah. And yet, it was 
generally believed that al-Da'wah Party had actually been driven 
out of the primary decisionmaking position in Hizballah. 
  4. Sayyid Nasrallah vehemently attacked the Lebanese 
Maronite 
regime in his speeches, and he described it in the ugliest 
terms. He got many people to think that he was sincere when he 
disavowed the infidel regime, but then he would turn into an 
apologist for it and rationalize joining it. When he found no 
precedent in Shiite history to justify a person's public 
involvement with infidel entities and oppressive governments, he 
worked hard in the hope that he might get Ayatollah Khamene'i, 
may God protect him, to give him legal cover. When he failed to 
do that, he took one sentence from the leader's statement that 
dealt strictly with internal Iranian matters, and he published 
it in the center of the front page of AL-'AHD Newspaper. That 
sentence had nothing to do with the outside world, and it had 
nothing to do with the elections in Lebanon. Nasrallah published 
that sentence to let people believe that Iranian leaders, acting 
according to a fatwa [formal legal opinion] from Imam Khomeyni, 
may God sanctify his secret, had pushed him to join the Lebanese 
regime. Nasrallah then started making various charges against 
those who hesitated to go to the polling stations or those who 
did not vote for the candidates he had nominated. After bringing 
the matter to a close, however, and getting approval for what he 
wanted approved, doing that by blatantly falsifying the facts 
right and left, Nasrallah started leaking information through 
his mouthpieces, indicating that no one had been legally 
commissioned by the Islamic leadership, but that the decision to 
participate had been made in the so-called Shura Council. 
  5. Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah wants people to forget that he 
lied 
to them about the parliamentary elections. He wants them to 
forget that he forced Muslims to recognize the Lebanese regime 
when he became a member of that regime's legislative authority. 
Today, Nasrallah is venting his wrath against the government, 
loudly proclaiming that, "We will not let the blood of our 
martyrs be spilled in vain." According to our information, 
however, he is trying hard via numerous and different channels 
to get one of his followers accepted as a government minister. 
This would be the price for the blood of martyrs who died in 
Airport Square. This time too the rationale is reforming the 
situation from within. 
  We are reminding sincere believers who would not consent to 
abandoning the provisions of their true religion that the basis 
for disavowing infidel and oppressive governments is the same as 
that for prayer and fasting. We are reminding those sincere 
believers that the unequivocal verses from the Koran and the 
sayings which are attributed to the prophet, may God bless him 
and grant him salvation, and to the sacrosanct imams, peace be 
upon them, forbid dealings of any kind with non-Islamic 
entities. No person, not even the most erudite scholar, can make 
permissible what God Almighty and His messenger, may God bless 
him and grant him salvation, forbad. Accordingly, from now on, 
no true Muslim who is a member of Hizballah may obey his leaders 
so he can make money or protect a position, because by doing 
that, he would be obeying a creature and disobeying the Creator. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59834 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LEBANON </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jabal 'Amil Cleric Criticizes Association Leadership </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0021B Beirut AL-SHIRA' in Arabic 15 Nov 93 pp 12-13 </F>
<F P=103> 94AA0021B </F>
<F P=104>  Beirut AL-SHIRA' </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "What's Inside the Association of </F>
Jabal 'Amil Ulema?"] 
  [Text] We received the following statement from a member of 
the Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema. The statement dealt with 
the association's recent meeting, the conditions surrounding the 
leaders of the association, and the relationship between those 
leaders and Shaykh Hasan Akhtari, Iran's Ambassador to Damascus. 
  The meeting started at 0930. It was started by Shaykh Ahmad 
Talib, imam of the village of Jibshit. He spoke about the 
objectives of the meeting, and he reminded attendees of the 
transgressions of members of the administrative board, which is 
made up of Shaykh 'Afif al-Nabulsi, Shaykh Yusuf Da'mush, Shaykh 
Muhammad Kawtharani, Shaykh Hasan Baghdadi, and Shaykh Ahmad 
Sadiq. 
  Then the discussion among the attendees focused on the 
transgressions of the administrative board. Ulemas [religious 
scholars] opposed to these transgressions had taken this action 
and called for this meeting. 
  The most important of these transgressions which the 
attendees dealt with were: 
  1. The attendees took up the matter of administrative board 
members holding on to their positions even after the expiration 
of the one-year term to which the general assembly had 
previously agreed. It is known that the administrative board was 
elected two years ago, but the general assembly has not called 
for an election so that an administrative board can be elected 
for a second term. 
  2. The attendees took up the matter of Shaykh al-Nabulsi's 
sudden announcement that he would preside over the Association 
of Jabal 'Amil Ulema even though members of the association had 
previously agreed that the association was to have no presiding 
officer and that it was to have an administrative board only. 
That decision was made after the resignation of the late Holy 
Sayyid 'Abd-al-Muhsin Fadlallah, the association's spiritual 
guide. His resignation was the result of comments he made on the 
activities of the administrative board, in particular, the 
personal remarks he made about Shaykh 'Afif al-Nabulsi. The late 
Sayyid Fadlallah, who became aware of Shaykh al-Nabulsi's 
fondness for fame and power, had made those remarks to some of 
the ulemas. 
  3. The attendees took up the administrative board's 
deliberate management failures, and they inquired into what 
members of the administrative board had achieved during their 
term in office since their election. 
  The attendees opined that members of the administrative 
board 
were not engaged in any cultural or social activity to speak of 
except for the fact that they issued statements to the media 
condemning one activity or supporting another, depending on the 
circumstances and the occasions. Their aim was to remind people 
of their presence lest they be forgotten. Also, they did that to 
receive payment from the Islamic Republic of Iran for making 
those statements. 
  4. The attendees also took up the administrative board's 
appropriation of official invitations extended by Iran to the 
association so that association members could travel to perform 
the pilgrimage or to visit Iran. Everybody noted that the 
conduct of members of the administrative board in this matter 
did not meet any religious or rational standards and controls, 
which could explain the board's appropriation of these 
invitations. There was no justification for the conduct of the 
board members. They did what they did to satisfy their desires 
because they found frequent travel to be [an opportunity for] 
tourism and recreation. 
  Their most recent trip to Iran was one of their 
extraordinary 
and ironical recreational trips. Accompanied by their wives and 
children they traveled to Iran after persistently and repeatedly 
asking Shaykh Akhtari to arrange for them such a visit to Iran 
in the name of the association. When Shaykh Akhtari did finally 
comply with their request, they traveled to Iran on that day on 
which Israel ended its shelling of the villages of Jabal 'Amil 
during the seven-day war. 
  To them that trip was their opportunity to reap the fruits 
of 
the efforts that were made and the steadfastness that was 
demonstrated by the dispossessed citizens of Jabal 'Amil. It was 
their opportunity to suggest to the Iranians that they deserved 
credit for their efforts and their strife in south Lebanon, 
which foiled Israel's plan of aggression. At the same time, 
everyone knew that all of them had fled to Beirut where they 
could be safe from Israel's aggression on south Lebanon. 
Everyone knew that they had played no part in supporting the 
people's steadfastness. 
  5. [The budget] was one of the important points taken up by 
the attendees in their comments on the conduct of the 
administrative board. The attendees inquired into the legal 
causes for which the association's $16,000 budget was spent. 
That amount is sent every month by Shaykh Akhtari to members of 
the administrative board for the Association of Jabal 'Amil 
Ulema. And yet, members of the general assembly [of the 
association] know that most of them receive nothing of this 
budget. Where then do these board members stand on the life and 
conduct of 'Ali ibn Abu Talib and his style of government? In 
one of his sayings 'Ali ibn Abu Talib said, "If the money were 
mine, I would establish equity between them. But since the money 
is God's, it is even more incumbent upon me to do that." When 
'Ali appointed Ashtar ruler of Egypt, he admonished him: "Don't 
conduct yourself like a ferocious lion, and don't consider their 
bread and butter to be your spoils. People come in two kinds: if 
they share your faith, they are your brothers, [and if not,] 
they are creatures just like you." 
  Of course, if one wants to find out what became of the 
association's budget, one has to look for all the telltale 
signs: the apartments in Beirut, which members of the 
administrative board have been buying, the luxurious cars they 
have been driving, the businesses in which they have become 
partners, and the splendor and luxury they have been 
experiencing with their families. The telltale signs are many. 
When the source of their property becomes the topic of 
conversation, and they are asked where all that property came 
from, they say that all of it had been given to them as personal 
gifts. 
  Our retort to that so-called answer, one that was given to 
get out of a difficult question, is one which the Prophet, may 
God bless him and grant him salvation, gave one of his friends. 
That friend, who had recently returned from battle, was 
distributing the spoils of war in front of the Prophet, may God 
bless him and grant him salvation. While distributing the loot, 
he told the Prophet, "This is for you and this is for me. They 
were given to us as gifts." 
  The Prophet replied, "Would these gifts have found their way 
to you if you had stayed home?" 
  Of course these gifts would not have found their way to him 
because they were given to him in his official capacity, not 
because of who he is as a person. 
  These were the most important points that were dealt with by 
those who attended the meeting. 
  At the end of the meeting the attendees drafted a concluding 
statement summarizing their demands, and they entrusted a 
five-member committee with the task of presenting those demands 
to Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah, to Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah, 
and to Shaykh Akhtari, ambassador of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran in Syria. The attendees were hoping that these individuals 
would help them achieve their demands. These demands are: 
  1. We consider the Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema to be 
the 
framework within which the ulema can do their work. As such the 
association is not to be duplicated or divided. 
  2. We demand that a charter be drafted for the association 
to 
define mandatory duties and due rights. 
  3. The charter shall become legal upon approval by the 
ruling 
jurisconsult and ratification by the association's general 
assembly. 
  4. The term of office for the former administrative board 
shall be deemed to have expired one year ago, one year after the 
members of that board were elected. That was the period of time 
which was determined for the board by the general association. 
  5. All decisions made by the administrative staff after the 
expiration of the term during which they were authorized by the 
general association to take action shall be considered void and 
illegal. 
  6. The attendees have entrusted a committee, which was 
formed 
with their consent, with the task of following up on the 
decisions they made and the task of drafting bylaws for the 
association. If such bylaws do exist, they are to be presented 
to the committee for its consideration. Then they are to be 
presented to the general assembly within a period of time that 
shall not exceed 10 days, and the general assembly shall either 
approve or amend those bylaws. 
  The attendees then signed the statement. 
  Afterwards 10 other ulemas who had not attended the meeting 
signed the statement. By signing the statement they were adding 
their voices to those of the opposition. [The following] are 
among the signatories: 
  1. Shaykh Khalil Rizq, Hizballah's cultural officer in 
Beirut 
  2. Shaykh Ahmad Kurani, former mayor of the village of Shhur 
  3. Shaykh Taysir Rizq, imam of the village of Zifta 
  4. Shaykh 'Ali Yasin, an official of the religious school in 
Sidon and imam of the village of Majdal Silm 
  5. Shaykh Husayn Surur, imam of the village of Burj 
al-Shamali 
  6. Shaykh Muhammad Hamud, imam of the village of 
al-Hallusiyah 
  7. Sayyid al-Sharif al-Sayyid, imam of the village of 
al-Marwaniyah 
Three other ulemas signed the statement. The number of members 
in the opposition came to 43 ulemas. 
  After some time we asked the follow-up committee how far it 
had come in its efforts, and committee members told us with 
resignation that the opposition's efforts had failed and that 
Shaykh Akhtari, Iran's ambassador to Damascus, had not granted 
their request. It was understood that Shaykh Akhtari wanted to 
keep Shaykh al-Nabulsi because of some advantage that he found 
in keeping him, and he dismissed the opposition of 43 ulemas. 
  The secretariat general of Hizballah was the second 
obstacle, 
which the opposition came up against even though Sayyid Hasan 
Nasrallah himself had given opposition leaders the green light 
for their action. A handwritten letter sent by Sayyid Nasrallah 
to Shaykh Nabil Qawuq, Hizballah's representative to the 
Consultative Council for south Lebanon, attests to that. Sayyid 
Nasrallah indicates in that letter his approval of the 
opposition's action for reform. Opposition leaders got hold of 
this letter, and they used it to allay the fears of some ulemas 
and to encourage them to join them in their action. This letter 
was seen by many ulemas in the opposition. 
  When Sayyid Nasrallah heard the news that some ulemas in the 
opposition had seen his secret letter, he became angry, and he 
withdrew his sponsorship of the opposition's action. 
  Those members of the administrative board whom the 
opposition 
had in mind tried to dissuade some of the ulemas in the 
opposition from their action. They spread rumors that the 
opposition was being backed by Shaykh Subhi al-Tufayli even 
though everybody knew that the opposition's action was launched 
after the green light from Sayyid Nasrallah and Sayyid Fadlallah 
was received. 
  Everybody also knew that Shaykh al-Tufayli was the president 
of al-Tablighiyah Foundation and that Shaykh al-Nabulsi and 
Shaykh Kawtharani, members of the administrative board of the 
Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema, were involved with that 
foundation. Some of the members of Hizballah's Consultative 
Council are also involved with that foundation. If there was any 
truth to that rumor, what would Shaykh al-Tufayli have to gain 
by backing this opposition? 
  If Shaykh al-Tufayli were not a good man and if he were a 
dangerous man, why did the Iranians appoint him to head 
associations for ulemas in Lebanon? 
  In conclusion we would remind Shaykh al-Akhtari that the 
position he took on the opposition conflicts with the policy on 
questioning rulers and holding them accountable that was pursued 
by Imam 'Ali, peace be upon him. It also conflicts with Imam 
'Ali's policy of encouraging the populace to make their 
complaints and comments about the rulers known. Imam 'Ali used 
to listen quite seriously to those complaints, and after 
investigating them, he would boldly take the decision to remove 
the ruler, indifferent to everything but the approval of 
Almighty God. The history of the rule of Imam 'Ali, peace be 
upon him, is full of such instances which illustrate his 
conduct. Since this is not the place where all of them can be 
mentioned, we will limit ourselves to one incident that we will 
relate in the hope that we might learn from it. 
  Imam 'Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him, wrote to 
al-Mundhir Ibn-al-Jarud al-'Abdi, one of the rulers [he had 
appointed] who had failed him in some of the tasks, which had 
been entrusted to him. 
  "Now then, I was misled in thinking that you would follow 
the 
example of your father's righteousness and walk in his 
footsteps. It was reported to me that you are led by your 
passions, that your work makes no allowances for the afterlife, 
that you enrich your life by undermining the foundation for an 
afterlife, and that the relationships you have with your 
community are forged at the expense of your relationship with 
your religion. If what was reported to me about you is true, 
then your family's camel and the soles of your shoes would be 
better than you are. Someone like you does not deserve the space 
he occupies. Someone like you does not deserve to be the means 
by which an order is carried out. Someone like you is not worthy 
of a promotion, nor is he worthy of anyone's trust. 
  "Accept this until you receive a letter from me, God 
willing." 
  [signed] Nahaj al-Balaghah: one of the ulemas in the 
opposition 
<H5>  The Signatories </H5>
  On Saturday, 1 October 1993, 34 of the ulemas from the 
Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema met in the mosque of the 
village of Jibshit. These ulemas are: 
  Shaykh 'Abd-al-Rasul Hijazi, imam of the village of 
al-Dwayr; 
Shaykh Hasan Hariri, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun al-Nahr; 
Shaykh Muhammad Tahini, imam of the village of 'Aytit; Shaykh 
Muhsin Baghdadi, imam of the village of Ansar; Shaykh Hatim 
Isma'il, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun Ra's al-'Ayn; Shaykh 
Muhammad Kurani; imam of the village of Yatar; Shaykh Yasin 
'Isa, imam of the village of Tayr Falsayh; Shaykh 'Uqayl 
Zayn-al-Din, imam of the village of Safad al-Battikh; Shaykh 
Kazim Yasin, imam of the village of al-'Abbasiyah; Shaykh 
Murtada Hasan, imam of the village of 'Arab Salim; Shaykh Ahmad 
Talib, imam of the village of Jibshit; Shaykh Hasan Mushaymish, 
imam of the village of Kfar Sir; Shaykh 'Adil Nadir, imam of the 
village of Nabatiyah al-Fawqa; Shaykh 'Adil Mu'nis, imam of the 
village of al-Hallusiyah; Shaykh 'Abbas Harb, imam of the 
village of al-Hallusiyah; Shaykh Ahmad Murad, imam of the 
village of Brayqi'; Shaykh 'Abbas Kawtharani, imam of the 
village of al-Sarafand; Shaykh 'Ali 'Abbas, imam of the village 
of Kfar Rumman; Shaykh Zayn-al-'Abidin Bakri, imam of the 
village of al-Siddiqin; Shaykh Hasan (Karasht), imam of the 
village of Batulayh; Shaykh Asadallah Jba'i, imam of the village 
of 'Aytit; Shaykh Hassan (Rutayl), imam of the village of 
Mayfdun; Shaykh 'Adnan Mahdi, imam of the village of Khartum; 
Shaykh 'Abd-al-Karim Karnib, imam of the village of Haddathah; 
Shaykh 'Ali Salih, imam of the village of Kfar Dunin; Shaykh 
Khudr Majid, imam of the village of Bi'r al-Salasil; Sayyid 
'Abd-al-Sahib Fadlallah, imam of the village of Khirbat Silm; 
Sayyid Hasan Zalzali, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun al-Nahr; 
Sayyid Husayn Hijazi, imam of the village of Qabrikha; Sayyid 
Amin Tarhini, imam of the village of 'Abba; Sayyid Muhammad Taqi 
al-Musawi, imam of the village of 'Ayn Qana; Sayyid Ghazi 
al-Husayni; and Sayyid Muhammad al-Amin, imam of the village of 
Shaqra. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59835 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> LIBYA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Construction Projects, Contract Details </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94SE0041A Bangkok THAN SETTHAKIT KAN MUANG in Thai 18-20 Nov 
93 pp 16-18 </F>

<F P=103> 94SE0041A </F>
<F P=104>  Bangkok THAN SETTHAKIT KAN MUANG </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] A survey conducted by the 
Ministry of Labor in 1993 showed that the number of Thai workers 
in Saudi Arabia has declined from 200-300,000 to only 50,000. 
There are fewer than 3,000 Thai workers in other Middle East 
countries. But there are still more than 20,000 Thai workers in 
Libya, which means that among Arab countries, Libya has the 
second largest number of Thai workers. 
  Of the more than 20,000 Thais working in Libya, statistics 
on 
those sent between 1990 and the present show that almost 13,000 
are employed by the Dong A Consortium, a Korean contractor. This 
is the single largest source of employment for Thais in Libya. 
The second largest employs only 1,750 Thais. To date, 34 groups 
of Thai workers have been sent to work for the Dong A Company, 
with each group consisting of approximately 400-500 workers. 
  Thus, the Dong A Consortium is a giant for Thai workers in 
Libya. This company has won the bid to build a man-made river 
for the Libyan government. This is Libya's largest investment 
project, which calls for laying pipeline to transport water from 
large underground reservoirs in the desert for use by 
communities located along the coast. About 40 percent of the 
Dong A employees are from Taiwan, and 60 percent are from 
Thailand. 
  Because Thailand and Libya do not have diplomatic relations, 
in the past workers who wanted to go work in Libya had to obtain 
a visa from the Libyan embassy in Malaysia and then fly to 
Tripoli, the capital of Libya. When countries halted air service 
to Libya because of the conflict between Libya and the United 
States, travel became even more difficult. Now, people must 
first travel to a neighboring country and then enter the 
country. For example, one route is to travel from Bangkok to 
Egypt and then take a bus from Egypt to Libya, which takes 30 
hours. Dong A, which has sent many Thai workers to Libya, uses 
this route. This is because the construction project is located 
in eastern Libya near Egypt. 
  A second route is from Bangkok to Malta. From there, people 
can take a boat to Tunisia, which borders the northwestern 
region of Libya and which is near Tripoli. Even though these 
long routes pose an obstacle, the profits waiting there are very 
attractive. 
  The first project in the eastern region of Libya was 
completed last year. And 3 years ago, Libya launched a second 
8-year project in the western part of the country. Libya has 
invested more than $8 billion in these two projects. Thai 
workers will build the "eighth wonder of the world" as this is 
called by Colonel Muammar Qadhdhafi. 
  The fact that more than 20,000 Thais are now working in 
Libya 
shows the effort that they are making to earn a living and enjoy 
a secure life. Their skills and qualities are greatly 
appreciated by the companies that employ them. An official of 
the Dong A Company said that it can be said that these projects 
are the work of Thais alone. Those who employ Thai workers are 
very satisfied with them as compared with workers from other 
countries. A driver is paid about $335. If he works 3 hours a 
day overtime, he can earn about 12,883 baht a month. The 
companies provide free room and board near the work site. 
  "Workers can save a minimum of 100,000 baht a year. The 
employment agencies charge each worker a fee of 40,000 baht." 
  In view of the fact that Dong A is a large employer of 
foreign workers and that it employees mostly Thais, there are 
several employment agencies that seek to place workers. These 
include the PPP Construction Employment Company, the BPB 
International Company, and the Khuta Company. An employment 
agency news source said that the managing director of the BPB 
International Company is a South Korean and so there is a close 
relationship. Also, the Thai shareholder is a close relative of 
Mr. Kittisak Hatthasongkhro, a Thai Nation Party MP [member of 
parliament] from Udon Thani Province. 
  The minimum wage paid is $240-250 a month, and there are 
benefits. This is very attractive to Thais hoping to strike it 
rich in the desert--something they have little hope of doing at 
home. 
  Now that this conflict has arisen, those engaged in sending 
Thai workers to Libya, who stand to be affected the most by 
this, have expressed great concern. Madam Kim, the managing 
director of the BPB International Company, said that 
preparations have been made to send another 100 workers. But 
they can't be sent because the Thai government has prohibited 
this. Actually, the Thai workers there are helping to build up 
Libya. In particular, the man-made river project must proceed. 
If Libya does expel Thai workers, those working for the Dong A 
will probably be the last to leave. The problem is, the "Thai 
government likes to interfere, which just causes problems." 
  A news source from the Khuta Employment Company Ltd said 
that 
Libya is now starting to employ workers from Vietnam and the 
Philippines instead. It is the government that has created the 
problem, but it is the workers who must suffer the consequences. 
Quick action must be taken to solve this problem. "Actually, 
Libya wants Thai workers, because they are even more skilled 
that the Koreans and it is their company. This is clear from the 
fact that the salaries paid to Thai workers are second only to 
what the Koreans get. Also, they are given annual bonuses and 
raises." The salaries of these workers are higher than those in 
Thailand who have a master's degree. Also, they get room and 
board. Most are drivers, blacksmiths, plasterers, and laborers. 
  Thailand is on the horns of a dilemma. Whichever way it 
turns, it could get hurt. The government has done things in a 
very "noisy" way. This has been the case even though Letter 
NR0504/1419 signed by General Charan Kunlawanit, the secretary 
general of the National Security Council, summarized the 
problems and said that Thailand should take action against those 
private companies said to be involved with the chemical weapons 
plant in Libya. But the letter stressed that things should be 
done very carefully, because this is a very delicate issue. 
  Police officials, however, have done things in a very 
"noisy" 
manner, apparently wanting the United States to see what they 
have done, even though they could have done things quietly. 
  Prior to this, officials had been negotiating with Libyan 
officials in an attempt to remove about 200 Thai workers from 
the Libyan plant said to be a chemical weapons plant. Thai 
officials cited the agreement signed by Thailand that prohibits 
chemical weapons. A regulation that will prohibit Thai workers 
from working at weapons plants is now being drafted. Libya has 
been monitoring all of this, because these things are in line 
with the pressure now being exerted by the United States, 
Libya's enemy. [passage omitted] 
  From another angle, the companies that send workers abroad 
are pressuring the government to solve this problem. The fact 
that officials are licking the ass of the United States may stem 
from pressures having to do with trade problems between Thailand 
and the United States. The United States frequently likes to use 
the GSP issue as a bargaining chip. What this means is that the 
government gives greater weight to exporters than to those who 
send workers abroad or to Thai workers who are trying to making 
a living abroad. There is a good chance that the second largest 
labor market in the Arab bloc will soon shut down completely. 
<H3>  The Man-Made River Project, Water Conduit or Underground 
Weapons Plant? </H3>
  The collision between Libya and the United States over the 
terrorists responsible for the bombing of the Pan American Jet 
has affected Thailand. The Thai engineer who owns a construction 
contracting company in Chiang Mai was arrested on charges of 
sending workers abroad illegally. But there are are rumors that 
he designed an underground tunnel in Libya for use as an 
underground chemical weapons plant. This has apparently made 
Qadhdhafi so angry that he has ordered the expulsion of the more 
than 20,000 Thai workers from Libya. 
  The matter of the underground tunnel is very confusing. Some 
people say that this is an air raid shelter. Others say that it 
can be modified for use as an underground weapons production 
plant. And some say that it is a water conduit that is part of 
the man-made river project. 
  "The man-made river project, or plant to produce huge water 
pipes for the project (Berka plant), is 1.4 million square 
meters in size. The plant produces pipes with a diameter of 4 
meters and a length of 7.5 meters. 
  Concerning Libya's "Great Man Made River Project, documents 
compiled by Dong A official Udon Chanthawan, and a document 
entitled "The River of Life" prepared by Libyan officials state 
that the purpose of this project is to defeat the dry natural 
conditions of the Sahara desert. The goal is to transform this 
desert into a green agricultural zone. [passage omitted] 
  Thus, this huge project to pipe water from the middle of the 
desert to communities in the north is in form similar to a 
man-made river. Altogether, there are five projects: 
  1. The Al-Sarin-Sidra and Qaslr Benghazi lines. 
  2. The western Jamahiriyah-Tripoli line. 
  3. The line connecting Kufra with the headwaters of a river. 
  4. Ajdabiya-Tubruq. 
  5. The Sidra line, which follows the coast to Tripoli. 
[passage omitted] 
  Building these five projects will require a huge sum of 
money. The first project alone cost $3.27 billion, or more than 
80 billion baht, to build. Almost 2,000 km of pipe with a 
diameter of 4 meters had to be laid through the desert. It took 
9 years to complete this project. A total of 1 million cubic 
meters of water flows through this pipeline each day. 
  The second project, which is being built by the Dong A 
Consortium, will cost $4.6324 billion. About 2 million cubic 
meters of water a day will flow through this pipeline. This 
project will consist of 283 km of iron pipe and 1,240 km of 
concrete pipe and will take 8 years to build. 
  The man-made river project has not yet been completed. But 
much experience and knowledge about underground work has been 
gained from building an underground tunnel in different 
topographical conditions. A tunnel with a diameter of 4 meters 
is large enough for a vehicle to drive through. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59836 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> OMAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Petroleum Minister Discusses OPEC Prices, Iraq </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0051A London AL-HAYAH in Arabic 26 Nov 93 pp 9, 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0051A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-HAYAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Husayn 'Abd-al-Ghani in Muscat: "Omani Minister </F>
of Petroleum and Minerals al-Shanfari Speaks to AL-HAYAH: `We 
Hope To Lift Petroleum Embargo on Iraq; Non-OPEC Members Did Not 
Cause Price Collapse'"] 
  [Text] Omani Petroleum Minister Mr. Sa'id Bin-Ahmad 
al-Shanfari has said that his country hopes to lift the 
petroleum embargo on Iraq "in order for it to resume the 
production and export of its petroleum." He added in an 
interview with AL-HAYAH that OPEC could restore Iraq's prewar 
quota, which was distributed among other countries, without a 
price collapse. 
  The Omani minister, whose country usually undertakes the 
role 
of coordinator between OPEC producers and other producers, 
criticized countries in the petroleum exporting organization for 
blaming the current petroleum price declines on nonmember 
countries, describing this as unfair, especially given the 
tendency of OPEC's production to rise, and the production of 
nonmember countries to decline. 
  Al-Shanfari, who this week accepted the OPEC 
secretary-general's invitation to intervene with countries 
outside the organization to support petroleum prices, showed no 
eagerness to reduce the production of his country, or that of 
other producers outside the organization. He emphasized that 
OPEC itself needed "cohesion" and that OPEC itself was capable 
of fixing prices. 
  The Omani minister confirmed the increase in his country's 
production this year, to record levels: 800,000 barrels. 
  The text of the interview follows: 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] This month, in which Oman's national day 
falls, and in the light of the drop in petroleum prices, it has 
been noted that the Sultanate's production and reserves have 
risen. What is the volume of the increase? How can it be 
reconciled with Oman's pessimistic expectations in the early 
1970's? 
  [Al-Shanfari] I am pleased to give you a complete picture of 
our petroleum production, especially since 1974. It was in that 
year that the picture of the future of petroleum and gas was 
very bleak. At that time, Omani and international experts 
expected that Oman would have petroleum in the years to 
come--the years we are now living in. 
  At the time, we had a petroleum reserve of about 1.5 billion 
barrels; our daily production was less than 300,000 barrels. 
Today, praise God, and with the guidance and support of His 
Majesty Sultan Qabus Bin-Sa'id in the petroleum sector, we have 
achieved these excellent results. Our production is now 800,000 
barrels per day [bpd], of which 80,000 bpd are for local 
consumption. We export the rest (720,000 bpd). 
  Oman's petroleum reserves have more than tripled, nearing 5 
billion barrels. We hope soon to add half a billion more barrels 
to the reserve, and I may say that the outlook is now bright. We 
are still at the beginning of the road, and I believe that we 
have great petroleum possibilities. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] More than one OPEC official has said that 
the 
petroleum market is now experiencing a new price war, and that 
the non-OPEC member countries of the region--among them 
Oman--are responsible for this deterioration. Do you agree with 
this assessment? Or is it your view that the failure of OPEC 
states themselves to adhere to the quotas is behind the rise in 
supply, and by extension the price collapse? 
  [Al-Shanfari] There is much to be said about this, but I do 
not want to get into blaming anyone in particular. The fact is 
that the global economy is in an unstable state. When 
development is slow in this economy, it is difficult to expect 
the consumption of large quantities of petroleum. Consumption 
grows slowly in the Western world--i.e., the industrialized 
countries--at a rate of less than 1 percent. Comparing that with 
the countries of Asia, we find that there is a large increase in 
consumption, and a greater absorptive capacity; average 
petroleum consumption rises 10 percent per year, reaching 14 
percent in the case of China. 
  Thus there are many factors involved in the collapse of 
petroleum prices, which taken all together do not encourage the 
growth of demand for petroleum. It is also true that some 
countries boosted their production capacity, such as the North 
Sea countries, Norway and Britain, but honestly, I cannot lay 
blame on the countries outside OPEC, because the majority are 
countries with small production (with the exception of Russia 
and the North Sea countries) that do not affect the global 
petroleum markets. Going back to the production of producing 
countries outside OPEC will fortify this view; we find that 
their petroleum production is decreasing. In 1989, their 
production was 43 million bpd, and this year it dropped to about 
40 million bpd. 
  In 1988, the OPEC countries' production was 21.8 million 
bpd, 
and it rose this year to about 26.9 million bpd. 
  So--there is a reduction in the petroleum production of the 
non-OPEC states, and an increase in the petroleum production of 
the organization's member states. Thus it would be wrong and 
unfair for us to blame the drop in prices on the non-OPEC states. 
  Here in Oman, as a coordinating state between the OPEC 
member 
producers and non-OPEC producers, we do not want to lay blame on 
specific parties, and we hope that our brothers in OPEC will not 
lay blame on the non-OPEC countries. I can give an example in 
this context that some members in the exporting organization 
directly boosted their production higher than it had been before 
the last Gulf war by nearly 40 or 50 percent. Some countries 
that had a daily production of 1.5 million barrels before the 
crisis have increased it to nearly two million bpd or more. 
  Another thing. All indications are that many non-OPEC 
producers are decreasing production. China, for example, will 
this year become an importing country, and India, too, will 
bcome an petroleum importer within months or a year at the most. 
  Among some OPEC member states there is a lack of agreement 
or 
consensus, but if there were to be cooperation and some good 
will among us, then the price situation would improve. Time is 
on OPEC's side; this is what I think and understand from my 
experience with petroleum-producing countries inside and outside 
the organization. I also say that we must not lay blame on one 
another. Let us coordinate with one another, because our dispute 
is not in the best interests of producing countries. I want 
there to be cooperation and mutual understanding among all 
producers. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] There are calls to hold a meeting of OPEC 
states and nonmember countries to reach an agreement to support 
prices based on the OPEC member states' request for a 5 percent 
or more drop in production, as has happened before. Would you 
agree, at this time, when we are seeing a retreat in petroleum 
prices and revenues, to another drop in your production, or will 
you price as you did before to convince Russia and other 
producers to lower their production? 
  [Al-Shanfari] We have no problem going along with these 
calls, on condition prices are raised. But we believe that 
lowering production without prices being raised would be hard 
for a country like Russia, which is facing economic hardship, or 
China, whose exports do not exceed 100,000 bpd. That leaves 
Oman, Mexico, or Egypt. Is it possible to ask Egypt, which has 
enormous economic challenges, or us in Oman, whose petroleum 
revenues are insufficient to achieve the government's ambitions, 
especially as we want to follow in the footsteps of our brothers 
in the Gulf, who produce large quantities of petroleum. 
  We in Oman need petroleum revenues for the basic necessities 
of development. How can our brothers, who produce millions of 
barrels, ask Oman to reduce its production by 20,000 or 30,000 
barrels? 
  Even so, we have no objection, and are constantly declaring 
our readiness to cooperate. But how can we ask a country like 
Egypt, in its circumstances, with a population growth of nearly 
a million people every year? 
  This is why we hope the members of OPEC will do their utmost 
to cooperate among themselves. If that happens, they might be 
able to solve the current petroleum price problem. 
  Everyone knows that Norway is not prepared to lower its 
production. While they might cooperate with us, it is only 
verbally. They are always attending the coordination meetings 
that OPEC members and nonmembers hold, just to listen to our 
points of view. Britain is the same, except that it does not 
consent to attend our meetings, because they have their own 
circumsatcnes and policy. I reiterate, in spite of that, our 
willingness to cooperate, as non-OPEC producers, but it is up to 
OPEC to define or fix prices, so there must be greater cohesion 
within the organization. Our belief is that even if we did lower 
our production, it would not be much of a help to the current 
price situation. All the power lies within the organization. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] Would you agree with the view that the 
chance 
of Iraq returning to the petroleum market is one of the major 
reasons for the current drop in global petroleum prices? 
  [Al-Shanfari] Everyone knows that Iraq is a 
petroleum-producing country, and Iraq's quota of OPEC production 
before the war is known. Iraq's return to the "petroleum 
producers' and exporters' club" is something to be taken into 
consideration. We in the Sultanate of Oman hope that Iraq will 
go back to producing its petroleum. The Iraqi people have 
suffered enough. Iraq's quota is known to all, just as Kuwait's 
was. Kuwait came back and resumed producing its quota, even 
increased it. The Emirates' quota was known, and its current 
production is known. Iraq should resume producing, and Iraq's 
resumption of production will not mean chaos or disorder in the 
global petroleum market. I believe the OPEC countries will allow 
Iraq to resume its quota. As to when Iraq will return and what 
effect that will have, these matters are hard to predict fully 
right now, though our hope is that sanctions will be lifted from 
Iraq and it will be able to resume exporting petroleum. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] But what will happen to the market and 
prices 
in the event OPEC is preventing from granting Iraq its old quota 
as soon as the international sanctions are lifted? 
  [Al-Shanfari] The question of the price collapse might 
happen, I believe, if OPEC does not consent to give Iraq its 
former quota. Prices would plunge, possibly reaching $10 per 
barrel. This would hurt producers. If Iraq is given the quota 
that was taken from it, or distributed among some other 
countries, I don't think we'll see a collapse of petroleum 
prices. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] Recently there has been a noticeable 
slowdown 
in the giant joint ventures Oman had contracted for, for 
instance, the construction of an petroleum pipeline from the 
Caspian Sea to the Black Sea, or the gas pipeline to India, as 
well as the liquid gas project--whose estimated total price tag 
is nearly $18 or $19 billion. 
  [Al-Shanfari] Discussing these projects brings us to the 
Sultanate's efforts to diversify its revenue sources at the 
local level, into the areas of agriculture, industry, fisheries, 
and minerals. We have also begun to diversify these sources 
abroad; we have begun to seek out economic projects abroad. We 
have actually signed agrements with Russia and Kazakhstan to 
build a Black Sea pipeline through Russia. The project is now 
ready for implementation. An economic study is now being 
prepared, along with the route of the pipeline. We hope that the 
study will be adequate, and we will receive it soon. Naturally 
we have entered the stage of obtaining of the petroleum 
exploration concession in Kazakhstan, and we hope that work will 
get under way soon in developing this concession. We have signed 
an agreement with the Indian Government to supply the Indian 
subcontinent with natural gas from Oman. As the world's second 
most populous country, after China, India likewise has a rising 
demand for energy, and the same holds true for the other rapidly 
developing countries of Asia, such as Vietnam, Taiwan, and 
others. The agreement includes the building of a pipeline, and a 
study is now being prepared. We hope it will be completed for us 
to consider by March/April 1994. The study will definitively 
establish the route of the pipeline and its actual cost. We are 
negotiating with the Indian Government over the pricing of the 
gas, and are working on having the project implemented at the 
earliest possible opportunity. We have the strong support of His 
Majesty the Sultan in building this pipeline, which will be the 
first of its kind in the world--it will be built at a depth of 
3,000 meters under the sea. 
  Economically, it will be a first-class pipeline. It will 
allow the planning of other pipelines between the Indian 
subcontinent and the Arabian peninsula. We in Oman welcome the 
participation and cooperation of our brothers in the region, 
should they have the intention. We could work on petroleum 
pipelines, because as we have begun with gas we can take on the 
building of other pipelines for petroleum. 
  According to what I have understood from Petroleum Ministry 
experts, the main obstacle to this project is technical, in 
terms of the means of putting a pipeline 3,000 feet down, but 
even this obstacle can be overcome. When the studies are 
completed, there will be an international tender for the 
construction of the pipeline. There is another project, the 
liquified gas complex we are also interested in, which may cost 
as much as to $9 billion. 
  People may wonder how these huge, expensive projects are 
funded. So far we have knocked on the doors of international 
financiers, because we are still in the study stage, but what I 
would like to make clear is that building these projects will 
not affect the development process at home. No portion of our 
current global investments will be withdrawn; these projects 
will be funded through international institutions. I do not 
believe Oman will have any difficulty in handling this funding, 
because these projects are vital and profitable, and the 
Sultanate's economic reputation abroad is excellent, because of 
our political stability. Contacts have been made in this regard. 
We in the Petroleum Ministry, as well as our brothers in the 
Omani Finance Ministry, have received proposals from 
international banks and investors, all of whom want to take part 
in these projects. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] After your recent visits to China and India, 
you announced Omani investments in those two countries' 
petroleum industries. What is the nature and scale of the 
investments? Will they be in the field of exploration and 
extraction, or in petroleum refining? 
  [Al-Shanfari] On my visit to India, we noticed vast 
possibilities in all aspects of work and investment in China. We 
are now discussing projects such as obtaining Chinese petroleum 
concession regions, building petroleum refineries, and 
participating in pipeline construction. We are still at the 
negotiation and discussion stage, so right now it is difficult 
to say what will be agreed upon. I think we willl be able to get 
certain project agreements within about four months. 
  Turning to foreign investments, we have a project to build 
two petroleum refineries in India, and we have also taken a 
share in an petroleum refinery in Thailand with Caltex, Inc. We 
are thus trying to diversify our income sources, especially 
since most of these projects will produce revenues in 10 or 15 
years, and at that point will constitute another support for the 
Omani economy, which will prevent our continued dependence 
solely on petroleum revenues. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] Do you think that India's recent agreement 
with Iran for a natural gas pipeline from Iran to India will 
affect the Indian government's commitment to their agreement 
with you? 
  [Al-Shanfari] So far, our agreement is in force, and we are 
moving ahead with it. The Indian Government feels that we are 
serious about implementing it, and I do not think the Indians 
will change their minds. I met with Indian Prime Minister 
Narasimha Rao, who asserted his support for the project. Just 
last week there were talks with the Indians on the course of the 
work. We are now at the stage of implementing what we agreed 
upon. We are not speaking of an imaginary project. We hope that 
two years from now the Indian subcontnent will have natural gas 
from the Arabian peninsula. 
  ['Abd-al-Ghani] Has the Sultanate's petrochemical project, 
which will depend on more natural gas energy and discoveries in 
the Sultanate, reached the stage of signing an agreement, or is 
it still at the preliminary study stage? 
  [Al-Shanfari] The extent of the natural gas present under 
the 
Sultanate has begun to become clear. At present we have reached 
gas reserves of 20 trillion cubic feet. We have an ambitious 
exploration program, and I think there are great possibilities. 
I believe continued exploration for gas will make the picture 
even clearer. We are able--according to our own experts' 
estimates--to double our present gas reserves. We use natural 
gas in Oman to provide energy for electric stations. Another 
large electrical station will soon be added, in Manah, in the 
interior of Oman. 
  As to the petrochemical complex and other projects, we are 
continue to study them, especially as our available gas reserves 
are sufficient for the Sultanate's local consumption for more 
than 30 years, in addition to covering the liquid gas project's 
needs and those of the natural gas pipeline to India. 
  We believe that within a few months we will add new 
quantities of gas. This gas is associated with petroleum 
(petroleum liquids) that will be added to our petroleum reserves. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59837 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> SAUDI ARABIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shura Analyzed by Prominent Arab Personalities </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0008A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 23 Sept 93 pp 
11, 14 </F>

<F P=103> 94AE0008A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Supplement prepared by 'Abdallah al-Qabi': "Consultation </F>
and Change; Saudi National Day"] 
  [Text] 
<H3>  `Consultation, Islamic Method of Representation,' by Shaykh 
'Abdallah Ibn Husayn al-Ahmar, speaker of the Yemeni House of 
Representatives </H3>
  The Saudi Consultative Council [Shura], the formation of 
which was recently announced, is considered a good, progressive 
step on the correct path, because it confirms how deeply the 
value of the Shura is embedded in our people, no matter what 
unforseen events befall them. It is a blessed act for which we 
commend Saudi Arabia--king, government, and people. 
  As Muslims, we consider the Shura a positive value and a 
shari'ah obligation. There is no dispute about Shura being a 
characteristic of fundamentalist believers, because God has 
imposed it as an obligatory duty which must be pursued, or 
rather, He coupled it with belief in Him, and with the 
obligation of prayer. He said: "Those who respond to their Lord 
and keep up prayer, and whose affairs are (decided) by counsel 
among themselves, and who spend out of what we have given them." 
  Shura is not merely a transitory idea or an emergency 
measure. On the contrary, it is a deep-rooted precept in our 
awareness and behavior. However, the events that have occurred 
have been far removed from the spirit of religion and, 
consequently, we were cut off from the principles, values, and 
morals of our religion, including the principle of Shura. 
  When Shura is absent from our reality, our lives become 
troubled and controlled by high-handedness and individual 
hegemony. Because of that, corruption, tyranny, and difficulties 
of life spread. 
  With this position that Shura occupies in our heritage, and 
with this conscious understanding of its beneficial effects and 
positive results, we are aware that Shura is nothing new to us. 
It is no alien import from the West. But the break with this 
principle for centuries has made it appear to be a modern form, 
as if it were new to us, while it is "our goods that have 
returned to us." 
  Therefore, Shura is our precept or fundamental principle. 
Its 
application has, in fact, taken various forms and methods 
including, most importantly, representation in the form of 
parliamentary and representative councils, as well as 
consultative, as a means of representation. 
  The highest expression of Shura application is in 
representative councils, which are considered a true and 
realistic expression of the meaning of Shura, which has remained 
blocked-off in letter and theory. Shura is now changing in 
practice, through "representative" consultative councils, from 
the stage of principle to the stage of practical application. 
  Moreover, even though Shura is obligatory in principle, it 
has not been confined to a rigid framework, in terms of methods 
and forms. It carries the concept of collectivism, consultation, 
and the exchange of ideas, free from absolutism in points of 
view or adherence to special positions. In terms of ways to 
apply it in practice, one should benefit from the experience and 
expertise of others. This strengthens its correctness and 
success. Islam leaves that to theological judgement and 
interpretation by changes and modifications. 
<H3>  `Saudi Role in Gulf Scene Strengthens Its Arab Leadership' 
by al-Shadhili al-Qulaybi </H3>
  After the convulsion that began in the summer of 1990, which 
shook the Arab nation from one end to the other, our people have 
remained upset, at odds over diverging views, differing in what 
constitutes best interests, with a prevailing malaise here and 
there. 
  Should our people remain waiting for whatever an 
international system might provide them three years after that 
hurricane, which destroyed structures, wasted resources, and 
monopolized the senses? Should they wait for it to rescue them 
from the fall and, possibly, save our countries from 
circumstances that prevent our society from resuming the 
building of its honor? 
  The answer to those questions is that, no matter what 
developments occur in the world, a system will not emerge that 
is based on anything other than the old system that the world 
has offered. This system is that the strongest benefit, and the 
interests of the major powers get the highest attention. 
  It has been said that nations have no friendship, only 
interests. We could add to that: "Interests of the major powers 
always precede all principles and values." We should not be 
blind, in any time or place, to the congruence between the 
interests of the strongest and the principles of international 
law. They are circumstantial and transient. One should not rely 
on them as permanent, fixed principles, because international 
politics is unjust by nature, by virtue of the tyranny of 
national interests. They rise above principles and values, 
whenever incompatibility occurs between them. We have seen that 
in many regional crises, the most recent and ugly in the tragedy 
of Bosnia. In this regard, many of those with international 
influence were in collusion to enable the Serbian side, at stage 
after stage, to continue its campaign of murder and population 
displacement, which could have been stopped in the beginning if 
the so-called leading nations had the political will for 
international action. 
  This was the truth once, but is it not the duty of our 
countries, despite all the negative aspects of mutual action--at 
the Gulf, Arab, and Islamic levels; and is it not also in our 
people's interests, despite the continuation of dashed hopes, 
and despite the violent storms that still rage around them; is 
it not the duty and in our best interests to rely on ourselves, 
to rescue our present from sliding more and more into the abyss, 
to bear the responsibility for our future until we achieve the 
prosperity, strength, and honor we desire? 
  Therefore, we are in urgent need of an awakening that 
possesses clarity of vision in thinking and derives 
determination from our collective pride. Our people are always 
in the position of "low hand" in the international community. 
  However, this matter requires some explanation, especially 
after the violent winds that blew away the concepts of "Arabism" 
and "ummah" [Arab Islamic community as a whole]. 
  Before any other consideration, Arabism is a cultural bond 
between the peoples who chose this affiliation and the source of 
this gift, the Arabian Peninsula. It fashioned this miraculous 
language that we have used for more than 14 centuries. It is 
still in constant development, but maintains its fundamental 
components. These peoples, West and East, both black and the 
white races, chose to be Arab. Many times, many of them 
tarnished its image. It is incumbent upon our countries to do 
everything possible to remove from our people the blemish of 
backwardness, not only to defend Arab honor, but also so that 
our people will share in prosperity and progress. 
  Therefore, one should review, at the outset, how we have 
gone 
astray, both in the past and now, in regard to the concept of 
ummah and mutual Arab action. In the past, the concept of 
Arabism--or the Arab ummah--was misused at times. We should not 
necessarily be led into discarding this marvelous bond or into 
renouncing its duties. The defect does not lie in the reality of 
this bond, but rather in the method of comprehending and dealing 
with its development. One of the lessons of the past is that--in 
the future--we must not rely on some idea or malign some 
principle without closely examining the results, analyzing the 
consequences, and agreeing on means of implementation, so that 
concepts are clear and satisfy--solidly and firmly--the 
principles that govern our acts. The Arab decision should be 
guaranteed implementation, because of the vision and profound 
dialogue that preceded it. 
  We accept the profoundness and value of the historic and 
cultural bond that cements some of our people to others. We must 
be persuaded that our destinies should be closely bound together 
in prosperity and adversity, both as regards our affairs inside 
the region and in our relations with the rest of the world. 
  At this point, one must offer a number of observations: 

  -  Removing the blemish of backwardness from Arabs in general 
will not be what keeps the Arab people as one. They may be 
marked by that. There is no room for egoism in our war against 
backwardness. It is an all-out war, whose only meaning is its 
universality for all peoples affiliated with Arabism. 
  -  The issue of Palestine is not a regional issue, not an issue 
of 
its leadership, but rather, it is an issue of one of our peoples 
in trust to all of us. Would we be satisfied with history 
holding us accountable for the loss of Palestine, as it held our 
forefathers accountable for the loss of Andalusia? Therefore, 
acceptance of the importance of the Palestinian negotiator--or 
the Syrian, Lebanese, or Jordanian--is only defending the Arab 
right, so that we can regain the most that is possible. 
  -  Then, with the regaining of Palestine, or most of Palestine, 
Israel will still remain a tyrannical power in the region, 
displaying animosity to all Arabs and on guard against them. As 
a result, our countries will continue to squander our vast 
wealth on armament and security, which will only result in our 
being distracted from the substantive. The substantive is the 
issue of growth. The nation whose ruler took the initiative that 
led to the Fez peace plan can only play a major role in support 
of the efforts aimed at peace. I do not say a "just peace," but 
one can only accept it and be reassured. 
  -  Coming out of backwardness is not only one of the duties of 
Arab honor; it is also a requirement of Arab security. The more 
our people have command of the sciences and different kinds of 
technology, the more they will be able to protect their security 
themselves. 
  -  Our people must choose the specific nature of their destiny: 
Are they content to always remain a geographic region in the 
path of violent international interests? Or, do they want to 
have self-identity, effectively making decisions with regard to 
their own affairs, and a voice to be heard in international 
assemblies? 
  -  One cannot ignore the past. We will have wasted its lessons 
if 
we treat it with forgetfulness. However, the past must not 
fetter us, but should open windows of the future for us. What 
concerns our people and their security is the revival of their 
present situation and excellent preparation for their future. 
This is what is required from us, we are not prisoners of past 
negative factors. We must head into the future with all the 
insight, courage, and enthusiasm that we have. Other than that 
will keep our people in positions of weakness and fragmented 
ideas. Their efforts will fail and they will go with the 
wind. 

    It behooves our countries to work within these crucial 
facts, 
no matter how powerful past experiences were, and no matter how 
shaken their confidence in their "brother" Arabs. For all these 
considerations, a true awakening must encompass the entire Arab 
nation, from the Gulf to the Atlantic. So that this necessary 
awakening will occur, there must be strong leadership to take 
charge. Capabilities must be gathered, and a call put forth for 
the "Great Jihad": the jihad of the spirit, in which rancor and 
separatist inclinations are spreading; the jihad against 
backwardness, because of which our people suffered for centuries 
from the woes of defeats and humiliations. Leadership in this 
awesome matter must be able to assume responsibility for 
coordinating viewpoints, rallying spirits, and directing 
efforts. The drive will only come from one of our countries, or 
a group of countries, with a decisive stand that is adopted from 
our religious past, and which is pursued on a new course to open 
the gates of the future. 
  In the first rank of those qualified to assume this role is, 
without a doubt, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, by virtue of its 
traditional Arab role of strengthening developmental efforts in 
various countries, and because of the astonishing leap forward 
that it has made in this regard in basic fields, such as 
education, forming highly-trained brilliant cadres in 
administrative and social, economic, and political affairs. By 
looking at the high percentage of cohesion that surrounds our 
people, thanks to the comprehensive development policy for all 
areas of the kingdom and all its social groups, there is no 
doubt that the new measures pertaining to the Consultative 
Council [Shura] and to government in the kingdom's provinces, 
will strengthen the cohesion of the kingdom's people, by 
supporting methods and techniques of Shura and broadening its 
area. They will also strengthen the organization of governmental 
powers, since the usefulness of the government's work will be 
doubled. Shura will increase its influence and credibility with 
public opinion. It is certain that these measures--and those 
that will doubtlessly follow--will cause the governmental system 
to keep more and more in step with the social and intellectual 
awakening that has been spreading throughout the country for the 
past two or three decades. 
  It is also certain that the role that the kingdom plays on 
the Gulf scene is influential in solidifying the Gulf's Arab 
leadership. All indicators point to the fact that this role will 
increase in importance in the future, because of the magnitude 
of the kingdom's size, the enormity of its wealth over the long 
term, the ancestral heritage of its state, and the importance of 
its population numbers. These are some of the considerations 
that gives it its power inside the Gulf Cooperation Council 
[GCC], gives it its influence, and makes it a mediator and 
authority. Many observers from outside the Gulf, even non-Arab 
observers, expect positive developments in view of this, which 
will enable the GCC to overcome its preoccupation with long, 
slow-moving "approaches." In taking a decisive step toward some 
form of federation, much time, effort, and money could be saved, 
and the long line of security and defense plans avoided. A 
responsible, effective, cohesive power in the area and inside 
the Arab family could be formed from that, within the framework 
of the Islamic community. This would increase the kingdom's 
fitness for leadership responsibilities, for which it stands 
alone on the international scene, with an increasingly effective 
role in economic, financial, and political areas. 
  Our Arab people, east and west, are Islamic as a whole, 
either by embracing Islam as a religion, or by feeling at ease 
with it culturally. The overwhelming majority of our Christian 
citizens confirm this, in Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, and 
Palestine, and also in Lebanon, despite the tragedy suffered by 
the Lebanese. This is also confirmed by many Jews who have 
settled among them in 10 good Arab nations, the likes of which 
they did not find--not in the past nor in modern times--in the 
European areas that allege today to be for human rights. 
  Our peoples' relationship with Islam makes them responsible 
for the renaissance of Islamic society, so that its first 
emergence, which fashioned that great civilization and created 
that comprehensive culture, is renewed. Within that culture, the 
idea of adopting the causes of progress and development matured. 
  The Islamic society will only be able to attain a renewed 
emergence by reviving the principles that were one of the 
factors of its power and the brilliance of its direction. They 
are: 

  -  The principle of ijtihad [independent legal judgement], 
through acts of opinion and use of reason in religious and 
worldly affairs. 
  -  Quest of knowledge: This is obligatory on individuals and the 
group "even if in China." 
  -  Hard work and labor, to earn one's livelihood and sustain the 
needs of the ummah. 
  -  Solidarity among individuals and peoples alike. 
  -  Shura, so that the ummah is safe from civil strife and the 
disaster of tyranny and absolutism in opinion. 
  -  Tolerance, which has made one of our Arab capitals a unique 
model for peaceful coexistence of people of various religious 
sects. 

    With these principles, the Islamic society was a power, its 
various groups cohesive, and the sciences and their technologies 
flourished, so that the authority which was Europe borrowed from 
it. Whenever we lose those principles, power and sovereignty 
slip away, economic prosperity declines in our countries, 
intellectual movement in our societies stagnates, and the true 
sciences are suppressed in our educational institutions. Our 
peoples' conditions worsen, and they are dominated by those 
nations that acquired sciences and culture from them, because 
they adopted the same principles that had made us the leaders 
and that--today--strengthen the nations that lead the 
international community. 
  We are more deserving of these principles, because they were 
originally in our doctrine, one of the pillars of our 
civilization. We would not have needed someone else's 
enlightenment to discover them, if there had been no inclination 
to replace this important part of our intellectual and cultural 
heritage. 
  Today, our people need to awaken from their cultural slumber 
and return to their first way of life, with regard to judgement 
in the rest of their affairs, in order to return to a place of 
honor among nations. But we must, therefore, be able to stop the 
civil strife that gnaws at some of our countries, threatens to 
spread into others, and is on the verge of destroying the costly 
gains that we cherish. 
  All our Arab and Islamic nations must heed this call, which 
requires universal effort and multiple directions and levels: in 
the framework of education, on the cultural and intellectual 
level, and in areas of social and economic reorganizations. All 
of that rests on each country equally, through collective labor 
in which all our nations participate, with the required 
effectiveness and breadth of vision. 
  In this noble work, the kingdom's role will be distinctive, 
thanks to the sum of the factors to which I referred earlier, in 
addition to the honor of embracing the two holy mosques. It is a 
responsibility that the kingdom bears in the most admirable 
manner, and from which King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz derives his 
title. We believe that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in firm 
cooperation with other of our prominent nations, will be able to 
drive the process of cultural revival, in which religious duty, 
moral restraint, and best interests must coincide, now and in 
the future. 
  People will only rally around a noble idea that will drive 
intellectual efforts and rally spiritual energies. At this stage 
of our people's history, the big undertaking is the ability to 
bring them together and revive their enthusiasm anew, revive the 
Arab, Islamic civilization and to plan for a cultural 
"revolution" aimed at attaining progress, prosperity, and honor, 
starting from our fundamental cultural principles and our high 
spiritual values. 
<H3>  `Concerning Shura and Change,' by Munah al-Solh, Lebanese 
politician and writer </H3>
  Government is choice. The custodian of the two holy mosques 
has chosen to give Shura. This is an Islamic principle and the 
method in force in the kingdom is a kind of council, with its 
form, personnel, and bases for action, within a framework of 
process of change. This was chosen as the method by King Fahd 
from the start of his exercise of official responsibility, even 
before he became king. 
  His decision was made within local, Arab, and Islamic 
circumstances. The purpose was to generate confidence in 
abilities and capabilities and in the maturity to develop the 
Saudi society. This began with the reign of King 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
and has continued through the reign of King Fahd. In this stage, 
building and modernization has burst forth, marked by broad, 
comprehensive change in the growth of human capabilities, 
professional qualifications, and progress, in addition to the 
material infrastructure. 
  All of this develops at a time when the kingdom's role in 
Arab, Islamic, and international circles is being 
comprehensively expanded through friendships and despite 
enmities. The spotlight points basically toward Islam, with its 
holy places, and on Arabism in the cradle of its inception. 
  These intentions and manifestations have been nurtured in 
the 
hearts of the kingdom's mature people, who have grown in 
society, with a collective decision to heed the call of duty, 
since it is for king, nation, Arabism, and Islam. 
  Naturally, the guardian of the two holy mosques was the 
first 
to perceive this historic maturity. He is the one who guided and 
watched over the growth of Saudi capabilities. He searched for 
and encouraged them in various fields. The four royal decrees, 
which arose from tangible and developed facts, rest on King 
Fahd's wager on the maturity of his people, especially the 
professional and intellectual elite of these people, to carry 
all the burdens of a institutionalization stage. Proof of this 
is the order to create the Consultative Council and the other 
orders for change. 
  These orders, and the direct changes they contain for the 
kingdom's people and society, have received support and 
admiration from every Arab and Muslim and every impartial 
objective observer in the world. These changes are recognized 
again as the lofty spirit of Islam--more open than any other at 
any time or place, able to keep pace with developments, 
believing in science, a friend of mankind, unlimited in its 
excellent abilities. They are the spirit the Muslims adopt as 
their way toward progress and renewal of their historic role in 
the guidance of mankind. 
  This spirit, which the Arab and Islamic ummah--and the 
Arabian Peninsula itself--extended at another time, and the 
capability to continue the renewal, is behind the decision to 
create the Consultative Council, which in all the world has had 
the best reverberations. In fact, it deserves more praise than 
the world has given it, in view of its importance and the values 
that it encompasses, in terms of a spirit of justice, openness, 
and wisdom. It is its nature to serve the Islamic reputation at 
a time in which Islam is being buffeted by campaigns directed 
from abroad, with their racist and greedy initiatives, 
benefiting from the errors and wrongs perpetrated by certain 
Muslims, whose actions and behavior leave a false impression 
regarding the spirit and goals of Islam. 
  The truth is that every Arab and Muslim should thank King 
Fahd for this step, which will make the kingdom--domestically 
and abroad--spiritually stronger, with friendship and 
solidarity, and will give more opportunity for the capabilities 
and wills of Arabs and Muslims to serve and participate. 
<H3>  `Concerning Shura and the System of Government,' by Mustafa 
Ahmad Ibn Halim, former Libyan prime minister </H3>
  Certain Arab intellectuals, influenced by Western culture, 
call for imitating the Western system, either in sum or in 
detail (perhaps, this call confirms the view of the great 
Islamic scholar, 'Abd-al-Rahman Ibn Khaldun, who said in his 
famous preface: "The vanquished often copy the victor.") 
  In my humble opinion, we should not imitate the Western 
parliamentary system and interpose it into Islamic countries 
without any consideration for the words of God's book and the 
sunna of His Prophet, in terms of the lofty principles and 
precedents as established by the orthodox caliphs pertaining to 
systems of government, Shura, human rights, and high values in 
the ruler's dealings with citizens. I say that this imitating 
exceeds the bounds and is erroneous. Therefore, it behooves us 
to turn back to that valuable treasure, those noble Islamic 
concepts and practices, and extract a system of Shura from our 
shari'ah and legacy, which will regulate the affairs of 
government and provide the Islamic peoples with freedom, 
justice, and the opportunity for growth and prosperity. 
  From history and fact, I would say that Western democracy, 
which some in our Arab world try to imitate, is a recent 
occurrence that the Western peoples produced after bloody, 
political uprisings, ruinous wars, and violent revolutions over 
many centuries. Moreover, contemporary, Western democratic 
systems only completed their growth and development in the first 
part of this century, after five centuries of bitter strife 
between the rigidity of the Catholic Church and the trends of 
liberating thought. These ideas seeped into Europe after the 
writings of Andalusian Arabs were translated into Latin and 
distributed in centers of European thought, especially the 
writings of Abi Walid Ibn Rushd (1126-1198). 
  Why should we imitate Westerners in a system that was 
established to deal with their traditions, values, and 
aspirations, which differ from our traditions, values, and 
aspirations? Why should we not return to our Arab, Islamic 
roots, the shari'ah, sunna, heritage, values, and experience 
after practical applications? From all of this, we can derive a 
system of Islamic, consultative government, which will promote 
justice, security, and safety, protect human rights and 
integrity, open horizons for our Islamic peoples to progress and 
prosperity, hasten their way on their cultural journey, and 
strengthen and organize their standing and effectiveness within 
the new world order. 
  It is correct to say that the equitable, fair standard by 
which any system of government should be evaluated lies in the 
degree of stability, security, safety, and opportunity for 
progress and prosperity that this system provides its people; 
the climate of freedom, justice, and human rights that the 
people enjoy; and the harmony and solidarity between ruler and 
the masses of people in the course of cultural progress. By this 
equitable standard, there is no doubt that the Saudi people are, 
in fact, proud of and devoted to their judicious, rightly-guided 
system. They are in harmony and solidarity with their brilliant 
leaders who have steered them--for generations--toward the 
highest stages of progress and the broadest horizons of culture, 
in an atmosphere of freedom, justice, and stability. The Saudi 
people have come to enjoy security, freedom, privileges, and 
comforts seldom found in any country similar to Saudi Arabia in 
the circumstances of its establishment and development. From 
that magnificent day on which the late King 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
unified the Saudi country and established a true, Islamic system 
of government, the course of rapid progress and judicious 
development continued in firm steps toward higher stages of 
civilization and prosperity, despite the fact the journey began 
from virtually nothing. 
  With regard to where this blessed journey began, perhaps it 
would be appropriate to mention here what I heard from my late 
father upon his return from his last pilgrimage in 1938. He 
compared that pilgrimage with his first one in 1912, during the 
Hashemite rule of the Hijaz. He told me that the first thing he 
did in preparing for his first trip to Mecca was to buy a gun to 
protect himself and his companions against highway robbers, 
especially on the caravan route between Mecca and Medina. 
However, on his last pilgrimage, he felt safe and secure. The 
regime provided him and the rest of the pilgrims with the 
necessary facilities and basic services. He performed his 
obligation in ease and comfort. 
  This was in regard to security and safety. As for civilized 
development, it is worth pointing out the basic fact that God 
did not afflict Saudi Arabia with the wrath of colonialism but, 
on the other hand, it did not enjoy some of the "privileges of 
colonialism!" (The reader may think it odd that I would say that 
colonialism had certain privileges. I am from a country and 
generation both of whom suffered from the woes of odious 
colonialism.) Colonialism might have had some benefits, as 
happened in my first country, Libya. The Italians erected many 
buildings and built most of the public facilities, including 
roads, ports, hospitals, electricity and telephone networks, 
etc. But, the colonialists built the buildings and constructed 
the public facilities to be enjoyed by the children of their 
countrymen, the Italian settlers. However, God's power is great; 
the Italians were defeated and the Libyans inherited those 
facilities and buildings, in spite of the colonialists. We had 
begun our civilizing journey in Libya. The country's public 
facilities and its infrastructure were sound, save for some war 
damage. 
  In Saudi Arabia, the journey toward prosperity started from 
zero. I personally saw some of the effects of this fact on my 
first visit to Saudi Arabia in October 1957, at the kind 
invitation of the late King Sa'ud. On that visit, my attention 
was drawn to the fact that that journey toward civilization was 
still in its first stages. The city of Riyadh did not compare at 
all with West Tripoli, for example. The public 
services--electricity, telephone, water and sewage 
extensions--did not compare with their counterparts in Libya. I 
mentioned that I saluted King Sa'ud, because he invited the late 
Dr. 'Abd-al-Wahhab 'Azzam to help him establish the first 
university in the kingdom, while the first Libyan university was 
built and began operation in 1955 in Benghazi, specifically in 
the al-Manar Castle, which the late King Idris had abandoned and 
which, in fact, had been headquarters for the Italian governor 
general. We inherited it as part of our inheritance from the 
Italians. 
  I should not fail to mention that oil would not be 
discovered 
in Libya until 1957. 
  Today the level of progress in Saudi Arabia has reached an 
astonishing degree. Construction and the major development of 
public facilities has spread, until it can be compared with its 
counterparts in America and Europe. Saudi cities, especially 
Jiddah and Riyadh, have reached a level of organization, 
prosperity, and expansion commensurate with the foremost cities 
of the world. 
  Universities have multiplied; there are now seven, including 
departments that provide higher education (masters degrees and 
doctorates). The number of graduates has multiplied and totals 
tens of thousands. Specialized hospitals are located throughout 
the kingdom. The number of students in elementary, preparatory, 
and secondary schools is in the millions. Saudi Arabia has also 
become a major source for agricultural products. 
  I could go on and on, describing the situation in Saudi 
Arabia today, fairly and accurately. 
  Let us now quickly compare the situations of the Saudi and 
Libyan peoples. Despite the fact that the ruling regime in Libya 
has earned oil revenues over the past 20 years that exceed $250 
billion, after the discovery of oil in Libya during the previous 
monarchy, and the successes of discovering oil riches with a 
speed that is nearly miraculous, and the explosion of that ideal 
capability from oil profits during the monarchy, the truth 
seeker has the right to question what this enormous wealth has 
done for the Libyan people. How much progress, prosperity, 
freedom, and security do they enjoy? 
  So that I may be fair, I will cite here a literal 
translation 
of our article published in the famous economic magazine, THE 
ECONOMIST, about Libya. We said: "Despite the fact that there is 
wide latitude for action in projects to improve health and 
education services, a comparison of the simplest measures of 
economic and social progress shows that, after 40 years of 
independence, after 30 years of oil revenues and especially 
after 20 years of oil income to a utopian degree, Libya still 
occupies its humble position among the poorest countries of the 
world, as concerns education, the average age for Libyans, and 
their nutrition and health. In these areas, Libya also occupies 
the lowest level among the OPEC nations, or rather, the worst 
level. In some aspects of public services, which touch the lives 
of all individuals, the level of those services in Libya is 
lower than that in Tunisia and the Arab Republic of Egypt. 
According to well-known facts that we have, and according to our 
expectations, the gap between Libya and the advanced countries 
will constantly increase, until, at least, 2000." This is a part 
of our article in THE ECONOMIST, in its supplement issued in 
April 1990. 
  This quick comparison between the system of government in 
Saudi Arabia and its effect on the condition of the Saudi 
people, and the system of government in Libya and its effect on 
the Libyan people, confirms that the most important element of 
the causes of progress and prosperity of any people lies in the 
quality of the people's leadership. If God blesses any people 
with wise leadership, in which there are ample qualities of 
mental acuteness, sincerity, self-sacrifice, long-range 
planning, perspicacity, and insight into events, then that 
leadership will be able to lead the people along paths of 
progress and upper mobility, toward horizons of prosperity and 
freedom. The people would sense justice, stability, and 
enjoyment of their rights. They would fulfill their national 
duty in harmony and satisfaction, increasing their cohesiveness 
and confidence in their leadership. 
  This is what has happened in Saudi Arabia, which God blessed 
with wise leadership that has taken the people by the hand to 
higher levels, has developed their affairs to a high level in a 
short time, and has relied on a constitution derived from the 
Koran and the Prophet's sunna and, then, God bestowed the major 
oil wealth, which has been used for the benefit of the people. 
  If leaders are bad and their quality sinks to a level of 
ignorance, deception, and irresponsibility, and their rule is 
oppressive, not consultative nor democratic, and if they only 
rely on hollow slogans to call for the people to close ranks and 
mobilize their efforts to combat corruption, expedite 
liberation, and catch up with civilized progress, all experience 
has proved the failure of those systems to attain the objectives 
they call for. On the contrary, those leaders only increase 
people's problems, make their problems more complex, make them 
poorer, and increase their wretchedness. 
  I saw what happened in my first country, Libya, at the hands 
of the new regime. The people's funds and treasure went up in 
smoke. The proteges plunder, and the rest of the people sink 
under the burden of poverty, oppression, and need. 
  This quick comparison contains a warning: systems of 
government that God blesses with judicious and wise leadership 
steer their people rapidly toward horizons of prosperity, 
construction, and progress, in a climate of freedom, justice, 
and equality. As for those to whom God has given childish 
rulers, ignorant and deceptive, they will lead their people with 
hollow slogans toward desolation in poverty, oppression, and 
absolutism. 
  In short, we do not need to imitate the West and its 
traditions. In our religion, history, heritage, and values, we 
have valuable roots to enable us to devise a Shura system 
appropriate for our circumstances and commensurate with our 
traditions, which will give us the opportunity of cultural 
progress, and economic prosperity in an atmosphere of freedom 
and human integrity. This is what King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, 
custodian of the two holy mosques, has done with his recent 
declaration about organizing a cabinet and creating the 
Consultative Council. 
  This is a wise and blessed step, and a far-reaching 
political 
decision, anchored to the fundamentals of an Islamic system of 
government. God caused the custodian of the two holy mosques to 
be successful in choosing a distinguished elite, those with 
correct views, superior intelligence, good reputation, and high 
educational qualifications. The Consultative Council, composed 
of this chosen elite, reflects the main characteristics of Saudi 
society and will easily interact with its aspirations and hopes. 
<H3>  `Building of Man Before Building Institutions in Saudi 
Arabia,' by Khalid al-Hasan, member of FATAH's Central Committee </H3>
  The [formation of the] Consultative Council [Shura], 
announced in Saudi Arabia, is a major step forward. It is a 
specific leap in the relationship between problems and the 
ability to solve them on the desired level. The essential reason 
behind that is the multiplicity of qualifications in many of the 
people who have become members of the Shura Council. 
  People qualified in each subject are the first to offer 
opinions, concerns, and suggestions concerning the subject that 
concerns them, i.e., the doctor in the case of health, teacher 
in the case of education, the businessman regarding the economy, 
and the judge or Islamic jurist concerning legislation. Then, 
discussion takes place through the full council, in order to 
crystallize the matter by study and discussion from various 
angles. Through a method like this, the superficial and 
simplistic in discussing matters can be overcome. Frequently, 
ailments befall certain parliaments, so that it is not necessary 
for each of those who are elected to have the ability to 
participate in specialized debate. 
  Shura has existed since Islam existed. But, the Islamic 
shari'ah did not set the specificity of Shura. Shura was 
explained in the Koranic verses: "Consult them in (important) 
matters", and "Their affairs are (decided) by council among 
themselves." These two basic verses set the relationship between 
the ruler [Wali al-Amr] and the people. As for the form of Shura 
and its methods, this is left to the people, but within precepts 
pertaining to the Islamic revelation and the Islamic milieu. 
This is the matter that might require clarification. 
  Rule in Islamic society is by the shari'ah and not by man. 
Compliance with the shari'ah is the focal point of thought in 
society. One of the ruler's responsibilities is to supervise 
implementation of the shari'ah. After that, but implied in it, 
comes Shura. The Consultative Council's mission is to scrutinize 
the carrying out of shari'ah laws by the various agencies. 
  In Islamic history, there was the so-called "Office of 
Iniquities." This office was a center and headquarters to look 
into disputes between persons or between persons and government, 
whether the government was a city or district or regional. The 
matter of Shura is ancient, but its forms are multiple. It 
develops or changes with the development of society and its 
changes. Medina's society, which contained a few thousand 
people, could apply Shura there directly and daily, but the 
situation is different with a society like Saudi Arabia today, 
which contains a number of cities and a population of several 
million. Moreover, the situation differs when the matter of 
Shura forms in the Islamic world as a whole is studied. Because 
of these differences, the shari'ah left the form of Shura to 
changing circumstances and situations, on the basis of the 
Islamic jurisprudent principle; "Do not disavow changing of 
precepts with changing times." Procedural matters might be 
changed, but the important thing is that Shura occur and occur 
in a sound form. However, the way to apply Shura is left to 
circumstances. It must not be a leap from reality, nor a rush to 
burn previous stages. 
  The Arabian Peninsula was nothing but a group of clashing 
tribes, before its unification and before the creation of modern 
Saudi Arabia under the authority of the late King 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
Al Sa'ud. With the beginning of unification, the establishment 
of central authority began. In the early days, it was focused on 
providing the security that was lacking, and from which 
travellers suffered, even the pilgrims at times. It goes without 
saying that the establishment of central authority was not done 
overnight, and it also need not be mentioned that the matter of 
Shura--at that time--had to take an appropriate form for that 
stage. 
  After the reign of the founder, King 'Abd-al-'Aziz, his 
successors continued to develop and expand the forms of Shura as 
well. Then came the custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd 
Bin 'Abd-al-'Aziz, during whose reign the kingdom has reached an 
extremely advanced state. At this point, I must point out that 
Saudi progress is often described as being slow, but I believe 
that this slowness was a kind of deliberateness, out of 
awareness of the difficulties of the situation, out of a policy 
of deliberateness toward change. In this way, change would be 
accepted and understood by the people, without convulsions 
pushing society toward the unknown. However, this slowness was 
crystallized in turn by a social revolution, considered to be 
the pearl of revolutions among Third World countries. It is 
sufficient to note the development of communications in Saudi 
Arabia, from overland roads to airports and railroads. We can 
see how that has led to unifying the structure of a tribal 
society and facilitating its domestic efficiency, since vast 
distances precluded that before. Moreover, a look at development 
in building schools, and education in general, from the 
elementary stage to girls' education, from seven universities to 
academic studies to obtain higher degrees abroad, shows us the 
kind of change that occurred in building the Saudi citizen. No 
less creative a matter is what happened in health and hospitals, 
agriculture and production in an arid desert environment, and 
the spread of radio, television, and the press as instruments of 
mass communication. 
  All of these factors join together, shaping Saudi progress, 
thanks to the custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, whose share in this progress is especially 
distinguished, from overseeing education affairs to running the 
kingdom. As a result of this deliberate, gradual and, at the 
same time, profound change, it has been possible for Shura to 
reach the level of an announcement that the "Consultative 
Council" has been formed. 
  The coming of this council is the result of this stage, 
after 
most of the manifestations of life in the kingdom have been 
developed, and after the Saudi citizen has been developed, 
educated and cultured, specialized and committed to his 
heritage. Shura came as a result of change, not as an artificial 
decree from above. It came as an expression of societal 
concepts, which were built through Saudi experience, not as a 
means to resolve clashes among suicidal groups, as has happened 
in certain experiences of other countries. 
<H5>  Election </H5>
  I know that there are Western claims circulating about the 
matter of elections. They consider elections to be the sole 
province of democracy only. We must not fall prisoner to this 
kind of moral pressure. In many Third World countries 
circumstances have not as yet allowed implementation of the idea 
of elections. The concept of elections must be preceded by a 
societal concept. This concept only comes through a process of 
long-term growth and change in the economic and social 
structure. When society is divided into two major tribes for 
example, as is the case in certain African countries, and one of 
the two is larger than the other, the result of elections--by 
virtue of this tribal situation--will be victory for the 
candidates of the major tribe and defeat for candidates of the 
smaller tribe. This causes various types and forms of civil war, 
as is occurring at the present time in Nigeria and Angola. 
Elections, in a situation like this, are harmful to the country 
concerned that has not yet been prepared for the concept of 
elections, or in which elections are merely a form of, or cover 
for, the victory of tribal candidates on the basis of tribalism. 
Here, the West applauds, because the form has been implemented 
without concern for substance. Our goal is not to satisfy the 
West, but rather to develop our country. From this premise, we 
must discuss our procedures. 
  As Muslims, we must turn our attention to the substance that 
will benefit the citizens, as well as making sure the substance 
is harmonious with our Islamic cultural and legal heritage. We 
must not merely imitate the West and fall into its secular, 
ideological framework. 
<H5>  Democracy </H5>
  Another question that requires looking into is the question 
of democracy. At this point, we must also not fall prisoner to 
the moral pressure exercised by the West with regard to this 
concept. Democracy is not one idea or one form. Democracy was 
born and developed in the West in multiple forms. The West's 
positions vis-a-vis democracy are filled with contradictions. 
The democracy that started from the Greek ideas, which are the 
basis for Western thought, had racist beginnings. Democracy 
belonged to the masters who ruled the slaves; Islam rejected 
that from the beginning. 
  Democracy in Israel today is democracy that the West 
introduced to it. It is also democracy based on race. The Jew 
enjoys democracy; the non-Jew has no right to it, while the 
oriental Jew has a reduced kind. 
  The West today pursues a selective position vis-a-vis 
democracy. It demands it in any country if its interests require 
it, but ignores a dictatorship in another country if its 
interests require. It treats democracy as a means of pressure, 
not as a general principle for the good of mankind. 
  Even democracy in the West has passed through numerous 
changes and conditions. Sometimes only landowners may vote. 
Sometimes only taxpayers may vote. Sometimes only men and not 
women may vote. This matter has not been free from bloody 
revolutions en route to democratic change. This confirms the 
connection between the idea of democracy and the degree of 
social development; it cannot be discussed outside this 
framework or in a general way. We should not allow ourselves to 
be gripped by an inferiority complex by the use of the word 
"democracy" instead of Shura. We must always insist on using the 
terminology whose substance is in harmony with our Islamic 
culture. 
<H5>  Legislation </H5>
  We must examine one last subject, which is that many of our 
problems in Islamic societies result from our not having applied 
laws that have been derived from our Islamic heritage. Instead 
of that, we turn to the adoption of Western laws. We must make 
an effort to understand what we have, so that we may recognize 
that what we have has been valuable all along. We have three 
distinguished legislative principles: 

  -  The first principle is that--basically--matters are 
permitted, unless evidence arises to prohibit them. This means 
the horizon before us is open. 
  -  The second principle is that the violation exists with the 
rule. If the violation exists, the rule exists, and if the 
violation vanishes, the rule vanishes. That is, if the 
circumstance changes for which the rule was made, the rule must 
be changed. 
  -  The third principle is that the purpose of the shari'ah is to 
prevent the causes of corruption and promote the good, and to 
prevent the cause of corruption from gaining advantages. 

    Principles such as these not only achieve justice, but also 
achieve openness, on the basis of not disavowing the changing of 
laws with changing times. I only mention that so that I can 
stress that our judicial heritage is excellent, rich, and 
deep-rooted. Even senior secularist jurists recognize that. 
Therefore, we must not be a prisoner to the mentality of 
imitating the West. Man is the product of his past, and the past 
cannot be annulled, except by our inability to build the future 
constructively. 
<H3>  `Significance of Decision To Create Saudi Shura Council,' by 
Ahmad 'Abbas Salih </H3>
  The issue of modernization has been the major topic in Arab 
and Islamic societies for more than two centuries. During this 
period, it became clear to the Arabs especially that they had 
missed the train and that Europe had taken over the situation 
and was able to move forward in areas of science and technology. 
This gave Europe military and economic power, as well as being 
reflected in social concepts and political systems. 
  The Arabs understood that they must regain the old 
situation, 
when Arab and Islamic civilization held the reins of progress in 
science, technology, and organization. For that purpose, a 
number of revolutionary movements were established in the 
region. The Ottoman Caliphate was completely worn out, bribery 
and corruption were rampant, and culture had degenerated in all 
facets of life. This was even reflected in religious tenets and 
customs. 
  The Arabs--in some way--felt that they were responsible for 
purifying their religious beliefs of the contamination that was 
attached to them. This had resulted in a state of social malaise 
and cultural deterioration, leading to the general deterioration 
experienced by the region. 
  Of course, the Arabs thought that they were capable of 
carrying out a corrective movement, since they were products of 
the cradle of Islam. In fact, a major religious movement, led by 
Imam Muhammad Ibn 'Abd-al-Wahhab, was established, aimed at 
purifying religious beliefs of the contamination that had seeped 
into them, and returning religion to its pure fundamentals. This 
was considered the start of a new rational stage, able to 
overcome the existing deterioration and catch the train of 
progress. 
  This was not easy. At this time, European expansion was 
sweeping the world. It was plucking weak fruit and eating away 
at the Ottoman Empire, which was ruling in the name of Islam. 
Naturally, Europe was compelled to take into account the 
modernization movements in the Arab world. These major powers 
were responsible for suppressing and thwarting the modernization 
movements. 
  Nevertheless, the modernization movements were reflected in 
various forms from the Maghreb nations to the eastern countries. 
In Egypt, a strong modernization movement was led by Imam 
Muhammad 'Abdu, which had a connection with what was, at that 
time, called the Wahabiyya Movement, especially on the rational 
side, which eschewed the superstitions that had been affixed to 
the religious beliefs of the Muslim masses. These superstitions 
had almost led to a kind of paganism that relied on extreme 
backwardness. 
  Aside from religious modernization movements, there were 
feelings of partition and division in the Arab world. The 
modernization movement in the Arabian Peninsula was based on two 
focal points: religion and political reorganization. The basic 
political thought was peninsular unity. The unity would have 
been impossible to achieve, were it not for the latent feelings 
within the people of the peninsula with regard to the need for 
unity and its importance. The idea of modernization imposes 
itself, when foreign powers and their domestic allies create 
obstacles that oppose it. 
  Many of the obstacles and subterfuges that reactionary 
forces 
in Europe used against the modernization movement were borrowed 
to block the Arab, Islamic movement. Most of the allegations 
that were raised in this regard, either on the Saudi scene or in 
other Arab arenas, and some of the erroneous ideas, claimed that 
progress and modernity were two Western, Christian processes, 
and were anti-Islam. People feared the modernization movements 
and created a state of satisfied alienation around themselves, 
which led to the belief that adherence to the existing backward 
conditions was adherence to the correct religious beliefs. 
Therefore, they made Islam to look as if it were against 
progress. They invalidated all the brilliant history, in which 
Islam led the world--in its glorious ages--to all manner of 
progress in thought, philosophy, and pure sciences and 
technology. 
  Therefore, the modernization movement is the fundamental 
movement; it is progress itself, escape from backwardness, 
ignorance, and subservience. It is the closest to the Islamic 
concept, benefiting from the events of history, and from the 
flourishing of that call throughout the world and within masses 
of its people. 
  The measurement of progress, the measure of modernization, 
is 
the basic measure. With this measurement, people can deal 
directly with tangible events. 
  The fact is that Saudi Arabia has benefited from oil 
prosperity and from the legacy of the religious and political 
modernization movement. It has been able to achieve, through 
education, great leaps forward and has changed the nature of the 
political composition. After less than 50 years, it has 
specialized cadres in all fields. Those who take a look at the 
Saudi condition will find that the most prominent manifestation 
is the cultural movement. That is expressed through the number 
of universities that have been built in a short time, as well as 
the revolutionary explosion in the media field, represented 
notably by press editions and data communication centers. 
  Saudi Arabian society has, therefore, gone far beyond the 
movement and works hard to absorb many of the movement's 
complications resulting from the rapid pace of modernization 
processes which, at times, resembles cultural shock. 
  In situations like these, people must hold on to the land 
and 
remember their popular roots in arts, crafts, and customs. That 
can be expressed in festivals that are held to recall ancient 
ways that are rapidly becoming extinct before their eyes, such 
as arts, crafts, and popular aesthetics. The [Janadariyah] 
festivals are proof of that. 
  Saudi Arabia is going through what the Japanese society went 
through. The rapid Japanese modernization movement was 
responsible for many changes in educational, social, and 
cultural life in general. The Japanese people had to find sound 
ways to avoid the complications of modernization. One of the 
most important method was through nostalgia, or feelings of 
longing for the past. 
  The same thing is happening in Saudi Arabia; the flourishing 
educational movement understands that and tries to absorb it by 
cultural means, by considering its various aspects, and by 
comprehensive understanding. 
  The Consultative [Shura] Council, and the accompanying law 
concerning Cabinet responsibilities and work regulations, is a 
natural acceleration of the modernization process, complements 
previous actions and accomplishments, and responds to its 
requirements. 
  One of the notable matters concerning the new council is the 
quality of its members. Those who read the names and know the 
details will understand that the Saudi intelligentsia is 
entering the decision-making arena, as if it were called to 
participate, to be at the heart of the modernization process 
that began--in fact--several decades ago. One of its results is 
the emergence of this huge number of intellectuals, experts, and 
specialists. 
  Any modernization movement, in any society, requires 
foundations and institutions. Saudi Arabia had reached the stage 
where its modernization movement needed to expand in terms of 
cadres and organizations. The emergence of the institution of 
the Shura Council and, then, the Cabinet and the Royal 
Secretariat, as well as the media establishment and other 
organizations in agriculture, trade, industry, and education, is 
clear proof of conditions inside Saudi Arabia and the spread of 
a new cultural pattern. The fact is that the Saudi modernization 
movement has great historic responsibility. It is proof of 
progress in various fields, including expansion in civilizing 
institutions, not the destabilizing of previous traditions and 
concepts. It has become a movement of major accomplishments, by 
which Islam and world Arabs have been enriched. 
  Fortunately, the material resources and fair distribution of 
wealth in Saudi Arabia has greatly decreased the acuteness of 
side effects that usually result from the pace of modernization, 
and its impact on people and various social forces, which linger 
here and there by virtue of their cultural or social 
composition. In any event, the modernization movement is not 
proceeding in haste, nor at a headlong clip, but rather, it 
proceeds--in fact--step by step, practical and reasonable, 
understanding the dimensions of the model toward which it is 
headed. 
  Through this practical process, which will open new 
horizons, 
opportunities and difficulties, successes and failures will 
emerge. The mission of the group of the new intelligentsia, and 
especially the members of the Shura Council, will be to overcome 
all these problems, develop the role of Shura, and participate 
effectively in the modernization movement that is in full swing. 
  A glance at human history in its different transformations 
makes it clear that wealth is a basic factor for progress. All 
changes in the entire world were the result of having wealth, no 
matter what its source. One example could be the emergence of 
the importance of commerce to a specific society. Whether 
discovering natural wealth, or possessing tremendous scientific, 
technical, and psychological capabilities, the society spends it 
for progress and expansion. 
  Wealth is the basis for progress, but wealth alone does not 
create progress. The discovery of coal in Britain was the main 
reason for its progress and wealth but, aside from that, there 
was the constructive will, social desire, and prudent use of 
that wealth. 
  Saudi Arabia has the necessary structure that resurgent 
societies rely upon, and it has used that to create an enormous 
development process. This process has led to the emergence of 
broad population segments of expertise and the institutions 
required for progress. 
  Apart from that, the Saudi people are building on their 
extremely important historical glory. It is well known that from 
the heart of this land, from a vegetation-less wadi, the 
greatest, most magnificent unification movement in the world 
began. It changed the face of the land and spread justice, 
freedom, and morality. It tore down the rule of false gods and 
opened minds to study and discovery. It brought peace and order 
to all the land. 
  The present process of social growth in Saudi Arabia relies 
on a splendid heritage, practical reality and, before all, a 
wonderful opportunity for maturity. Creating the Shura Council, 
and the changes preceding and following this action, is an 
indication of the soundness of these trends and the achievement 
of aspirations. 
  Perhaps, this is the simplest significance that the neutral 
observer can deduce from this decision. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59838 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Basindwah on Crisis, Boycott, Peace Accord </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0005A Doha AL-SHARQ in Arabic 1 Nov 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0005A </F>
<F P=104>  Doha AL-SHARQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muhammad 'Abd-al-Salam: "In an All-Inclusive </F>
AL-SHARQ Interview, Yemeni Foreign Minister: I 
Confess...Disagreement Exists Within the Governing Coalition in 
Yemen, but It Is Exaggerated by the Media'"] 
  [Text] Sanaa--Yemeni Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim 
Basindwah accused certain news media of deliberately 
exaggerating the events in Yemen for the purpose of distorting 
the image of its internal state of affairs before both Arab and 
European public opinion. He said that what was taking place in 
the Yemeni arena is no more than mere differences of opinion 
between sides of the governing coalition. The preceding took 
place in an interview conducted by AL-SHARQ with His Excellency 
in Sanaa, in which Arab-Arab reconciliation, need for 
establishment of a level of joint Arab action that ensures the 
provision of necessary safeguards allowing that no country be 
exposed to harm or aggression from any other country, were dealt 
with. The interview also touched on Yemen's stance with regard 
to the Gaza-Jericho agreement, its readiness to host a 
conference on Palestinian-Palestinian reconciliation, and its 
stance with regard to the crisis in Somalia, especially as the 
country accommodates 700,000 Somali refugees, in addition to the 
issue of redrawing the borders between Yemen and the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia (KSA). The text of the interview follows: 
  [AL-SHARQ] On the occasion of the visit by [Qatari] Minister 
of Information and Culture, Dr. Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, 
could you point out the extent of development of Yemeni-Qatari 
relations, and will a new informational protocol be signed 
during the visit? 
  [Basindwah] I would like to welcome the visit of His 
Excellency brother Dr. Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, Minister 
of Information and Culture in the sister state of Qatar, to the 
capital of his second homeland, the Republic of Yemen. He is a 
dear friend, as we enjoyed several years of fellowship when 
either of us headed his respective country's delegation to the 
United Nations. With regard to Yemeni-Qatari relations, I am in 
the position to state that they have become more enduring than 
what they were prior to August 1990, and that they undergo 
continuous improvement, by the token of His Excellency brother 
Foreign Affairs Minister Shaykh Hamad Bin-Jasim Bin-Jabbur Al 
Thani's, visit three months ago, and His Excelleny brother Dr. 
Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz's visit. For our part, we are keen on 
cementing the bonds of cooperation and coordination with our 
brothers in Doha in the interest of our two countries, 
especially our Arab and Islamic peoples in general. 
  [AL-SHARQ] The Gulf crisis had negative repercussions on 
Arab-Arab relations: To what extent have some of these negatives 
been rid of to date, and how do you perceive the future of 
achieving Arab reconciliation, currently an important issue in 
view of recent international transformations? 
  [Basindwah] Undoubtedly that Arab-Arab relations have 
experienced a measure of improvement after the calming of 
nerves. However, developments in the Arab region compel 
reconsideration of our positions, as Arab countries, with one 
another. That is, how may we become reconciled to our historical 
foe--Israel--but reject reconciliation between ourselves? 
Reconciliation does not imply that we allow repetition of 
anything that had expired; rather, it is essential that what 
must follow is the planning and execution of a new level of 
joint Arab activity that ensures the provision of necessary 
safeguards allowing that no country be exposed to any harm or 
aggression from one or more states, whether sisterly or 
otherwise, and avoidance of all past negatives and dangers. 
Should we, as Arabs, seek not to mend our fences, consolidate 
our ranks and reestablish our bonds before it is too late, then 
I fear that we shall be worse off than we are now. We perceive 
nations everywhere entering into blocs for their own protection 
and those of their interests. Any lasting and harmonious Arab 
action must be based on the unity of economic interests. 
  [AL-SHARQ] The current political crisis in Yemen occupies 
much Arab and international public interest. Does this crisis 
have repercussions for current Yemeni foreign policy, and is 
there any Arab mediation to reconcile perspectives within the 
governing coalition in an effort to resolve the crisis? 
  [Basindwah] Perhaps it has come to your attention that 
certain news media deliberately exaggerate events in Yemen for 
the purpose of distorting our internal affairs before both Arab 
and international public opinion. In truth, differences do exist 
among the three parties--the Congress, Socialist and 
Reformist--of the governing coalition; however, these 
differences are not irremediable. Such differences occur from 
time to time in democratic countries. Naturally, such 
differences will have their negative consequences on the actual 
performance of our foreign policy; however, such repercussions 
disappear with the mere resolution of these differences. While 
we appreciate all efforts expended by our brethren to help us 
overcome our differences, we are supremely confident that these 
differences are mere summer clouds that will disperse before 
long. The wisdom that brother Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih, presidential council chairman, is endowed with, in 
particular, and all national leaders, in general, is capable of 
attaining solutions that would shield Yemen from all dangers and 
perils. As uttered by the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, 
"Wisdom is Yemenite." Thus there is no reason to fear for unity, 
democracy or the stability of our nation. 
  [AL-SHARQ] Following signatory of the Gaza-Jericho agreement 
between the PLO and Israel, many Palestinian organizations, 
including Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement], announced their 
rejection of this agreement. At the time it was announced that a 
reconciliation agreement between Hamas and the PLO would be held 
in Sanaa. What are the reasons for such meeting not being held 
to date, and does the invitation still stand? 
  [Basindwah] We remain prepared to host a conference on 
reconciliation between Palestinian brothers of all factions 
should they wish to have one. Yemen will spare no effort to 
achieve harmony between Palestinians in order that dissension 
among themselves not dissolve into armed conflict, because the 
beneficiary of such would be Israel, not the Arab Palestinian 
people. 
  It is acceptable that there be agreement on differences, 
such 
that refusal becomes a source of strength in the position of the 
Palestinian negotiator, and on condition that disagreement not 
lead to infighting. Since Yemen respects the right of all 
peoples to choose what they want, it did not oppose the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. We know that the Palestinian people are 
capable of imposing their will and choosing their own path. As I 
have said during meetings of the last Arab Foreign Ministers 
Council, which was held in Cairo the 19th and 20th of last 
September, this agreement is undeserving of our glorification 
into a victory, lest Israel believe that it had given to the 
Palestinians more than they deserved. Moreover, we must not deem 
those who have accepted the agreement as traitors or mercenaries 
because they sought to wreck the negotiation path, agree with 
them should they succeed in achieving the limited national 
aspirations, specifically the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian state and renewed control of Gaza and the entire 
West Bank, including Jerusalem, and demand that they retreat 
from their ways should they fail. 
  [AL-SHARQ] There exists some inclination to end the Arab 
boycott of Israel. What is Yemen's current position on this 
matter, and will Yemen agree on establishment of diplomatic 
relations with Israel at the end of the peace process? 
  [Basindwah] The Republic of Yemen is not among the 
[encircling] countries; rather, it is a supporting country, and 
it abides by what is agreed upon by the countries directly 
involved in the struggle against Israel, including our brethren 
Palestinian people. We will not proceed with anything before 
then, and before an Arab consensus and the achievement of a just 
and comprehensive peace in the region, or at the least one we 
are certain of. 
  [AL-SHARQ] What is Yemen's stance towards the struggle in 
Somalia between the forces of General Muhammad Farih Aidid, and 
the U.S.-led UN forces? How do you view resolution of this 
crisis? 
  [Basindwah] Yemen's point of view is summed up in that the 
sisterly Somali people's tragedy cannot come to an end 
militarily; rather, [such tragedy] must necessarily be resolved 
politically. We did not wish the United Nations to be party to 
the conflict, especially since the motive for its involvement 
was the lending of assistance to Somalis in the restoration of 
order, peace, and stability in a land ravaged by civil war, 
famine and disease, and inhabited by a people dispelled by fear. 
Our country could have played a role, along with other African 
Horn countries, in consolidating the ranks of the various Somali 
factions and inducing them to agree among themselves, especially 
since Yemen is host to more than 700,000 Somali refugees. 
However, we did not demand such, despite our participation in 
the effort to unite Somali forces, which took place in Djibouti. 
Despite the worsening conditions in Somalia, it would have been 
possible to overcome the problem through collaborative efforts 
of Arab and African nations, especially since the suffering of 
the Somalis has reached its zenith, prodding the realization of 
a solution that is acceptable to all. 
  [AL-SHARQ] A final question: Do you perceive in the process 
of redrawing thr borders between Yemen and the Sultanate of Oman 
a model for resolution of border problems between Arab 
countries, and could the process of redrawing of the borders 
between Yemen and the KSA follow such a model? 
  [Basindwah] Unquestionably, the Yemeni-Omani agreement on 
redrawing borders could serve as a model to be followed for the 
resolution of border problems between sister states and for the 
border issue between Yemen and its sister and neighbor, the KSA. 
We are eager to resolve them at once, God willing, rather than 
at a later date. Moreover, we have not the least doubt that 
KSA's leadership has the same desires. As such, I am confident 
of our ability to overcome all difficulties and to reach, God 
willing, an acceptable agreement. I am spurred by the hope that 
we are close at hand to the realization of tangible improvement 
on the path to a comprehensive and complete solution, if it be 
God's will. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59839 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Al-Bid on Union's Crisis, Return to Sanaa </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0003B Doha AL-SHARQ in Arabic 30 Oct 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0003B </F>
<F P=104>  Doha AL-SHARQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yemeni Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid by </F>
Muhammad 'Abd-al-Salam in Aden; date not given] 
  [Text] The house of 'Ali Salim al-Bid, secretary general of 
the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP] and vice president to 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih, is built on a high hill in the mountains of 
Aden that snake around the coastal city. I met him in the house 
where he is still in seclusion. A few guards are stationed 
around the house and along the road extending to the hills. The 
road is unpaved; it is so rough that we almost plunged into a 
ravine when the driver of the car that took me to interview 
al-Bid did not pay attention to a deep hole which he tried to 
avoid. 
  Some 10 minutes after my arrival in al-Bid's residence his 
press secretary Dr. 'Abdallah al-Haw joined us. We talked about 
the progress of the Yemeni press and the large number of 
publications of which many Yemeni citizens do not know the 
names. The publications total 120 dailies and weeklies. The 
director of al-Bid's office entered the room and informed me 
that the vice president was on his way. A minute later I saw 
myself standing in front of this man with thick black hair and 
deep set eyes. Signs of exhaustion were clearly evident on his 
face. But the years of struggle against British colonialism 
together with his colleagues until 1967 have toughened his 
resolve and solidity. After greeting me we sat. He asked me 
about the AL-SHARQ newspaper, its circulation, and affiliation. 
When you sit with al-Bid you feel that you want to draw closer 
to him in order to hear what he says in a low voice. When he 
answers a question words cascade out of his mouth, almost 
unstoppable. He wants to say everything so that everybody will 
hear him. He wants to put the facts before the world. He said he 
will not return to Sanaa, the Yemeni capital unless the 18 
points he submitted to end political confrontation are 
implemented. He pointed fingers at one of the ruling coalition 
parties accusing it of conspiring to assassinate the YSP 
leadership of which he is the chairman. He said he is on top of 
the list. In this interview 'Ali Salim al-Bid revealed many 
secrets of the current political conflict in Yemen. Nobody knows 
how or when will it end. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Your excellency brother 'Ali Salim al-Bid, 
YSP secretary general and vice president: Following the arrival 
of the new Qatari ambassador 'Abdallah al-Ansari in Sanaa and 
after he was received by the Yemeni foreign minister, how do you 
evaluate the Yemeni-Qatari relations now and in the future? 
  [Al-Bid] First, we welcome the arrival of his excellency the 
new Qatari ambassador and any other Arab ambassadors to Sanaa. 
We are very interested in enhancing diplomatic activity with our 
brothers in the GCC [Gulf Cooperation Council] states. Our 
relations with Qatar are good. We hope they will develop even 
further by elevating them to a higher level of action that would 
strengthen these ties. We highly appreciate the state of Qatar 
and its people, and we hope that the arrival of the ambassador 
will start a new phase of activity between the two countries. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Mr. vice president: The Gulf crisis had some 
negative impact on Gulf-Yemeni relations. Do you believe that 
the clouds that have led to conflict have vanished completely, 
or some are still marring the relations? 
  [Al-Bid] The Gulf crisis is part of the Arab situation; it 
is 
the focus of attention by many parties. But I hope that we will 
deal with our Arab situation with a new vision. We are 
responsible for what happens in the various Arab countries; we 
are responsible whether we are far or close to these 
developments. The deterioration of the Arab situation calls upon 
us to review its causes. I believe that the Gaza-Jericho 
agreement is a landmark; it calls for a pause by all Arabs. I 
believe that this situation will move us to a new, advanced era. 
We cannot say...[text missing] But this calls for a greater 
debate and discussion among all the Arabs of the question of 
responsibilities, including the Gulf crisis and its effects. The 
issues are interlined; they should not be separated from one 
another. We all in the Arab homeland are paying the price of the 
Gulf crisis. We find that our enemies have derived strength from 
our weakness. Developments in the Arab arena call for the 
adoption of a serious stand and demand that we should have the 
capabilities to overcome the crisis. No one should depart from 
the Arab course and we should not hold any party in particular 
responsible for it. All these developments happened in the 
presence of everybody, both those who supported the war and 
those who opposed it. The situation has harmed the Arab nation 
as a whole; it is our responsibility to address the problem. We 
cannot conceal its impact on all of us. This calls for standing 
together in order to overcome this situation. I do not think 
that anybody who is proud of this nation and its history would 
accept this situation without feeling pain and suffering. 
  I wish we all will succeed and hope to continue to exchange 
views, follow up events, work together, and go back to what we 
call the fundamentals. For example, we should once again 
advocate the fundamentals of Arab nationalism and maintain our 
links together as Arabs and as brothers. All this existed some 
half a century ago when Arab nationalism was at its peak. But 
now Arab solidarity has begun to vanish and advocating it has 
once again become a struggle and a national task. We have 
reached a situation that calls for adopting a serious stand. The 
Palestine problem, as an Arab cause or as an Arab-Israeli 
conflict, used to join us together. We now have reached the 
point where we call it the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Then it 
would be said that we should not be royalists more than the king 
so that we will get rid of this difficult trial. If national 
commitment no longer exists, what would then bind us together. I 
am afraid that the ties that bind us together will weaken if the 
nation faced a problem. As a result of this situation it can be 
said that the general situation is deteriorating. But I believe 
and I am optimistic that deterioration is followed by revival. I 
hope that all the resources will be available to us and all the 
good people in the Arab nation will demonstration a revival 
spirit so that we will continue our struggle and to be proud of 
our history and nation. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Your excellency is aware that the Yemeni 
unity which you and President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih achieved has 
gladdened the Arab nation and Arab governments and peoples. Do 
you believe that the basis on which this unity was found are 
sufficient to protect it against any political crises that it 
might face, or is it in need of new bases in order to provide 
greater protection for this unity? 
  [Al-Bid] In theory and on the basis of documents the unity 
is 
not suffering from any problems. But the ability to shoulder the 
unity's responsibilities has decreased; that is lesser than what 
is required to build unity based on nationalist and democratic 
principles. But in practice we were incapable of advancing on 
the path of unity building. Consequently it has become clear in 
the Yemeni arena and to everybody that this situation calls for 
review in order to once again arouse the forces. If we remain in 
the same position in which we are now and are satisfied with the 
unity and democracy slogans, did not take practical steps along 
its path, and developed its slogans from being a public rhetoric 
and theories into reality, we will find that we have failed our 
duty toward our unity and aspirations. Some people look at this 
as a national dream. The proponents of any cause should adopt a 
national dream for which he should struggle in order to realize. 
Some say that this only enables us to escape reality, shifting 
from one position to another and leaving the problem outstanding 
to be dealt with later. But it is these two ideas that have led 
us to this tug of war situation. There are unity and democratic 
forces that want to go ahead on this path and have the ability 
to do so. Other forces do not have such ability. Consequently 
they are impeding our movement and obstructing it. The question 
is now raised on a national level. When we were unable to raise 
the question in the bodies and within the framework in which we 
operated, we were forced to put the matter to the people; it is 
the concern of the people after all. Our role was only to sign 
on what the people wished. But when we saw that different 
concepts are developing in the people's mind--something that 
cannot be ignored--we believed that we must once again go back 
to our people, to dialogue, to debating issues, and to taking 
substantial measures. Our masses accept nothing short of 
substantial measures that would ensure for them the ability to 
advance and to build this grand Yemen with its 13 million people 
and an area of no less than half a million square miles. All the 
Yemenis and all the good people are looking forward to this 
building. But when the resources are unavailable, efforts to 
ensure erecting this building weaken. This creates a situation 
in which frustration disappointment prevails. Therefore, we find 
that this dream is blurred and facing difficulties. I do not 
think that the problem is theoretical. It is due to our 
inability to arouse endeavors and to lack of efforts. During the 
past three-and-a-half-year period the efforts were not up to the 
building level. Some people aspire for ownership but they are 
satisfied with the slogans. This is our problem; it is the 
problem in many Arab countries. We think that it costs us 
nothing to say anything. Demagogy is rampant in politics and in 
many Arab situations. Some of us may be think so. Never mind. 
And yet we say "no prayer," "Leave it to God." This is a major 
task that calls for major endeavor and strong people. We have 
confidence in all the good people and our people. We do 
everything that might help leveling the path and stay close to 
the people's will. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] The political scene in Yemen has definitely 
witnessed several activities in order to bring views closer 
between you and his excellency President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih. 
Can you talk about these efforts and the results achieved so far? 
  [al-Bid] We need no mediation between us, but probably our 
people are in need of a mediator between them and their 
officials who should wake up and honor their pledges and 
commitments. All the efforts that are being made are, of course, 
good. We do not need people to (?educate us) because we are 
responsible and are aware of the situation. What is needed is 
credibility in what we say and announce to the people. This is 
what is needed. Mediation is probably in order to clarify a few 
things. But things between us are clear and the agreements are 
open and clear. The failure to implement them is the cause of 
what we are suffering from today. I believe that we have no need 
for mediation. If we do not prove our credibility we want 
witnesses to testify that we are not up to the promises we have 
made. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Can it be said that Qays al-Zawawi's visit 
to 
Aden was part of the efforts to break the deadlock in the 
crisis, or was it a courtesy visit because His Majesty Sultan 
Qabus was unable to visit you when he visited Yemen recently? 
  [Al-Bid] Brother Qays al-Zawawi visited Sanaa and Aden. The 
visit, we were told, is in order to follow up the issues that 
were discussed during His Majesty, the Sultan's, visit to Sanaa. 
Our brethren in Oman are concerned about the situation, and we 
appreciate the efforts they are making. They have proposed 
nothing specific. The discussions dealt with the situation, the 
exchange of views, and development of the bilateral relations. 
Yemen claims that the Arabs originated from there. We consider 
Yemen to be for all the Arabs. We are not embarrassed nor feel 
awkward when any of Arab brothers asks about our situation. 
Indeed this makes us very happy. We are gladdened by their 
interest in us and their wishes to us to make progress so that 
all we will be happy. We are happy to light a candle for Yemen 
so that we can diffuse some light also to other Arab arenas. I 
believe that this is a brotherly interest that stems from the 
desire to develop relations and be reassured about the Yemeni 
situation. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] It is obvious that the present discord is 
due 
to party disputes. You have submitted 18 points for the solution 
of the crisis and for your return to Sanaa. The GPC [General 
People's Congress] responded with 19 points most of them 
contrary to yours. This means that the points of agreement are 
still far apart. Doesn't your excellency see that these 
differences could endanger your historical achievement? 
  [Al-Bid] First, our historical achievement will be 
endangered 
if we do not take practical steps to build it, regardless of 
whether party issues are raised or not. Issues should be dealt 
with from a nationalist standpoint. The points which the YSP 
raised were approved by all the other parties that are outside 
the government. Those have been condensed into 16 points, which 
you can see. We regard these 16 points as containing all the 18 
points. They only had them redrafted. The proposed points 
reflect all the concerns of the Yemeni people. These were not 
party issues. They reflect our fear and anxiety over delaying 
taking steps that would strengthen the edifice of freedom and 
democracy. It is not a question of political bickering. Every 
party expresses itself differently. Perhaps our brothers in the 
GPC think that the 19 points are all the problems the people are 
suffering from. The people have matured; they can distinguish, 
they can understand, and they can eat with their own hands. They 
can also distinguish which are the issues that serve them. We 
are in favor of the issues that serve the people. We are not 
against discussing any subject raised by any quarter. The most 
important thing is that these issues should be relevant to the 
people's problems; problems of their country; their security; 
and their building of a unified state on all the Yemeni 
territories. There is need to create a genuine democratic 
climate. This work calls for making efforts. We realize that 
certain things need time to be implemented, such as growth, 
development, and completing building the state machinery. But we 
believe that certain urgent measures should be taken that need 
no effort on our part, such as the apprehension of outlaws and 
terrorists who are causing disturbances for the nation. We 
should arrest them and bring them to trial publicly. Those who 
reject this demand are not a problem. What do they want those 
who reject this demand? For example, we say that army camps 
should leave [urban areas] according to the unity agreement. The 
people and the major towns are demanding this. They should move 
and leave according to the agreement that has not yet been 
implemented. I do not think that this costs anything. Therefore, 
we believe that certain issues could move. On the contrary, 
because the camps are now in a position different from where 
they are supposed to be, from where they can defend national 
sovereignty. These forces are in a position that is too distant 
from the task of defending Yemen. For this reason we can see 
that certain issues can be solved. This would build up trust 
among the parties and the coalition; it would develop good 
relations between the people as well as the feeling that we are 
working for them in order to reassure them and create more 
stability in the country. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] In a recent speech President 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih reiterated the term "the red lines" that should not be 
crossed. Is there a prior agreement on these lines between you 
to ensure the preservation of unity, or is it the present 
circumstances that have led to talking about these red lines? 
  [Al-Bid] I believe that the red line is to ignore peoples' 
problems; the red line is to disregard peoples' issues; the red 
line is not to build a unified state; and the red line is to 
consecrate sectoral mentality; the red line is to impose a 
pattern over another; it is not to have sufficient enthusiasm to 
establish the unitary state, the "Yemeni Republic." The red line 
is also to ignore the existence of others. This is how I 
understand the red lines. This is what causes the loss of unity 
and eliminates our noble dreams for which we are struggling. You 
may ask for clarification, but this is how I understand the 
situation. I wish neglecting struggle and disregarding peoples' 
problems were a red line because the results will affect all of 
us. If we ignore the citizen's problems, we cannot build; if the 
state of institutions is not established, there will be no law. 
Instability is a red line that will lead to the disintegration 
of the unitary state of which we have been dreaming. I wish this 
was so. We might differ in our interpretation of this matter. 
The red line is the stand on which the people agree; it is to 
forsake the unitary state or to try to adopt a method or manner 
that will not lead to building unity. To raise a slogan and not 
practice what it preaches is unacceptable. I believe that this 
is the situation that should prevail. The interest and love of 
the country is what should prevail and be the common denominator 
binding us together. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Following the Yemeni defense minister's 
recent announcement that Yemeni armed forces will stay away from 
the current political struggle, does your excellency believe 
that this is sufficient for you to drop one of the 18 points, 
the one concerning the need to move the army and the armed men 
to outside the cities, particularly Sanaa? 
  [Al-Bid] No, we do not object to [the army] being neutral. 
This is our view in the YSP. The armed forces should not be 
involved [in politics]. Their position is quite different from 
the proposed tasks of building a unified armed forces for the 
Yemeni republic. These are two different questions. It is true 
that we should not involve the armed forces in political 
disputes, but this does not mean that we should adopt a negative 
attitude toward building national and unified armed forces 
established on scientific basis and on recognized national 
standards of efficiency in order to defend national sovereignty. 
That is, the two subjects are quite different. The question 
concerns the current problem. We should not involve the army in 
these issues, that is in debates and discussions. The army 
should devote its attention to the country. 
  ['Abd al-Salam] Recent reports spoke of a large-scale 
campaign of assassination against YSP members and cadres that 
was recently uncovered, including the assassination of 11 key 
leaders. How true is this report? 
  [Al-Bid] This is a serialized story that began some time 
ago; 
it is not new. Maybe it is the YSP's lot to make sacrifices on 
behalf of others for the sake of unity and democracy. The party 
has made major concessions and we spare nothing for the sake of 
this country. Such possibilities are often part of hostile 
activities and run counter to the activities of our allies. This 
is regrettable and we have drawn attention to it sometime 
before. I believe that this is proposed even in the 18 points 
which we submitted. We must face these situations and put an 
end to them. Because there is a proverb that says: "Today it is 
with you and tomorrow it will be with your brother." Another 
proverb says: "If your brother had a hair cut moisten your 
hair." The blade goes from one head to another. We should be 
alert. Hostile activities and violations could take place. 
Vigilance is required by everybody. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Three and a half years have passed since 
unity. Did it achieve anything that would raise the standard of 
living of the citizen who have attached great hopes on unity to 
realize this goal? 
  [Al-Bid] The chaos that prevailed during this period has 
obstructed progress toward improving the people's life. We have 
been supporting unity. We all in Sanaa have struggled for unity, 
for order, and for the establishment of the state of law and 
institutions. We did not accept the spread of chaos. What has 
been happening every day unfortunately was spreading chaos, 
weakening the state, and preventing it from imposing its 
authority on the Yemeni territories. The situation now is even 
worse than what it used to be before unity. There was a 
government in Aden and its mechanism was everywhere and in every 
central department. But we could no longer administer the 
government through which we deal with the citizens' problems, 
with development, and with the standard of living. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] The unified Yemeni currency which was to 
come 
into circulation when unity was announced has not been issued. 
Has it been abandoned? How do you explain the increase in prices 
and the drop in the dinar value? 
  [Al-Bid] The new currency was part of our agreement, but the 
abandonment of many agreements has affected our present 
situation. Had all the agreements agreed upon been implemented 
during the transitional period we would have found ourselves in 
a better position to deal with the issues of the unitary state. 
But this failure is now having an impact on the situation. When 
we entered into unity the value of the dinar was $3 to the 
dinar. Since the day of unity and up to this day the value of 
the dollar has become almost 2 dinars. [sentence as published] 
This drop happened five times. The drop in the currency value 
and the high prices are due to the economic policy. 
  The economic policy in Yemen since the unity has been 
unstable. Some of the activities to which we were accustomed 
have been suspended. For example, we used to draw up five-year 
plans and annual plans. These have stopped. It has become 
apparent that the state is producing a deficit rather than 
controlling it and putting an end to it. Smuggling is 
continuing. When we come to Sanaa we see goods on display but 
most of it is smuggled. There are no official documents showing 
that these goods entered the country legally. Many officials are 
aware of this situation. If it was not for the protection of 
some big fish in the state smuggling would not have continued. 
  This is the cause of chaos. Smuggling and the smugglers and 
those who want to perpetuate this situation do not want a 
unitary state, a state of laws and regulations because it would 
put an end to the chaos in the economy. A state would lay down 
the basis for development, a correct economic policy, and a 
policy for currency issuing, dealing with deficit, developing 
revenues, expanding development, and creating more job 
opportunities rather than more deficit. 
  ['Abd-al-Salam] Is there a consensus in your party politburo 
and central committee on your attitude toward the present crisis? 
  [Al-Bid] The present attitude is actually that of the YSP 
politburo and the central committee. We are accustomed to 
reflecting the party's unanimous will. These points represent 
the party's politburo on practical issues. But we also have our 
own views on the development of the country in general as stated 
in our election program, our views as strugglers with a cause in 
our country. Our party has submitted these points and welcomes 
discussing them and discussing other points as well. 
  ['Abd -al-Salam] What is your latest attitude toward the 
question of returning to Sanaa or continuing to stay in Aden? 
  [Al-Bid] Really, I do not wish anybody to ask me about 
returning to Sanaa because Sanaa is my town and I know when I 
have to go there. I went there willingly and I know the way to 
it. When my national duty and my responsibility call upon me to 
be in Sanaa, God willing I shall be there. When I see no reason 
to do so then staying in any part of the Yemeni homeland is a 
matter to be decided upon; it is left to be decided upon the day 
when the situation calls for our presence. Our presence is 
unnecessary when all there is to be done is to focus on a single 
issue and ignore the rest. 
  I hope...there is no reason for the people to tire 
themselves. We have before us issues that we must discuss. 
Without being serious in Sanaa, the capital of the unitary 
state. [sentence as published] I see no reason to discuss where 
the human being should be located. The human being is found were 
there is work, there is a job, there is a plan, and there are 
bodies that work. We shall find our way to Sanaa. After three 
and half a years I believe that we can stay wherever we happen 
to be; staying close to the people is better. We can at least 
comfort them, even if morally. Our citizens and kinsfolk have 
suffered a lot in the provinces in the past. We thought that all 
the government departments have been busy trying to solve the 
citizens' problems throughout the republic, but what we found 
was failures. We believe that these failures had a negative 
impact on the citizens' life. 
  We must work with renewed effort and do all we can in order 
to pull the country out of this situation, and to stay wherever 
we like in Yemen. Where there there is work is where we should 
be. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59840 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial Warns of Civil War </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0003C London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 19 Oct p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0003C </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Uthman Mirghani] </F>
  [Text] The current crisis in Yemen seems to be more graver 
than preceding ones, particularly since some parties have begun 
talking daily with voices growing louder about endangered unity 
and the possibility of divisiveness returning. Reading the 
statements of President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih and his deputy 
Salim al-Bid one would feel the widening alienation between 
them, and would sense the depth of the political crisis and the 
danger threatening Yemeni unity. 
  In a press interview with him before the election of the new 
presidential council, President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih said that a 
collective style of leadership is a communist party tradition 
that has proved its failure. He believes that al-Bid's going 
into seclusion will probably continue "perhaps because some 
think that results can be achieved by going into seclusion. But 
his deputy 'Ali al-Bid believes that the General People's 
Congress Party [GPC] is dominating the unitary state. He asserts 
that he will not go to Sanaa unless it really becomes the 
capital of the Yemeni Republic (the unitary state), and not of 
the Yemeni Arab Republic (formerly northern Yemen). 
  Because the differences between the president and the vice 
president and between the GPC and its ally the YSP [Yemeni 
Socialist Party] are really deep, the election of a new 
presidential council and the confirmation of 'Ali al-Bid in his 
position as vice president, although he was not sworn in with 
the rest of the council members, does not mean that the crisis 
is over and the dangers to unity have receded. Rather, what 
happened was maintaining the status quo and keeping the crisis 
in suspension, with all what this may entail in terms of 
paralyzing the government and impeding merging the institutions 
and consolidating national unity. 
  It is no secret that failure to complete the merger of the 
armed forces underscores the danger the political dispute 
between the GPC and the YSP poses to unity. Al-Bid recently 
confirmed what certain reports said about armed forces put on 
alert during the recent elections, which has almost set off a 
serious problem between the former two Yemenis. Many quarters 
believe that the YSP does not want to lose the army card before 
its demands are realized and its differences with its northern 
allies are solved. 
  Maintaining the status quo involves great dangers, 
particularly since the building of unity needs a consensus of 
views and building bridges of trust in order to overcome the 
many difficulties and obstacles which we have seen plague even a 
developed and rich country like Germany. Circumstances have 
decreed that difficulties of unity in Yemen be coupled with 
difficulties of democracy, thereby heightening pressures on the 
nascent unitary state. Overcoming such difficulties cannot be 
realized by the expression of wishes, but rather by hard work 
and unlimited patience because the alternative would be not only 
the collapse of unity but also the possibilities of a bloody 
civil war in which the biggest loser will be Yemen and the 
Yemenis. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59841 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Committee To Implement Cultural Agreement Formed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0005B Doha AL-SHARQ in Arabic 1 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0005B </F>
<F P=104>  Doha AL-SHARQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muhammad al-'Ariqi: "During a Session of the </F>
Qatari-Yemeni Official Informational Talks: Formation of Joint 
Committee To Follow-Up on Implementation of the 
Informational-Cultural Agreement; Committee Holds its Meeting 
Next January in Doha"] 
  [Text] Sanaa-AL-SHARQ--Yesterday, Yemeni President 
Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih received His Excelleny 
Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, minister of information 
and culture and his accompanying delegation, who are on an 
official visit to Yemen. At the outset of the meeting, the 
minister conveyed the greetings of Amir Shaykh Khalifah 
Bin-Hamad Al Thani's and Crown Prince Shaykh Hamad Bin-Khalifah 
Al Thani to the Yemeni president, and to the people of Yemen of 
their wishes for continued prosperity and growth. His 
Excellency, the minister spoke of the special relations that 
bind the sisterly countries and are undergoing continuous 
improvement. For his part, the Yemeni president expressed his 
profound pleasure with the level of development of Yemeni-Qatari 
relations, and affirmed Yemen's desire to advance these 
relations to a higher level for the benefit of the sisterly 
countries and our Arab and Islamic nation. The meeting was 
attended by the Yemeni Minister of Information and his 
accompanying delegation. The session on Qatari-Yemeni 
informational talks had begun before noon yesterday under the 
chairmanship of the information ministers of the two countries, 
His Excellency Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari and Hasan 
Ahmad al-Lawzi. 
  At the start of the talks, Yemeni Minister of Information 
Hasan al-Lawzi welcomed Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari 
and his accompanying delegation, and said: "I am happy and 
gratified for your response in accepting the invitation to visit 
your country, the Republic of Yemen, which has experienced a new 
impetus to improve bilateral relations, not only on the 
informational and cultural level, but also on informational, 
cultural, and other levels as well. This level will also serve 
to actuate all existing areas of cooperation between the two 
sister countries." 
  He added: "I hope this visit will avail you of the 
opportunity to examine closely all aspects of life in Yemen, and 
to become intimately acquainted with the true nature of 
conditions, achievements, and changes that have taken place in 
this country. This visit will be an opportunity for us, through 
yourselves, to become acquainted with the procession of progress 
in the State of Qatar and which we follow, whenever possible, 
over all media. Hence, we affirm our pride in the judicious and 
equable policy of our second country, the State of Qatar, 
whether it involves its bilateral or regional relations, its 
policy and program of national endeavors, or its joint Arab 
activity. And if our praise is praise generally directed, it 
would be incumbent upon us to specifically praise the bilateral 
relations of the two sisterly nations, for they are special and 
evolving relations. We indeed hope that our relations be such 
that they form a positive model in our Arab homeland, especially 
as we live in a single geographical area, which affirms the 
importance of enhancing informational and cultural cooperation". 
He added, "By such scope, we are able to present an honorable 
example of relations in all areas". 
  In his speech, the Yemeni minister broached the domains of 
informational and cultural cooperation, saying, "A cooperation 
was signed here in Sanaa in May of 1990; through its 
implementation, we will achieve positive steps in the area of 
informational cooperation". 
<H5>  Qatari Information Minister's Speech </H5>
  The Yemeni minister then presented the floor to Dr. Hamad 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, who thanked, on his own behalf and 
that of the members of the delegation, the dispatch of the 
hospitable invitation to visit Yemen. He added: "I express my 
thanks and those of the members of the accompanying delegation 
for this hospitable invitation to visit our second homeland, 
this ancient, sisterly country with a special place in the soul 
of every Arab. Since each of us was looking forward to visiting 
this dearly beloved country, we could not but accept the 
invitation. We have experienced pleasure ever since setting foot 
in this country, and we thank you for your gracious hospitality 
and your generosity, a generosity that we became aware of from 
the very start and one that is not surprising, for you are of 
the Arab fold, and generosity is the most prominent 
characteristic of Arabs." 
  He continued: "This visit is among a series that seek to 
develop and improve relations between our two sisterly 
countries. These visits were initiated a short time ago by the 
visit of His Excellency Foreign Minister Shaykh Hamad Bin-Jasim 
Bin-Jabbur Al-Thani, who visited your sisterly country and 
discussed with its leaders all aspects of mutual relations. In 
continuation of that process, begun by the foreign minister, we 
are here today to focus on an important and vital aspect, one 
that is as important as all others, that of informational and 
cultural relations. Information has become a mark of this era, 
especially in the global development of communications. Thus, we 
are in support of this meeting as well as the exchange of 
opinions on the manner of dealing with this vital aspect, that 
which has been decreed by the scientific, technological and 
informational development in the world as a whole." 
  In the course of his speech, the minister congratulated the 
people of Yemen on the realization of unification, and said: "I 
am pleased to congratulate the people of Yemen on their 
achievements, especially the unification of Yemen, which we hope 
becomes more firmly established each passing day, and becomes an 
example to be followed by Arabs as a whole. We wish you success 
and prosperity in this unity, which has realized not only a 
dream of Yemenis, but one of Arabs as a whole. We realize the 
challenges that confront you in the area of development; despite 
the obstacles involved, you have been successful in achieving a 
great deal. We look forward to the development of relations in 
the interests of both sisterly peoples. I would like to signal 
out and commend the role of the sisterly Yemeni expatriate 
community and its contributions to the development of Qatar. 
This is a fact that cannot be denied; on the contrary, we 
express it with profound appreciation, as our Yemeni brethren 
have lived in Qatar and taken part in its development from the 
very start. Many of them are Qatari citizens, and they have been 
good to a fault, while all their deeds have had the best 
interests of Qatar in mind. To them, we convey our thanks and 
appreciation. 
  I hope that this visit is a springboard of benefit, begun by 
the fOreign minister, for development of relations in various 
areas, especially that of information and culture, which 
possibly we may be able to discuss during this session. The 
discussion of this topic starts from a discussion of the 
informational agreement signed by ex-Minister of Information 
(now Minister of Health) Shaykh Hamad Bin-Suhaym in May 1990, 
along with brother Hasan al-Lawzi. Unfortunately, certain 
circumstances, passing as a summer cloud does, precluded 
follow-up on the matter. But a summer cloud passes rapidly, 
leaving ever-clear skies. Thus, God willing, we begin 
implementing this agreement, and consideration of the means to 
bolster relations between our two countries in all areas." 
<H5>  Informational Agreement Implementation Talks </H5>
  Later, the two parties initiated the discussion of means to 
develop the informational agreement signed two years ago, which 
encompassed coordination and cooperation in the domains of 
radio, television, news agencies, literature and newspapers, as 
well as aspects of training. Also discussed was enhancement of 
the role of the Khalifa Institute for Radio and Television, 
established at Qatar's expense, as well as the role of the 
committee during the forthcoming phase, which would enable 
advancement of the implementation of the agreement to its 
fruition. In this connection, the two sides affirmed the 
importance of follow-up for implementation of the agreement. It 
was agreed that the implementation follow-up committee meet next 
January in Doha. The Yemeni committee is headed by Ministry of 
Information Assistant Deputy Amma al-'Alim al-Suswa, External 
Information General Manager Iskander al-Asbahi and Planning and 
Follow-Up General Manager Muhi al-Hamdani, while the Qatari 
committee is headed by Qatar Ministry of Information Assistant 
Deputy for Information Shaykh Hamad Bin-Thamir Al-Thani. 
  During the talks session, the Yemeni side heard of Qatar's 
experience in the areas of radio and television, specifically 
the satellite channel, and particularly as Qatar enjoys a 19.5 
percent interest in ARABSAT. In this context, Dr. Hamad said 
that Qatar is focusing on enhancement of the public program and 
the English channel on television, that they become acceptable 
viewing in a number of Arab countries. 
  On the Qatari side, the talks session was attended by 
Assistant Deputy for Information, Shaykh Hamad Bin-Thamir 
Al-Thani, Radio Director Mubarak Jiham al-Kawari, Follow-Up and 
Planning Director 'Abdallah Sadik, and Public Relations Manager 
Ahmad al-Jida. 
  On the Yemeni side: Deputy Minister of Information Muthir 
Ahmad Taki, Ministry of Information Assistant Deputy Amma 
al-'Alim al-Suswa, Radio and Television Board Chairman Muhammad 
'Abd-al-Qawi, Public Program's Radio Sector Manager Ahmad 
al-Noubi, Ministry of Information's Information Department 
Official Salih Hajar, Director of the Khalifa Institute for 
Radio and Television 'Abd-al-Rahman al-Mishrib, Public Relations 
General Manager 'Abdallah al-Sindi, Planning and Follow-Up 
General Manager Muhi al-Hamdani, and Deputy General Manager of 
Public Relations Intisar Khalid. Tomorrow, the Qatari minister 
and his accompanying delegation will go on a fact-finding trip 
outside the capital of Sanaa. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59842 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Issues That Might Wreck Unity 
Cited </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0003D London AL-MAJALLAH in Arabic 30 Oct 93 p 32 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0003D </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-MAJALLAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Many observers expressed skepticism about the 
seriousness of President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih's initiative last 
week in which he called on his vice president 'Ali Salim al-Bid 
to let bygones be bygones and to begin a new chapter of personal 
relations between the two men who threw all their weight behind 
the establishment of the unitary state on 22 May 1990. 
  Many people exclude the possibility of any reaction on the 
part of Salim al-Bid who was elected by the Presidential Council 
members for the post of vice president despite the fact that he 
did not come to Parliament in order to take the constitutional 
oath. 
  Al-Bid is still demanding the implementation of the 18 
points 
which he considers basic conditions before any reconciliatory 
steps toward the General People's Congress [GPC] are taken. 
  Al-Bid, who accused Salih of building a state of tax 
collection and military, faced wide criticism by politicians and 
the opposition press, accusing him of being secessionist and 
helping to implement a foreign plan, and exploiting differences 
in order to redivide Yemen. However, President 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih in his speech before Parliament after taking the 
constitutional oath strongly warned his deputy that "we must 
draw up red lines which we should not allow ourselves to cross 
whatever the circumstances may be." 
  Yet the Yemeni crisis is still bogged down despite the 
strong 
public optimism regarding President 'Al 'Abdallah Salih's recent 
initiative. The deadlock in the crisis was demonstrated in the 
message al-Bid sent to Parliament, declining to attend the 
swearing ceremony because of his personal stand toward President 
Salih and YSP [Yemeni Socialist Party] relations with the GPC 
party. But al-Bid did not reject the new position and left the 
door open for his return to the capital, Sanaa. 
  When the election battle died down in April some people 
thought that Yemen has passed the first test of democracy 
following the election of the first popular and legitimate 
Parliament through elections in which several parties were 
involved, not just one or two parties. It was believed that the 
differences between the president and the vice president 
concerned the latter's demands for several guarantees for the 
YSP while in power, or that power is to be shared according to 
the role and status of each party in the field. But 'Ali 
al-Bid's going into seclusion in Aden recently exposed all those 
differences, thereby demonstrating that the situation in Yemen 
is close to collapsing. For the first time, al-Bid openly said 
that the conflict is about salvaging what used to be called the 
South and restoring the positive advantages it enjoyed, until 
the negative effects of what used to be known as the North began 
spreading southward. 
  Some politicians in Yemen see the vice president's recent 
stand as based on the outcome of the legislative elections in 
which the YSP scored a sweeping victory in the southern 
provinces, which led to the creation of a strong bastion for the 
socialists who have begun raising issues of the South and 
setting its priorities, both in the Presidential Council and the 
Parliament. 
  The situation further aggravated when the speeches of the 
president in Sanaa and the vice president in Aden developed into 
political polemics, with each one accusing the other of 
plundering the state coffers, misappropriating public funds, and 
each holding the other responsible for the state the country is 
in. This escalation aroused the fear that the unitary state 
might come to an end. Some opposition papers expressed the fear 
that the differences might lead to the restoration of the border 
entry points which existed previously and culminated with the 
unification of north and south. 
  With these serious proposals being openly talked about by 
leaders of both parties, the voices advocating secession have 
become louder. They point to several factors that can be used as 
justifications to go back to secession. These are: 

  -  The existence of two different currencies in circulation; 
the dinar, which was the principal currency in the South, and 
the rial in the North (the dinar is worth $26). 
  -  Failure to take practical steps to merge the armed forces and 
the security forces, thus two armies now profess loyalty to the 
previous parties, the YSP and the GPC. 
  -  The existence of two airlines, Alyamda in Aden and 
al-Yamaniyah 
in Sanaa. 
  -  The publication of two official newspapers, AL-THAWRAH in 
Sanaa 
and 14 OCTOBER in Aden. 
  -  The existence of two television and radio channels in Sanaa 
and 
Aden. 
  -  The failure to standardize school curricula and the general 
educational system. 
  -  The feeling among citizens of the South in particular that 
unity has worsened their poverty. 
  Over and above that, political frictions between the GCP and 
YSP during the transitional period preceding the elections have 
affected a wide sector of the inhabitants of the southern 
provinces. Cash liquidity in banks disappeared and for several 
months employees received no pay. Also, the project to establish 
a free zone in Aden when it was proclaimed the economic and 
commercial capital of the country was not implemented. 
  Despite the gains Yemeni unity achieved and the feeling 
among 
Yemeni citizens of greater freedom following the termination of 
the two totalitarian regimes, lifting restrictions on citizens' 
travel, and the existence of freedom in all its forms--these 
achievements are no longer a daily demand because hardships 
caused by the security and economic situation, particularly 
among the southern citizens, overshadowed everything else. 
  The consensus of views among observers is that Yemen is 
living very critical moments due to increasing distrust between 
the YSP and GPC leadership. Al-Bid clearly referred to this 
situation when he said in an interview with a local paper that 
"if we do not understand the meaning of the establishment of the 
unitary state, its mechanism, and its major democratic and 
contemporary project, then we are afraid that the entity of this 
state will break into several entities." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59843 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Unified Army, Amendments Complicate Conciliation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0004D Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 15 Oct 93 p 21 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0004D </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Secrets of Privileges Crisis Between </F>
President and Vice President"] 
  [Text] Sanaa--While Yemen's Vice President 'Ali Salim 
al-Bid, general secretary of the Yemeni Socialist Party, 
continued his seclusion in the economic capital Aden, leaders of 
the General People's Congress and the Yemeni Grouping for Reform 
hastened to contain the legal and constitutional crisis among 
the three sharers of power--a crisis that threatens to produce a 
constitutional vacuum resulting from al-Bid's seclusion and the 
solidarity of the members of the Socialist Party's political 
bureau with him. In practice, this means not reaching an 
agreement about the proposed changes to the constitution, as the 
process of amending the constitution requires the agreement of 
three-fourths of the members of the House of Representatives, a 
number available only by a political agreement among the three 
political parties sharing power. 
  It appears that the Yemeni leadership, with its three 
parties, has moved quickly. Time, too, may have moved quickly. 
On 14 October, the authority of the Presidential Council that 
has led Yemen since the declaration of unity expires. If there 
is no agreement on the proposed constitutional changes, 
parliament will find itself forced to elect a new Presidential 
Council; and even this new council is not an object of 
agreement. 'Ali Salim al-Bid, for example, has stated that he is 
unwilling for his membership on it to be renewed, thus reviving 
speculations about possible alternatives the Socialist Party 
might propose instead of its general secretary. The name of 
Salih Muhammad, the party's assistant general secretary, has 
been mentioned in this regard, or political bureau member Dr. 
Yasin Sa'id Nu'man for membership in the new council, on 
condition that one of them would become vice chairman of the 
presidential body. Sources in the People's Congress, which is 
headed by President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, say that attempts at 
mediation, both domestic and Arab, have taken place during the 
last two months, since the vice president's return from a 
European and American tour, with the goal of persuading him to 
return to the capital, Sanaa, and end his seclusion. These 
mediations reached a dead end; nevertheless, the attempts were 
repeated and are still continuing. It should be mentioned in 
this regard that a parliamentary delegation headed by Shaykh 
'Abdallah ibn Husayn al-Ahmar has offered to go to Aden to talk 
with Salim al-Bid and reach a formula for a new Presidential 
Council with al-Bid as a member to be formed before 14 October. 
  It is difficult to predict Yemen's future legal and 
constitutional situation unless one goes back to the real 
reasons behind the sudden decision to seclude himself that 
al-Bid made without informing anyone, even the members of the 
Socialist Party's political bureau. They were surprised by his 
seclusion, but understood his statements and objections to the 
constitutional changes after they met with him in Aden during 
September; this despite the fact that before al-Bid's return 
from the United States the political bureau itself had agreed to 
the proposed constitutional changes and had participated with 
representatives of the two other parties--Reform and People's 
Congress--in approving them. 
  Was al-Bid not informed of what his party's representatives 
had approved? In fact, the vice president was apprised of 
everything that took place in the meetings of the three-party 
committee that discussed and approved the constitutional 
changes. Salim Salih Muhammad, the number-two man in the party, 
has stated that he informed 'Ali Salim al-Bid of all the 
developments as they occurred. 
<H5>  Seclusion </H5>
  What happened? 
  The way in which al-Bid returned to Yemen drew attention. He 
refused to board the presidential plane reserved for the 
president and the five Presidential Council members, preferring 
to board a plane belonging to Alyemda, the southern airline. He 
took off on 19 August, went to Aden, instead of Sanaa, and 
refused to meet with any official in the country; neither did he 
deliver any statement to the information media. Finally, at the 
end of August, he came out with a fiery speech before the 
leaders of the Labor Confederation and defined his position on 
the constitutional changes. It came as a shock to all parties 
sharing in the government, including the leaders of the 
Socialist Party. Al-Bid insisted on the need to hold a popular 
referendum on the changes, although there is no constitutional 
provision to that effect. For the first time since unification 
he referred to "balance of interests," although he did not 
define exactly what he meant by the term. He used astonishing 
expressions, such as "rejecting incorporation and annexation." 
Many interpreted the expression as an implied rejection of one 
provision of the constitutional changes: namely, that only the 
president should be elected, while the vice president's name 
would be announced without their necessarily being on one slate. 
Al-Bid leveled strong criticisms of state and government 
policies such as weak security measures, failure to arrest the 
perpetrators of attempted political assassinations, and 
suspicions of administrative and financial corruption in the 
government apparatus. 
  What many considered to be the time bombs in al-Bid's speech 
in fact reflected but one side of the reasons for al-Bid's 
opposition to the constitutional changes. Leaders of the 
People's Congress say that the vice president is trying to 
obtain the best privileges in the proposed constitutional 
changes--such as election of the president and vice president 
from one slate, with the vice president having the right to 
succeed the president for the remainder of his term of office in 
case of the latter's death or resignation. 
  Sources in the Socialist Party say that a two-party 
agreement 
on constitutional changes was concluded one week before the 
elections. The most important point was agreement to change the 
form of the presidency from a five-member Presidential Council 
elected by the House of Representatives to a president and vice 
president only. The two would be chosen by direct popular 
election from a single slate after the House of Representatives 
had pronounced on their integrity. Socialist sources say that 
the People's Congress tried to change this provision while 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid was traveling outside the country. 
  The problem in Yemen now is that the complications 
surrounding the constitutional changes--complications that 
threaten to cause a political and constitutional vacuum if 14 
October passes without an agreement--come at a time when many 
were expecting that the Socialist Party and the People's 
Congress would merge and that their parliamentary 
representatives would form a single bloc. The current 
disagreements have given impetus to the antimerger wing of the 
Socialist Party. Leadership sources in the party say that the 
party's general convention this December will not discuss on its 
agenda the issue of merging into the People's Congress, which 
means that the proposal no longer has any meaning at the present 
time. 
<H5>  Army Merger </H5>
  Another aspect of the complications is that the ongoing 
disagreements have derailed strategic decisions that were 
supposed to have reached the stage of practical implementation. 
Perhaps the most important of these was the decision to merge 
the armed forces, the military police, and the people's security 
forces, in addition to the forces of central police and 
security. Many fear that the suspension of unifying the army is 
the prelude to an unknown and perhaps frightening alternative. 
The recent resignation of the chief of staff revealed political 
forces that do not want the armed forces to merge, perhaps so 
that they can preserve the privileges they used to obtain before 
unification. 
  In any case, many in Yemen predict that the efforts of the 
speaker of parliament, Shaykh 'Abdallah al-Ahmar, will succeed 
in persuading the vice president to end his seclusion, return to 
Sanaa, and agree to a formula acceptable to the three parties 
for constitutional changes before 14 October, which coincides 
with the 30th anniversary of the revolution against British 
imperialism in the south. On the 18th of the same month, Yemen 
is to receive French President Mitterrand. It would be 
unthinkable for these occasions to take place with the vice 
president absent. Meanwhile, many in the Arab world and Europe 
are speaking with wonder about the democratic experiment in 
united Yemen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59844 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> BANGLADESH </F>
<H3> <TI>   Columnist Criticizes U.S. Human Rights Policy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK1912101993 Dhaka DAINIK INQILAB in Bengali 15 Dec 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> BK1912101993 </F>
<F P=104>  Dhaka DAINIK INQILAB </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Bengali </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Onubandh" column by Bidayak] </F>
  [Text] The call being made throughout the world for the 
establishment of democracy and the protection of human rights is 
nothing but a farce. In fact, both democracy and human rights 
are being violated around the globe. It must be mentioned that 
violation of human rights is the main problem in this world. We 
want to portray a true picture of the oppressed nations. But 
before doing so, we want to say a few words regarding the 
statement made and the role played by President Bill Clinton of 
the United States, who is the champion of democracy and human 
rights. 
  On the occasion of Human Rights Day, which was observed on 
December 10, President Clinton made a statement and said that 
every man has some inalienable rights. These include the right 
to live; the right to personal freedom and security; the right 
of not being detained without trial; and the right to remain 
free from oppression. The Declaration of Human Rights also 
guarantees political, religious, and cultural freedom to every 
individual. Under no circumstances can these rights be violated. 
Every individual is entitled to lead a free and respectable 
life. The West has no idea of how to improve the environment for 
making a better life for human beings. 
  Along with President Clinton, his assistant secretary of 
state, John Shattuck, also stated that the United States 
respects the cultural and historical differences existing 
between different nations. He reiterated that all the people of 
this world are entitled to enjoy the same fundamental and basic 
human rights. No one should be subjected to oppression. He 
further said that no man was born to be jailed for expressing 
his views. 
  We agree with the statements made by the president and his 
assistant secretary of state. Both democracy and human rights 
are protected in the United States. But what is happening 
outside the United States? If we look at the recent incidents 
which occurred in the areas inhabited by the Muslims in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and in Somalia, it appears that the 
statements made by President Clinton and his assistant secretary 
of state are nothing but a satire of democracy and human rights. 
  Is the brutal killing of several hundred thousand unarmed 
Muslim men and women in Bosnia by Christian Serbs not a 
violation of democracy and human rights? It is unfortunate that 
the developed nations, which advocate the cause of democracy and 
human rights, have never raised any protest against such 
incidents. The Middle East problem is the most complex issue in 
the world at present. But the U.S. Administration has adopted a 
dual policy regarding this issue. The largest human rights 
organization of the United States is Human Rights Watch. In its 
recent report, the group alleged that although President Clinton 
criticized various activities of Iraq, Iran, and Libya, he is 
not saying anything against their ally Israel. President 
Clinton's human rights policy regarding Israel is much weaker 
than that of former President Bush. The Bush administration was 
willing to impose economic sanctions against Israel with a view 
to achieve its objective. But President Clinton has adopted a 
very liberal policy towards Israel. Recently he gave an 
assurance to the Israeli prime minister, Mr. Rabin, that an 
amount of $3,000 million in assistance will be given to Israel 
every year. The Human Rights Watch report further states that 
Washington did not criticize Israel for the expulsion of 415 
Palestinians to Lebanon. On the other hand, the U.S. secretary 
of state made efforts to reach a political understanding with 
Israel in this regard. 
  We feel that this report by Human Rights Watch is sufficient 
to unmask the administration of President Clinton. Since the 
birth of Israel, the United States has contributed to its 
development by extending financial assistance. At present, the 
main problem in the Middle East is Israel. From the very 
beginning, this Jewish state has been making attempts to grab 
the countries of the region. For this purpose the United States 
has equipped Israel with arms and nuclear weapons. Some people 
have remarked that Israel is itself an atomic bomb in the Middle 
East. Realizing this fact, Iran, Iraq, and Libya have taken up 
an anti-Israeli stand. Their stand led to the recent outbreak of 
the Gulf War. It must be mentioned that economic sanctions were 
imposed against Libya centering a trifling issue. Two Libyan 
citizens were accused for the accident of a PanAm airliner. The 
United States, Britain, and France have demanded extradition of 
these two people to face trial. The United Nations imposed 
sanctions against Libya since it refused to comply with their 
demand. 
  The Libyan citizens denied that they are involved in the 
mishap of the PanAm airliner. Hence, Libya has not committed any 
offense by refusing to hand over its citizens to face trial. For 
this refusal, several hundred thousand Libyan citizens have 
become victims of the sanctions imposed by the United Nations. 
Isn't this a violation of human rights being committed by the 
United Nations, which is influenced by the United States? Hence, 
the masks of those who claim that they are champions of the 
cause of democracy and human rights should be opened. Fresh 
initiatives should be taken for the establishment of real 
democracy and human rights in the world. For this purpose, 
efforts should be made to build a new world order. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59845 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> BANGLADESH </F>
<H3> <TI>   Report 
Details Record Textile Losses </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK0312154893 Dhaka DAINIK INQILAB in Bengali 2 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> BK0312154893 </F>
<F P=104>  Dhaka DAINIK INQILAB </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Bengali </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by M. Abdullah] </F>
  [Text] The condition of the state-owned textile mills is 
deplorable. The industrial units of the Bangladesh Textile 
Mills Corporation [BTMC] incurred losses of 401.25 crore 
[4,012.50 million] taka during the past 21 years. The BTMC has 
41 textile mills. At present production has virtually stopped in 
36 of them. Efforts by the government to sell these mills to the 
private sector have not yielded the desired result. 
  All 41 mills are facing acute financial crisis due to 
recurring losses. There was no production in these mills during 
the past year due to the unavailability of raw cotton. Only five 
mills are operational while the rest have been unofficially 
closed. As a result, 47,000 mill workers are unemployed. BTMC 
sources said that the Ministry of Industries has invited private 
sector bids on 10 mills, but it has been learned that the 
response is not very encouraging. Steps are also underway for 
the denationalization of 10 more mills. The government's plan is 
to privatize the mills in a gradual manner. It has been 
reported that the Industries Ministry is going ahead with the 
sale of these mills, although the prices offered is far below 
the actual cost of the mills. About 10,000 workers in these 10 
mills, which were declared closed about nine months ago, have 
not yet received the salaries and other benefits due them. 
  From 1972-1993 the corporation incurred a loss of 401.25 
crore taka. During the past two and a half years, that is, 
during the term of office of the present government, the 
corporation incurred a loss of 286 crore [2,860 million] taka. 
This shows that the loss incurred in the textile sector during 
the tenure of the present government exceeded all records. The 
BTMC earned profits during the 1972-1976 fiscal years. From 
1977-1979, the corporation earned a profit of over 1.5 crore [15 
million] taka. It also earned profits during the 1982-83, 
1984-85, and 1988-89 fiscal years. By deducting the profits made 
during the past 21 years, the net loss of the corporation is 
estimated to be around 401.25 crore taka. 
  The BTMC workers union at a press conference held yesterday 
called on the government to accept their 14-point demand, which 
includes reopening the 10 industrial units of the corporation 
which had been closed and payment of their overdue salaries. 
They alleged that a grave situation is prevailing in the BTMC 
units. The mill workers have not been paid in four or five 
months. The union leaders further alleged that these mills 
incurred losses worth several million taka during the term of 
office of the present government. They said that influential 
persons are conspiring to purchase each mill worth about 50 
crore [500 million] taka at the nominal price of only 5 to 10 
crore [50 to 100 million] taka. 
  The 14-point demand of the jute mill workers include 
reopening the 10 mills which have been closed; payment of the 
back salaries of the workers; release of the workers arrested 
under the Anti-Terrorism Act; withdrawal of duty on the import 
of raw cotton, color, chemicals, and machinery parts; banning 
imports of duty-free thread; preventing entry of smuggled thread 
and textile yarn; withdrawal of value added tax; lifting of 
interest on bank loans; issuance of long-term loans for 
modernization of the textile mills; and providing capital to 
these mills. 
  The statement at the press conference was read by the 
general 
secretary of the workers union, Z.M. Kamrul Anam. The other 
union leaders present included Md. Nurul Islam Bhuiyan, Subash 
Chandra Debnath, Abu Taher, and Shamsunnahar. The textile 
workers have also decided to stage a sit-in in front of the 
Bangladesh Secretariat [ Dhaka complex which houses all 
government ministries] on 29 December to press their 
demands. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59846 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94036" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Future World Order Foreseen Based on Hindu Ideals </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AS0071A Bombay NAVBHARAT TIMES in Hindi 10 Nov p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0071A </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay NAVBHARAT TIMES </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hindi </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Siddheshwar Prasad: "1893-1993 And India] </F>
  [Text] The end of 1893-1993 centennial is the beginning of 
the worship of the great goddess Durga. In 1893 the three great 
sons of Mother India--Swami Vivekananda, Mahatma Gandhi, and 
Yogi Arvind--started this pious beginning. Swami Vivekananda 
dazzled the world by exposing it to the real glory of Sanatana 
Dharam at the Chicago World Religions Conference. Mahatma Gandhi 
sounded the conch shell to announce agitation against Western 
conceit by starting satyagraha [non-violent movement] against 
racial discrimination in South Africa. Swami Arvind received the 
first inspiration from Goddess Shakti when he touched land in 
Bombay and published a series of articles in INDUPRAKASH. He 
gave a new definition to nationalism and politics. Swami 
Vivekananda and Gandhi rejuvenated the feeling for duty of the 
sleeping kshatariyas [warrior caste]. Yogi Arvind helped raise 
new awareness of the ancient Indian wisdom and presented the 
original Vedas, the Upanishdas, and Bhagavad Gita to the world 
in a modern form. 
  The world is ready to change for the new era as desired by 
the Goddess Durga. We have to think and theorize as to which 
powers will be defeated and trodden under feet, and which powers 
will become great powers. The three great sons of India will be 
the trail blazers of this new era, and will be Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Mahesh of this age. 
  It is surprising and sad to see that nothing has been done 
according to the requirements of this historic century in India. 
At times, it looks like the century of the giants has passed and 
we are living in the century of dwarfs who cannot think big, who 
think that independence means just staying in power, whose blood 
stream cannot bear the heat of glory of freedom, and who have 
made it a habit to accept 
intellectual-cutlural-economic-political slavery. The dwarfs can 
gain power using muscle, betrayal, and deception; can hold on to 
power; but cannot change the society. Thus, the flow of time and 
duty throws them out on the banks. 
  India is burning in the fires of communalism and prejudice. 
Is just sending its representatives to South Africa and Chicago 
at the time of the beginning of this new era enough for India? 
Cannot we use this historic century to start a national or 
international campaign to stop religious and communal malice? 
Cannot we unite the people belonging to all political parties, 
religions, and castes for participation in this national 
campaign and start the powerful flow of national devotion? But 
who will do it? Can a blind person lead another blind person? 
  How can those who cannot even see the nation be able to 
perceive the whole world? There is a great fear that the clutch 
of economic and cultural slavery will become tighter in the name 
of economic liberalization and modernization, and India will be 
forced to see with the eyes of others instead of using its own 
eyes. It appears that India will have to ignore its own 
intelligence and will have to walk the way others tell her to. 
However, can we call it walking? That would be just crawling! 
  The government must be helpless and incapable of doing 
anything. The Congress (I) at the Center has its own 
incapability. Who interferes in the states run by other parties? 
Why are they supporting an organization that spreads communal 
prejudice while patting their backs for being modern? Do they 
think that Gandhi is not worth being honored by spreading his 
message in every village at this time when the policy of 
apartheid has ended in South Africa? It appears that this is not 
the Congress Party that Gandhi had raised with his blood and 
sweat and enabled it to beget independence for India. Perhaps, 
the Congress is not in the hands of his successors; it is being 
controlled by slavery-loving opportunists. Powers that are 
dreaming of controlling the whole world naturally will take 
advantage of India's timely weakness. 
  What have the independent organizations associated with the 
Gandhian philosophy been doing? Why are organizations like the 
Sarvaseva Sangh, the Gandhi Samarak Nidhi, and the Gandhi Shakti 
Parishthan silent now? Why are not they following Gandhi's 
legacy? In South Africa, 100 years after the satyagraha was 
started, they did finally succeed in ending apartheid. Do not 
these organizations see the victory of Gandhi's policies in it? 
  Why has the Shri Ramakrishna Mission, the organization 
associated with Swami Vivekananda, also limited itself to a 
ceremonial participation? Why is this mighty organization 
hesitating in presenting the form of Sanatana Dharam or Hindu 
Dharama that Swami Vivekananda had presented at the Chicago 
World Religions Conference to the people in the world now? 
  Shri Arvind Ashram is an organization in itself, and an able 
disciple of Arvind is its head. Is it not amazing that during 
the centenary year, a selection of Arvind's writing and thinking 
under the title of India's Reincarnation was published not by 
Arvind Ashram but by an organization in Paris! The title of this 
book published in Paris expresses the future truth that Arvind 
has dedicated his life to. 
  Now this image of "India's reincarnation" is viewed by the 
world as formed by the West. But no proper government can be 
formed, be successful or be stable in India until the 
triumvirate of these three great men stops being neglected. How 
long can a country depend on a borrowed crutch? 
  This centennial has also acknowledged another great truth: 
All political parties and organizations are petty, they have no 
interest in actual resolution of India's problems, their 
disagreement is not based on basic issues but on establishing 
monopoly of specific persons, and they do not look within 
themselves for answers but depend on others. The Western slavery 
in the form of modernization has encompassed their mind and body 
so much that they cannot even think of walking with their head 
high on the stage of world. The warrior-like glory of Swami 
Vivekananda and Gandhi and intellectual glory of Arvind are 
being neglected now. Who can stop India from being weak and 
narrow-minded now? If everyone is busy trying to fill up their 
own coffers, who will fill Mother India's bowl? Who will create 
the new awakening of the man in the world? 
  The West's established supremacy over the whole world has 
reached its apex, and the time for its downward slide has 
arrived. The 'churning of the ocean' of the West has begun, and 
the West is suffering pain, defeat, and laziness because of the 
heat generated by it. It does not understand why this is 
happening because this is beyond the sphere of physical science. 
The West, drowned in the ocean of worldly luxuries can deceive 
itself for a while by calling the two civil wars in Europe two 
major World Wars. It should not forget that these civil wars 
ended the monopoly of Europe on the whole world. Now the United 
States may laugh in the United Nations while standing on the 
ashes of former Soviet Union, but this will not help it create 
the new world order. 
  The bad results of this cultural policy are emerging 
gradually. The communist powers fell right in front of our eyes 
because of the "centralized public policy" of the Marxists, and 
those communist nations also appear to be effected by this fall. 
However, communism is not the weakness of the Marxists; it was 
their strong desire for despotism. How can despotism under the 
guise of democracy have a different outcome? 
  Swami Vivekanand, Mahatma Gandhi, and Yogi Arvind are the 
saviors of the world suffering from the desire of total control, 
and have been the best representatives of world culture. The 
prosperous and powerful nations should not be under the illusion 
that no hub of power can flourish outside the sphere of their 
influence nor should the poor nations have the delusion that no 
strong leadership, except for the blind worshipper of the West, 
can emerge there. Who knows who Fate will pick and from where 
and give him which responsibility? How can the Western culture 
based on physical science can understand the secret of the 
longevity, repeated rise, and preservation of the ancient 
spiritual cultures? What can we say about the rest of the world 
when even India itself is neglecting the triumvirate of the new 
age who knew the secret of this wisdom? 
  These three great men fearlessly took revolutionary projects 
while living under the slavery of the world's most powerful 
imperialist. They also awakened the nation and challenged the 
West. India's soul was free even in slavery at that time, and 
India was fearless. Today, we cannot hear this free and fearless 
voice even in independent India. 
  The 'reincarnation of India in the ashes of the West' that 
Yogi Arvind had mentioned has two aspects. The fall of the West 
and India's reemergence. The fall of the West and India's 
reemergence are yogic prophecies and are two interdependent 
facets. If there is destruction in one place; there will be 
building in another, if there is building in one place; there 
will be destruction in another. At one time, the Western empires 
were built on the destruction of Eastern nations. Now the time 
is coming when the East will be rebuilt on the rubble of the 
West. 
  Not only the government and the political parties, but most 
of India's intellectuals, writers, and journalists are apathetic 
about the rebuilding of India in the new world for which Swami 
Vivekananda, Gandhi, and Yogi Arvind had done their historic 
work. it appears that most of them are interested only in 
copying and enjoying doing what the West has done. Perhaps, they 
do not know that the western intellectuals are destined to look 
at the world through the eyes of the triumvirate that India had 
produced. 
  The reemergence of India will be the greatest event of the 
21st Century. This will herald the new era of universal man, 
universal culture, universal policy, and a universal economic 
system that was founded by the Indian triumvirate during this 
century. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59847 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94037" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Manmohan Speech Sets Forth Policy Agenda </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AS0078A Madras THE HINDU in English 26 Oct 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0078A </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by F.J. Khergamvala: "Manmohan Completes Policy </F>
Agenda"; boldface words as published] 
  [Text] Limassol (Cyprus), Oct. 25. The Indian delegation to 
the 29th Commonwealth Summit headed back home on Monday evening 
content that it had at least attempted to satisfy a heavy 
bilateral and multilateral agenda. 
  Assisted by senior officials, including the Foreign 
Secretary, Mr. J. N. Dixit, the Commerce Secretary, Mr. Tejinder 
Khanna and Mr. Y. M. Tiwari, India's High Commissioner here, the 
delegation leader, Dr. Manmohan Singh's job included interaction 
with Pakistan's new leadership and a detailed presentation of 
India's views on the sub continent and the economic situation to 
every member of the South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation [SAARC], the Association of South East Asian Nations 
[ASEAN] and some others like Britain, Australia and Mauritius. 
It is learnt that due to the flux in the domestic situation in 
both Pakistan and India, especially the latter, the Foreign 
Secretary-level dialogue will not be held before January at the 
earliest. 
  So far as multilateral concerns go, India had wisely 
attached 
itself by prior consultation with Britain to maul the 
Commonwealth Secretary General's grand proposal for a New Global 
Humanitarian Order, laying out for the body an interventionist 
role. In fact the Indo-British consultation process here has 
been a revealing feature. Next, India was determined to argue 
for retaining the integrity of the Commonwealth Fund for 
Technical Cooperation, from which funds were being diverted to 
serve political ambitions and to press for preserving the 
autonomy of the Commonwealth Foundation. After realising that 
the initial draft on the Uruguay Round and General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade had not reflected its concerns India was 
strongly interested in having the Commonwealth incorporate its 
concerns. This, arguably, was largely achieved. 
  Pak not isolated: It is quite impossible at 
multilateral meetings to establish a success-failure ratio. As 
the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Paul Keating, replied the 
other day to the press, "can one of you please enlighten me what 
a successful visit is." However, insofar as putting the Global 
Humanitarian Order into a coma, India can legitimately claim 
success. It is quite another matter than in claiming to do so, 
some found the need to highlight Pakistan's isolation. Islamabad 
did mention that there were several positive elements to the 
Secretary General's proposal and the paper was worth talking 
about, as did at least one third of the countries. By no means 
is this a state of isolation. 
  On Kashmir, delegates here are of the view that time and 
events on the ground will determine the course of events unless 
some imaginative and creative ideas are explored. Meanwhile all 
India can do is to contain what has undoubtedly been a 
successful attempt by Pakistan to internationalise the situation 
in Jammu and Kashmir. For those who have either attended or 
covered international conferences it is quite obvious that if 
one had to take a private poll of other delegates three facts 
would emerge. One, that the problem must be resolved, preferably 
bilaterally. Two, something more up to date than the Shimla 
Agreement is needed because the local Kashmiri element is a 
potent ingredient, not included in the Shimla pact. Finally, 
that India is on the back foot on the human rights situation. 
  Quite often India needs to direct its publicity to its own 
officials, indeed within the Ministry of External Affairs 
itself. It is quite extraordinary that while here in Cyprus the 
Indian team saw fit to acknowledge positive aspects in Ms. 
Benazir Bhutto's phraseology on Kashmir and found nothing 
objectionable in Bangladesh's general reference on waters, in 
Amritsar an official of the External Affairs Ministry was 
criticising Islamabad and Dhaka for these utterances. 
  Over the past few years the Ministry has had quite a few 
politicians of three types. One, those who do not ready their 
briefs or do not understand them. Two, those who feel no need to 
read them, either because they are facile in the language and 
feel they can waffle. The last category, those in whose minds 
the papers of the cold war era have been indelibly printed. 
Fortunately in Cyprus, all these species were absent and India 
sent a man who could not only absorb his papers but inject them 
with more wisdom and deliver and then make each delivery without 
reference to them. 
  Those who have seen the subject grasp of people like Mr. 
John 
Major, Mr. Paul Keating, Dr. Mahathir Mohammed and India's own 
Mr. Narasimha Rao would realise how important it is to send out 
at the head of India's delegations men who can hold five 
consecutive meetings in one day, interspersed with interventions 
in a general debate, without a break for revision or a siesta 
and also host a lunch on G-15 issues, not to mention a meeting 
with the Queen without any officials present. 
  In bilateral meetings or before the media Mr. Nawaz Sharif 
was a man who was tongue tied and a bumbler. But Pakistan's new 
leader is of a wholly different genre who can be taken on only 
by men that India sent to Limassol. Fortunately also, the 
Foreign Secretary and his officials kept themselves fully 
accessible to the local, Indian and the foreign media for 
background briefings, especially on economic subjects. But there 
is only so much that public relations can do. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59848 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94038" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Positive Outcome of Raphel Remarks Predicted </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AS0077A Madras THE HINDU in English 21 Nov 93 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0077A </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by F. J. Khergamvala: "Raphel's Remarks Will Help </F>
India"; boldface words as published] 
  [Text] Manama (Bahrain), Nov. 20. With the dust settling on 
the controversial remarks on Kashmir passed by a senior U.S. 
State Department official these will turn out to be beneficial 
in the long run. At least, these will help India avoid the 
mistakes in the Arab-Israeli process. The remarks have also 
enabled Indians to see holes in India's attitude towards Kashmir 
and the U.S. 
  Last month's "background" briefing of Ms. Robin Raphel, the 
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia sparked a 
highly informed and honest public debate in the Indian media. A 
vital debate like this was by and large missing when the West 
Asia peace process was launched by the Bush administration. The 
U.S. hinged on its own prestige, not informed public debate 
among the direct participants. That came later. 
  The violent and halting fallout of the secret Oslo deal 
between Israel and the PLO shows that Mr. Yasser Arafat's brave 
but rash move necessitated a desperate effort to economically 
prop up the peace deal after a wider consultative process was 
by-passed. On the Israeli side, the Labour-led coalition now 
finds itself stranded between barbed wires on the deal with 
Syria. 
  The debate in India, and in due course in Pakistan and among 
Kashmiri elements, will make movement on an eventual deal 
ponderous but once made will ensure that it sticks. For long, 
Governments in India did their own private running of policy, 
without adequate input from the large number of specialist 
studies on the subject. 
  It is extraordinary that a Government that calls for 
transparency at the UN on decision making is not obliged to do 
so for its own people. The holes have been exposed not only by 
the debate following Ms. Raphel's remarks but also by the 
British Foreign Secretary, Mr. Douglas Hurd's broadly similar 
remarks. 
  Parallel message: The essential parallel message 
from West Asia, applied to Kashmir, is to forget the biblical 
times and 45-year-old resolutions and make recent agreements 
work, or else improve upon them. In other words, give up 
maximalist dreams. It may not be of much satisfaction to New 
Delhi and Islamabad that many Arab and Islamic governments feel 
the same way. 
  Kashmir's 2nd century B.C. Buddhism, its 14th century 
transfer to muslim rule, its accession in 1947, the UN 
resolutions of the late 1940s -- none of these is relevant. Like 
the Arab-Israeli entanglement everyone is sitting on 10 layers 
of history that does not resolve but guide. 
  The one common thread running through every editorial or 
commentary in the Indian and foreign media, and in conferences 
abroad is that Kashmir is the main obstacle to peace between 
India and Pakistan. This is a big gain for Pakistan's repeated 
plea that the dispute is a "core" problem. 
  India has made little if any ground in lumping together all 
problems between India and Pakistan. The omniscient claims and 
attitude of various governments in New Delhi, to the exclusion 
of academic inputs, have led to taking stagnant and irrelevant 
positions in the international fora. Some telling debating 
points have been missed. 
  A relevant question: For instance Mr. Amar 
Saksena, the Legal Counsellor to an international bank in West 
Asia, has in an essay to a regional paper raised a valid point. 
If only Kashmiris could decide Kashmir's fate, he argues, "why 
and pursuant to which legal right did Pakistan cede Kashmiri 
territory to China." In all the years of monitoring Indian and 
Pakistani positions in Arab and Islamic conferences one has 
never heard India making this searching argument. 
  It must be conceded that India's policy in Washington has 
paid dividends. It was no mean feat to wean a close ally and 
bringing it to the brink of declaring Pakistan a terrorist 
state. But the flaw in India is that it appears to have elevated 
the U.S. to the status of chief arbiter on terrorism in the 
sub-continent. That has now backfired. 
  India corroborated mindlessly on U.S. intentions against 
Libya. India had expected that if at the UN Security Council it 
looked at Libya and Iraq through the U.S. prism, the pay-off 
would be Pakistan being labelled a terrorist state. 
  Backbone non-existent: The Indian official 
spokesman's unprincipled statement after Mr. Bill Clinton's 
Cruise missile attack on Iraq -- where he reminded that India 
too faced cross-border terrorism -- must rank as the most 
begging request New Delhi made to the U.S. 
  Consequently, when Ms. Raphel downgraded Kashmiri terrorism 
and labelled it as "political consciousness," the bottom fell 
out of India's looking up to the U.S. as the judge of terrorism 
on the subcontinent. Pakistan had abstained on the Security 
Council Resolution 883 tightening the Libyan sanctions and is 
none the worse for it. 
  It's amusing that all these years, the Indian political 
establishment complained of neglect from the U.S., but when a 
new administration, dubbed by Mr. George Bush as being run by 
"two bozos," switches on, the U.S. is branded as an unwanted 
do-gooder. 
  The political establishment do not ask it who, in the first 
place, invited the U.S. into the terrorism issue. India forgets 
Mr. Sharad Pawar's remark of India winning the war without 
firing a shot, when Pakistan was put on the so called watch list. 
  U.S. is out of it: Ms. Raphel's prodding remarks 
have also ensured that the U.S. is out of the Kashmir peace 
process. Her remarks have injured public sentiment and now that 
the public and the media will debate the subject neither is 
likely to allow the Government to use the U.S. in the dispute. 
  Indo-U.S. differences lie primarily in issues concerning 
space, non-proliferation, missiles, trade related agreements, 
among others. At the business and public level there was a 
tremendous forward leap. It is in the public diplomacy domain 
that the relationship has suffered. 
  That is perhaps the major reason why the U.S. is backing 
off. 
To wit, on November 9 at his briefing the State Department's 
spokesman talked about the bilateral relationship as "one that 
is considered among the most important in the region.... if not 
in the world itself" and is of the "utmost importance" to this 
administration. 
  The added clarification, that the disputed area includes 
those parts of Jammu and Kashmir ceded to or in possession of 
China, suggest a recognition of one of India's main arguments, 
well put across by the foreign office -- that the country's 
concerns have to be understood in its Asian (China) construct. 
Whether, by including China the U.S. intends to include it in 
the overall South Asian security regime remains to be seen. 
  Since four years India has tried everything to give Kashmir 
a 
non profile internationally. It may now turn out that whatever 
motivated the Hazratbal operation, has done the gravest damage 
to an old Indian Kashmir policy. 
  An entirely new element has to be reckoned with by both 
India 
and Pakistan. In many ways a whole new ball game is beginning in 
a new ball park. And with new rules. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59849 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94039" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cooperation With Russia in Science Reviewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AS0079A Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA in English 18 Nov 93 p 11 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0079A </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vinay Pandey: "Russian Backing in Science </F>
Continues"] 
  [Text] New Delhi, Nov. 17. Russia's dithering on the 
transfer of the cryogenic technology to India notwithstanding, 
the two countries are still each other's largest partners in 
science and technology. And the scale of their scientific 
co-operation is probably the largest between any two countries 
in the world. 
  The ties have been further strengthened by the 
just-concluded 
visit of a high-level delegation of Russian officials and 
members of the Russian Academy of Sciences, led by the Russian 
deputy prime minister and academy president, Mr Yuri Osipov. The 
most significant event of the visit was the signing of the 
agreement for a joint venture for design and production of light 
transport aircraft (LTA). 
  Before his departure to Moscow, Mr Osipov told this 
reporter: 
"Certain parts of the cryogenic contract signed in 1991 do not 
go with the present Russian law. But our scientific co-operation 
covers a vast range of areas. We have a lot in common. We mean a 
lot to each other." 
  During its 10-day stay here, the Russian team did not hold 
any specific talks on the cryogenic deal, Mr Osipov said. But 
there was a general agreement between the two countries that 
discussions on the issue would continue, he added. 
  As both countries are hard pressed for funds, the emphasis 
in 
their scientific collaboration is on programmes of mutual 
economic benefit. There were also efforts to involve private 
companies from both sides, Mr Osipov said. A case in point is 
the involvement of a private company, whose name has not yet 
been revealed, in the light aircraft programme. 
  The 22-member Russian delegation included an academician Mr 
G. I. Marchuk, a former president of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences and academician, Mr A. M. Prokorov, one of the Nobel 
prize winners for the invention of laser. This was the fifth 
meeting under the ILTP [Integrated Long Term Programme]. Each 
country hosts the meeting every alternate year. This year's 
talks have revived the warmth between the science establishments 
of the two countries, which, as one Indian scientist put it, 
"had lost their touch after the break-up of the Soviet Union." 
  The scientific co-operation between the two countries is 
covered under the ILTP agreement signed in 1987 by India and the 
former Soviet Union. The two countries are working jointly on 
about 100 projects. The programme involves 55 institutions in 
India and 71 in Russia. The Indian side has 240 co-ordinators 
and the Russian side 172. There has been an exchange of 1,600 
scientists since the programme began. 
  The 16 areas covered under ILTP include biotechnology, 
material sciences, computers, radio-physics and ecology. 
  The light transport aircraft is being developed by the 
Bangalore-based National Aerospace Laboratory (NAL) of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and the 
Russian Myashischev Design Bureau. The 14-seater aircraft, 
called Saras-Duet, will have a Canadian twin-turbo-propelled 
engine with a range of 2,000 km and speed of 550 to 600 kmph. 
  It is 50:50 partnership between India and Russia. The cost 
of 
development as well as two aircraft is estimated at $30 million. 
The first prototype is likely to be ready by 1995. 
  Another important area of co-operation is the blue laser 
equipment which can be used for curing TB. Trials under the 
joint programme are going on at the Mehrauli TB Hospital in 
Delhi and Choithram Hospital in Indore. The technique involves 
insertion of optical fibres into the veins through a laser beam 
passed to the affected part. A few terminal cases have been 
cured during trials but how the technique works is yet an enigma 
for scientists. This is probably the reason why the health 
ministry has not yet cleared it. 
  One of the PARAM supercomputers developed by C-DAC, Pune, 
has 
been put up for demonstration at the Institute of Computer-aided 
Design in Moscow. The Moscow institute is developing software 
using PARAM. The software is to be sold in India and Russia, as 
well as third countries. 
  The two countries are also working on a joint programme to 
develop electronic earthquake sensors. The project taken up by 
the Chandigarh-based Central Scientific Instrument Organisation, 
attempts to marry India's expertise in electronics to the very 
effective sensors, developed by the Russians. The electronic 
sensors will be used by the Indian Meteorological Department for 
seismic surveys. 
  The joint programme on catalysis could be useful in 
pollution 
control as well as production of petroleum or high-quality wax 
from methane. The Novosibirsk Institute of Siberia the 
Dhanbad-based Central Fuel Research Institute and the National 
Research and Development Council are working jointly on the 
development of such catalysts. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59850 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94040" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> IRAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rafsanjani's Battles With Radicals Explained </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LA0008A London AL-MAJALLAH in Arabic 19 Sep 93 pp 44-47 </F>
<F P=103> 94LA0008A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-MAJALLAH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr 'Ali-Reza Nuri-Zadeh: "Rafsanjani's Latest </F>
Battle With Khomeyni's Heirs"] 
  [Text] About four months ago, the well-known hardline 
newspaper SALAM published a front-page article under the 
headline "The Huge Financial Scandal in Italy is Spreading 
Beyond Its Borders." The article contained an explanation of the 
secret commercial deals between Italian companies well-known for 
their connections to the Mafia and foreign countries, among them 
Iran, and the volume of commissions paid to some of the 
officials of the countries doing business with those companies. 
SALAM indicated that a prominent official of the Iranian 
National Oil Company in the Shah's day served as a middleman 
between an Italian company and the Ministry of Petroleum to 
build the new Bandar 'Abbas refinery in return for several 
million dollars. After the publication of the SALAM report this 
past 12 May, President Hashemi-Rafsanjani ordered one of his 
advisers to conduct an investigation into what the newspaper had 
published, and asked the Minister of Islamic Guidance Dr. 'Ali 
Larijani to issue a press directive to the editors in chief of 
all publications for them not to print any news or report 
containing any reference to the subject of the commissions. 
About two months later, the president's adviser submitted a 
comprehensive report on the press report and the parties that 
had been behind its publication. 
  According to a source close to the presidency, the report of 
President Rafsanjani's adviser was extremely provocative. It 
made it clear that there were some hardliners with highly placed 
positions in the ruling structure, particularly in the economic 
and financial institutions, who with the help of agents and 
middlemen, had been able to amass great wealth by making 
commercial deals with large European and American companies, and 
obtaining huge commissions. The report revealed the involvement 
of a former employee of the Islamic Consultative Council and 
former adviser to the Minister of Post, Telegraph &amp; 
Telephone, 
and an Italian national who had been a doorman at the Italian 
Embassy in Tehran, in a massive scam. It also indicated that 
they had set up a corporation in Europe to fund newspapers and 
publications opposed to the policies of the government in Iran. 
The report did not rule out that SALAM was one of the papers 
enjoying the financial and political support of that corporation. 
<H5>  The Newspaper Funding Corporation </H5>
  While the news of the arrest of SALAM's editor in chief, 
Engineer 'Abbas 'Abdi, on August 26, was a surprise for most 
Iranians, those close to the presidency took the news with 
complete calm. 'Abdi's name had come up several times before his 
arrest, in the meetings held at the presidency to discuss the 
activity and moves of the students following the line of the 
imam group, and those calling themselves hardliners, and the 
scope of their involvement in financial and administrative 
corruption, and the misuse of positions to acquire wealth. In 
fact, the investigations of President Rafsanjani's adviser 
entrusted with looking into the SALAM article on financial 
scandals, confirmed that Engineer 'Abbas 'Abdi had connections 
with a person known as H.B., now detained by Iran's security 
authorities. He was one of the participants in the corporation 
for funding newspapers opposed to the government. The imprisoned 
person, who had been a translator for the Ministry of Petroleum 
and the Iranian Majles, confessed that his partners were using 
the money that they had obtained through commercial deals with 
foreign companies in the field of stirring up public opinion 
against Rafsanjani's government, and spreading despair and 
misery among the people. The revolutionary public prosecutor has 
not yet disclosed, however, whether or not Engineer 'Abdi will 
be tried for violating the publishing and press code or for 
having defamed the president and ministers, or whether he will 
face charges unrelated to his mission. However, Mohammad 
Musavi-Kho'iniha, the director of SALAM, and spiritual leader of 
the students following the line of the imam, who held the 
American democrats hostage in Iran in 1979, believes that the 
arrest of 'Abdi occurred after SALAM began to defend the values 
and sacrosanct principles of the revolution, and refused to 
bargain over what 'Abdi and his colleagues considered to be the 
unchangeable principles of the revolution. 
  In an interview with SALAM, the paper's director, Kho'iniha, 
said that the arrest of its editor in chief was an illegitimate 
act and represented a clear violation of the publications law. 
He added that he was himself responsible for what SALAM had 
published recently about Ayatollah Montazeri, and comments about 
him, and THAT the criticisms of President Rafsanjani's economic 
programs, and his recent Friday prayer sermon, were the reason 
for Abdi's arrest. 
  SALAM published, in its August 30 issue, an article about 
the 
way Engineer 'Abdi was arrested, saying that security men broke 
into his house, and threatened his wife, saying that she must be 
silent and not interfere with the process of enforcing the law, 
then bound 'Abdi's hands and took him to an unknown place. It is 
notable that 'Abdi's arrest coincided with the arrest of Mehdi 
Nasiri, the editor in chief of the mass-circulation KEYHAN, on 
the charge of defaming the top judicial authority, Ayatollah 
Mohammad Yazdi, although judicial authorities freed him after 
just one day in return for a financial guarantee, while 'Abdi's 
detention by the central security agency has continued without 
any announcement of the reasons for his arrest. 
<H5>  The Postponed Struggle </H5>
  The question now in Iranian politics is: is Rafsanjani 
actually determined to end the role of the extremists by 
arresting two of their senior figures? And has the struggle 
begun, which was expected to break out after Khomeyni's death, 
between those who want to turn the revolution into an actual 
form of government, and those who believe in the continuity of 
the revolution, and the ongoing revolution. 
  In order to answer this question, we must first get to know 
the parties to the struggle in Iran and sketch a clear picture 
of the governing structure today and the system Rafsanjani 
wants, and who would implement it with him. 
  Since the death of Khomeyni, there has been mounting talk in 
the Western press about the wings competing for power in Iran. 
These newspapers generally point out that there is a wing led by 
Rafsanjani--the pragmatists--that seeks reconciliation with the 
West, the rebuilding of the Iranian economy, and the restoration 
of Iran's rightful place in the region and the world. This 
faction is in constant conflict with the hardline wing led by 
former Interior Minister 'Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, who formed an 
alliance with former speaker of the Majles Mehdi Karrubi, former 
public prosecutor Mohammad Musavi-Kho'iniha, director of the 
Strategic Studies Center, and director of SALAM. The Western 
press considers Ahmad Khomeini to be the major supporter of this 
movement, while the position of the leader of the revolution 
'Ali Khamene'i is still unclear. Sometimes he supports 
Rafsanjani and at others announces his support for the 
hardliners. 
  This asessment of what is occurring in the corridors of 
power 
in Iran since the death of Khomeyni is oversimplified, lacking 
sufficient evidence, first of all, for the true reasons for the 
conflict, and secondly, the truth behind the loyalties of those 
considered to be pragmatists, and those known as hardliners. 
<H5>  The Moderate and the Hardliner </H5>
  Khomeyni himself was a hardliner and a moderate at the same 
time. He was hardline with his enemies, and those who dared to 
criticize his actions (Shari'atmadari, Qotbzadeh, Bani-Sadr); 
but Khomeyni did not believe in the economic solutions the 
hardliners are now proposing (the system of allotment and the 
whole socialist path). In his writings, Khomeyni constantly 
affirmed the need to safeguard Muslims' wealth, oppose land 
reform and the nationalization of the private sector, despite 
the fact that the revolutionary authorities confiscated the 
money and property of more than 2 million Iranians after the 
revolution. 
  The Assembly of Experts granted Khomeyni's powers, after his 
death, to his successor 'Ali Khamene'i, at the same time raising 
the latter's religious standing to ayatollah, although Khamene'i 
was young (compared to most senior ayatollahs in Iran, whose 
ages range from 80 to 100). The fact that there were dozens of 
clergymen who were more knowledgeable and qualified than he in 
the Majles and heading up government institutions, caused the 
Islamic leader of the revolution to have a lack of weight and 
importance versus the mounting strength of the power centers 
that Khomeyni had been able to destroy with a mere gesture of 
his hand. Khamene'i was forced to include them in his decision 
making in order to hold onto his position. This is how the 
leader of the revolution has, since Khomeyni's death, moved to 
the left in the morning and to the right at night, trying to 
please everyone. This was at a time when Rafsanjani needed 
legitimate cover for carrying out his reform projects. Given the 
two-track position of the leader of the revolution, Rafsanjani's 
opponents were able to form powerful blocs in Majles, the 
mosques, and universities, and in some of the revolution's 
institutions, such as the Revolution Guards and the Basij 
(volunteers). While Rafsanjani succeeded in the Majles elections 
held last year, in keeping some of the figures of the powers 
opposed to him out of the Majles, but the hardline forces have 
kept their other power bases. 
  A glance at the position and possibilities of some of the 
pillars of the anti-Rafsanjani movement reveals the reasons for 
the Iranian president's failure to achieve his ambition to 
transform the revolution into a state and implement his reform 
programs. 
  1. Hojjat ol-Eslam Ahmad Khomeyni, Khomeyni's son, is a 
member of the National Security Council, representing the leader 
of the revolution. He is also a member of the committee for 
identifying the interests responsible for solving disputes 
between the executive authority (the government) and Majles. He 
manages a financial empire from Jamaran, in northern Tehran, and 
directs his father's complex, which has become a major economic, 
religious, touristic, and cultural complex, bringing Ahmad 
Khomeini profits estimated at millions of dollars annually. 
  2. Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, former speaker of the Majles and 
the Shahid Institute, who has great influence in broad sectors 
of the Guard, and the wounded and handicapped from the war. His 
wife still heads up the health department of his famous 
institute. 
  3. Former Interior Minister Hojjat ol-Eslam 'Ali Akbar 
Mohtashemi, and director of the magazine BAYAN. Although he is 
banned from travel, his contacts with revolutionary forces 
outside Iran are ongoing. Last month, and during a visit of 
Hezbollah leaders to Iran, security authorities revealed that 
senior Hezbollah leaders visited Mohtashemi and spoke to him for 
several hours. 
  4. Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammad Musavi-Kho'iniha, public 
prosecutor and leader of the last pilgrimage [to Mecca], 
director of the Strategic Studies Center, adviser to the leader 
of the revolution, and spiritual guide to the students following 
the line of the imam. Bear in mind that 30 of the students that 
took part in the captivity of the American diplomats now hold 
high-level positions in the Iranian diplomatic service, among 
them Assistant Foreign Minister Hosein Sheikholislam. 
  5. Ayatollah 'Ali Meshkini, leader of the Assembly of 
Experts 
that is responsible for choosing the commander and Islamic 
leader, or removing him; he also has the power to amend the 
constitution. 
  6. Former Minister of Intelligence Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammad 
Mohammadi Reyshahri, Meshkini's son-in-law, leader of the 
Iranian pilgrimage mission, and Khamene'i's representative. 
These people have dozens of followers in the Majles, the Guard, 
government departments, and Iranian embassies abroad. 
  It is said that one of Rafsanjani's advisers on national 
security and Majles deputy Dr. Mohammad Javad Larijani, every 
time he approaches Rafsanjani on settling a problem, whether 
dealing with the opposition, or with Western countries, or the 
economic ills, we see secret forces move quickly to foil them. 
So far, these forces have been able to prevent the attainment of 
any positive change in the method of governing. 
  Has Rafsanjani actually begun his final war against these 
centers of power? AL-MAJALLAH's sources in the Iranian capital 
indicate that the summoning of Musavi-Kho'iniha by the public 
prosecutor's office to give evidence before judges, with the aim 
of hearing the complaints against him, represents a turning 
point in Rafsanjani's method of dealing with his foes. The 
outcome of Kho'iniha's trial, of Engineer 'Abdi and of the 
hardline KEYHAN's editor in chief Mehdi Nasiri, will make clear 
whether the Iranian president is determined to expel Khomeyni's 
heirs from power for good, or whether secret forces will again 
move to save Kho'iniha and his partners, to show that the 
revolution goes on--and that it is Rafsanjani who must back his 
bags and get off the revolutionary train. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59851 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94041" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> IRAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Leadership Structure, Dynamics, Allegiances Explained </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LA0010A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 19 Oct 93 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94LA0010A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ja'afar Ra'id: "Iran's Inner Leadership"] </F>
  [Text] Inside Iran is not as depicted. Many outside 
observers of the Iranian scene fall into this error on many 
occasions. Iran today is not like any other country in the 
world. It is a country that is not governed by political 
parties, but by political tendencies that influence the 
direction of its domestic and foreign policies. These political 
trends enjoy considerable influence, whose effects are 
manifested in all public economic, social, cultural, and 
political areas. 
  Moreover, Iran is not under military rule, with senior 
officers sitting at the top, using junior officers as assistants 
to manage affairs, whose wills are enforced by military units 
deployed throughout the country. However, the armed forces, 
especially the Revolution Guard and the forces subordinate to 
the Guard, are respected everywhere, including the highest 
official circles. 
  In Iran, political blocs compete, but they are not political 
in the complete sense of the word. They are political-religious 
blocs, led by strong religious leaders who have specific 
political orientations. The size of these blocs increase or 
diminish in accordance with circumstances, and their influence 
waxes and wanes accordingly. 
  Iran is under a parliamentary system of government, but the 
Islamic Consultative Majles--i.e., the Iranian Parliament--does 
not have all the powers enjoyed by parliaments in countries with 
parliamentary systems. There is a higher body called the Council 
to Preserve the Constitution, which scrutinizes all 
parliamentary decisions and enactments for ratification. If it 
finds they conflict with the provisions of the Islamic shari'ah 
or with the articles of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran, it refuses ratification and sends them back to the 
Majles to be amended in accordance with the Council to Preserve 
the Constitution's recommendations. 
  The matter does not end there. There is another body that is 
higher still than those two (the Islamic Consultative Majles and 
the Council to Preserve the Constitution) in breadth of powers. 
It is the Committee for Discerning Expediency for the System. 
This committee or council is composed of the heads of the three 
legislative, judicial, and executive branches, the chairman of 
the Council to Preserve the Constitution, and the representative 
of the velayat-e faqih [rule by religious jurist]. At the 
present time, this representative is Hojjat-ol-Eslam Ahmed 
Khomeyni, son of the Imam. In addition, there are other 
individuals from high organizations. This committee is set apart 
from the Islamic Consultative Majles and the Council to Preserve 
the Constitution, i.e., its decision is valid and determines 
whatever issues are submitted directly to it. 
  Moreover, there are other councils and bodies: the Assembly 
of Experts, with nearly 100 members who are elected directly by 
the Iranian people. This assembly is tantamount to a constituent 
assembly, and its members meet as necessary to amend certain 
articles of the Constitution, which was written by the assembly 
itself, or for the purpose of choosing the country's leader 
(velayat-e faqih), as occurred when it chose Ayatollah Seyyed 
'Ali Khamene'i for this position--the highest position in the 
nation. The position of prime minister, which used to exist, was 
abolished. It had been occupied by Engineer Mir Hoseyn Musavi. 
Now all executive branch responsibilities rest on the shoulders 
of the president of the republic, who--at the present time--is 
Hojjat-ol-Eslam 'Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani. 
  Khamene'i stands at the pinnacle, with vast powers that are 
higher than the powers of the councils, bodies, and agencies, 
without exception. The leader of the country, whom, these days, 
the Iranian media customarily call the "leader of the 
revolution" or "leader of the Islamic Revolution," is content 
with this title over several other sobriquets that were used 
before. 
  The leader of the revolution, Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali 
Khamene'i 
is, at the same time, the supreme commander of the armed forces. 
His position is permanent for life, as opposed to the term of 
president of the republic, which lasts only four years and can 
be renewed only once. 
  Hashemi-Rafsanjani is serving the second and final term of 
his presidency. From this point of departure, he is working hard 
to succeed in his plan to rebuild the country. He tours cities 
and rural areas, urging the people to participate actively in 
carrying out the rebuilding projects. He has also given priority 
to economic affairs in his domestic and foreign policies. He 
recently stated that he was determined to make maximum efforts 
at cooperation with the rest of the member OPEC states to fight 
against any lowering of prices. In pursuit of this objective, he 
telephoned the custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, and certain other heads of member states in 
that organization. The contacts resulted in the fact that the 
recent conference of those countries in Geneva achieved certain 
positive results. Evidence indicates that efforts were 
successful to prepare the groundwork to hold a summit conference 
between the Iranian president and the custodian of the two holy 
mosques, to study bilateral relations and oil affairs in 
general. It is certain that economic issues, especially in the 
petroleum field, will be given high priority. 
  However, behind all of President 'Ali Akbar 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani's domestic and foreign activities, which have 
attracted attention, a critical eye watches very calmly, without 
causing any clamor or uproar. This is the movement of the inner 
leadership of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is moving slowly 
forward, taking hold of the destiny of all affairs in Iran. It 
is the leadership of Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i 
which--these days--is exerted, at times, determinedly and 
resolutely from behind the scenes, and publicly and overtly at 
other times. This leadership is gathering all the reins into its 
hand and has dropped some of the titles and slogans that are no 
longer appropriate in the present circumstances. Its sole 
concern is to rescue the ship of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
from domestic and foreign perils. 
  We shall leave the details of this event to another 
occasion. 
  It is worth noting that officials responsible for the 
sensitive ministries in Hashemi-Rafsanjani's government are 
persons well known for their loyalty to Ayatollah 'Ali 
Khamene'i. Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati, the foreign minister, was 
Khamene'i's choice to be prime minister, when Khamene'i first 
took over the presidency during Khomeyni's regime. However, the 
Iranian Majles decided that day to reject his nomination for 
that important post. President Khamene'i was forced to give the 
prime minister's job to Eng. Mir Hoseyn Musavi, with Velayati 
taking on the Foreign Ministry. He has remained in the foreign 
minister's post to the present day, that is, for 12 years, 
maintaining that serious portfolio throughout Khamene'i's first 
and second terms, and during Rafsanjani's first term. The 
Foreign Ministry has been returned to Velayati for Rafsanjani's 
second term. Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati is a pediatrician, who has 
become skillful in dialogue and is considered the most loyal of 
Khamene'i's men. 
  The role of Hojjat-ol-Eslam 'Ali Fallahian, the minister of 
information, is a strong one at the present time. He is one of 
the leader of the revolution, Hojjat-ol-Eslam [as published] 
Khamene'i's, elite. Following those two officials in status is 
Minister of Interior 'Ali Mohammad Besharati-[Jahromi], who 
enjoys the confidence of Khamene'i, and is one of his closest 
proteges. There are a number of other ministers who rely on the 
leader of the revolution, not to mention the Armed Forces, 
including the Army, Revolution Guard, gendarmerie, and police, 
who are directly subordinate to his leadership. 
  These matters must be taken into account by anyone who 
wishes 
truly to understand the course of present events in Iran. In my 
opinion, he who would follow the course of radical developments 
in Iran must follow--from now on--the steps of Hojjat-ol-Eslam 
'Ali Khamene'i, who is most skillful. Recently, he has been 
content in his addresses as leader of the revolution to back 
away from other titles, some of which have raised certain 
sensitivities. Follow his steps in various Iranian fields of 
endeavor. In order to make a more precise evaluation, we need to 
look at Khamene'i's past. He is from the city of Mashhad, the 
capital city of Khorasan, where he was born in 1929 into a 
well-known religious family. He received his introduction to 
religious sciences in Islamic jurisprudence in the same city, 
and in Qom, studying under senior marja'iat [religious 
authorities], such as Ayatollah Borujerdi and Ayatollah Milani, 
as well as Ayatollah Khomeyni. His roots go back to the city of 
Khamene'ieh in Iranian Azarbaijan. 
  After finishing his traditional religious studies, he turned 
to teaching Islamic jurisprudence and interpretation in the two 
religious cities of Qom and Mashhad. From the beginning, he 
immersed himself in the struggle of religious ulema in 1952, as 
a supporter of Ayatollah Khomeyni. He took part in the political 
struggle for religious groups. From mid-1976, he was one of 
those who were drawing up the principal guidelines to create a 
party organization, which later were crystallized in the form of 
the Islamic Republican Party. This party emerged onto the 
Iranian political scene after the success of the revolution. 
  Khamene'i was one of those depended upon by Ayatollah 
Khomeyni and was an object of his esteem. He was a permanent 
member of the Revolution Command Council [RCC] and was also in 
charge of matters to do with the Revolution Guard. Later, during 
the last part of Eng. Mehdi Bazargan's government, he was 
appointed deputy defense minister for coordination between 
Revolution Guard affairs and the regular army. However, 
Khamene'i resigned from this post to enter the Iranian elections. 
  A short while after the revolution, that is, 1 April 1980, 
Imam Khomeyni appointed Khamene'i imam for the city of Tehran to 
lead thousands of Friday worshipers. He is still the principal 
imam for Friday prayers, and the rest--such as Rafsanjani, 
Musavi-Ardebili, Jannati, and Yazdi--lead those who perform 
Friday prayers in Tehran in their capacity as acting Friday imam 
or temporary imam, according to Iranian terminology. 
  During the Iranian Revolution, Khamene'i and his colleagues, 
Ayatollah Seyyed Mohammad Beheshti (a clever religious and 
political leader, who lost his life in the mass assassination to 
which more than 70 senior revolutionary leaders were subjected, 
in the explosion of a building where they were meeting) and 
Hojjat-ol-Eslam Akbar Hashemi, established the Islamic 
Republican Party. Khamene'i was elected deputy to Beheshti, the 
party's first secretary general, responsible for the party's 
newspaper, JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI. 
  Ayatollah Khamene'i's political life encompasses the 
following stages since the Iranian Islamic Revolution, and he 
was successful at each stage: 
  1. Member of the RCC. 
  2. Imam of Friday prayers in Tehran. 
  3. Deputy defense minister. 
  4. Imam Khomeyni's representative to the Revolution Guard. 
  5. Representative of the leader of the revolution, Imam 
Khomeyni, to the Supreme Defense Council; later, chairman of 
this council after he became president of the republic. 
  6. Secretary general of Islamic Republican Party. 
  7. President of the republic, and member of the Council to 
Amend the Constitution. 
  8. Successor to Imam Khomeyni after his death. He enjoys the 
highest authority and broadest powers in the Iranian Islamic 
Republic regime. 
  One of the most important facts of Khamene'i's life concerns 
27 June 1981, when he was the target of an assassination plot 
organized by the Mojahedin-e Khalq. An explosive charge was 
concealed in a cassette player, which exploded while Khamene'i 
was speaking in a mosque in one of the southern areas of Tehran. 
However, the explosion did not take his life, but did result in 
paralysis in his right arm. 
  On 2 October 1981, he was elected president of the Iranian 
Islamic Republic, following the death of President Mohammad 'Ali 
Raja'i in the incident of the blowing up of the cabinet referred 
to earlier. Khamene'i was reelected to that post in 1985 and, in 
the second week of June 1989, that is, a week after the demise 
of Imam Khomeyni, Khamene'i was elected by the Assembly of 
Experts to be Imam, Khomeyni's successor and leader of the 
country. 
  Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i, the Azerbaijani, is fluent 
in Farsi and Arabic, and is a devotee of literature, philosophy, 
Sufism, and music. These qualities endear him to the hearts of 
Iranians, who are lovers of poetry and art. He is well known for 
his integrity. 
  We do not want, at this point, to discuss this man's life; 
we 
just offer a brief summary to help understand his identity and 
political orientations. In conclusion, one can stress that the 
dual nature of leadership in Iran, to which I referred and to 
which others have many times referred in the pages of AL-SHARQ 
AL-AWSAT, has begun to disappear from the Iranian scene. Freedom 
of action is emerging for Khamene'i's one-man leadership. 
Certain experts in Iranian affairs have called attention to 
this. Amir Taheri dealt with this matter some weeks ago in the 
opinion page. Therefore, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT is a leader in 
shedding light on events before they occur. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59852 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea001___94042" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> IRAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Regime Policies Viewed in Context of Words, Deeds </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AE0616A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 20 Sep 93 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 93AE0616A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amir Tahiri: "The Iranian Policies...in Context </F>
of Words and Deeds"] 
  [Text] According to what has been reported, the mullahs 
[clerics] in Iran have started a "friendly" offensive in order 
to end the diplomatic isolation of their country and to attract 
foreign capital, as well as other forms of aid to the stagnating 
Iranian economy. 
  During the past two weeks, the mullahs have contacted three 
major European countries. In that respect, one of the mullahs, a 
brother of President Rafsanjani, visited Germany where he held 
three meetings with government officials. His message there was 
that the Islamic Republic was a responsible member of the 
international community and that it was ready to open a "new 
chapter" with the West. 
  Also, as part of that offensive, the secretary-general of 
the 
French Foreign Ministry, paid a 48-hour visit to Tehran where 
his Iranian hosts assured him that the Islamic Republic opposed 
terrorism and that it would not do anything to stir trouble in 
the region. 
  Finally, Iran welcomed Michael Berton, a senior official in 
the British Foreign Ministry, who, according to the official 
version, had come to discuss the death warrant issued by 
Khomeyni against the British writer, Salman Rushdie. 
  Such visits are in themselves quite positive, and every move 
concerning the normalization of Iran's foreign policy, should be 
welcomed. 
  However, what in fact is needed is a real change in Tehran's 
thinking. But so far, there is no indication that this is going 
to happen any time soon. 
  The crux of the matter concerning the mullahs can be 
explained by an Iranian folk story about an aristocrat who had 
set on a difficult journey in winter time during the Middle 
Ages. One night, the aristocrat and his servant stopped to rest 
in a little house along the road. 
  The weather was very cold. The aristocrat was shivering like 
a tree shaken by an autumn wind. The servant did his best to 
cover him with all the blankets he could find. But the 
aristocrat was still cold; he screamed at the servant with 
arrogance and despair saying: "Can't you look for few additional 
things to cover me with?" 
  The servant was embarrassed because the only thing left was 
the saddle of the donkey. He wondered how could an aristocrat 
sleep covered by a saddle. Nevertheless, the servant gathered 
his courage and told his master about what was available. 
  The master yelled: "Stupid...bring the damned thing, but do 
not mention its name, and do not tell anybody about it!" 
  The moral of this story is obvious, namely, that one has 
sometimes to sacrifice appearances out of necessity. The 
aristocrat was not ready to freeze and die of cold because 
sleeping under a donkey's saddle might hurt his dignity. 
  The revolutionary mullahs in Iran are in a similar position. 
They need to abandon their slogans so as to remain in power as a 
class of their own, in a world which is changing in a 
fascinating way. 
  And a number of them are ready to change. 
  President Rafsanjani once even said that he was ready to 
exchange his mullah's clothes for those worn by ordinary 
Iranians so as to remain in politics. 
  He was, in fact, realistic enough to make secret deals with 
the United States and to organize the freeing of the Western 
hostages who were held captive on Khomeyni's orders. Also, it 
was Rafsanjani who pressed the old angry man "to swallow the 
poison" [bite the bullet] and sign the cease-fire with Saddam 
Husayn. It was also partly thanks to Rafsanjani that Iran 
refused to conclude a foolish alliance with Iraq following the 
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. 
  However, other mullahs believe that giving up their slogans 
would mean a dangerous loss of face to a regime with such a 
narrow basis of power, especially at a time when the social and 
economic crises are so acute. 
  Still, another group of mullahs have suggested using the 
peace agreement between Israel amd the PLO as an excuse to 
launch a "third wave" of Revolution. 
  At the center, between those two groups, there are a few 
mullahs, together with their technocrat aides, and who most of 
the time are related to them by marriage, who advocate a 
compromise solution. Such a solution is derived from the claim 
that "the State," which is represented by Rajsanjani, is 
officially separated from the "revolution," which is led by 
Khamene'i. 
  That was exactly the old deceit that had been used by the 
Soviet Union, and later, China for many years. At certain 
occasions, the late Alexis Kossygine used to speak as prime 
minister, while Leonid Brezhnev used to express opposing views 
as chairman of the Communist Party. Foreign Governments used to 
read the editorials of PRAVDA on the ground that they expressed 
the views of the Communist Party, at the same time those same 
governments were led to believe that it would be better to read 
IZVESTIA in order to understand the position of the Soviet 
Government. 
  That game became a farce to such an extent that Brezhnev 
decided to put an end to it by appointing himself both president 
and chairman of the party. 
  The Iranian version of that same game is as ridiculous. 
During his visit to Tehran last week, Boidevau, raised the 
problem of the threats directed at the former Iranian officials 
living in France. He was told that: "The Government of the 
Islamic Republic has nothing to do with this at all. And that if 
there was any threat, it must have originated with some 
revolutionary institutions that had no relations with the 
government." There is no way to know whether the French diplomat 
believed that excuse, but if he did, then his brain must be 
examined. The Islamic Republic should end this dualist talk and 
adopt clear positions which would leave no doubt on the 
important issues and the policies vital to Iran's interests in 
the region and beyond. 
  The use of "Taqiyah"--i.e., to hide one's beliefs when one 
is 
in a minority among other ideologies--cannot serve as a sound 
basis for an earnest foreign policy. 
  Nor could Iran adopt two policies at the same time: one for 
the government and another for the revolutionary institutions. 
Such duality involves a great danger to the people as a whole. 
It is currently playing that game concerning the 
Israeli-Palestinian Agreement. The mullahs are entitled to 
oppose the agreement, but their position should be stated 
clearly because it is not possible to tell foreign visitors one 
thing while "the leaders of the revolution" of the Revolution 
Guards present an opposing view. 
  The Iranian people should be informed through rational 
arguments, and in a precise language, not in slogans, as to why 
the peace agreement between Israel and the PLO would be a bad 
thing to Iran's rights and its national interests; and in what 
way would it hurt Iran if Israel and the PLO decide to put an 
end to their struggle and live in peace. 
  Last week, I asked a number of West European and Asian 
foreign ministers about their opinion concerning the Iranian 
reaction to the Israeli-Palestinian agreement. Their response 
was unanimous, namely, that Iran had acknowledged in private 
that the Agreement was an issue that concerned the two parties, 
and that Iran would not encourage terrorism or violence in the 
Middle East. 
  This is an acceptable position. Iran could say: We are not 
happy with the agreement, and we do not see that it could help 
the Palestinians, yet we would not hinder that process through 
violence. 
  That position would be similar to that adopted by Syria, 
which is favorable to the peace process. Moreover, Syria seeks 
to establish good relations with the United States. 
  Yet, we hear Khamene'i the High Murshed [counselor] repeat 
over and over to the Republican Guards that Israel should be 
wiped out of the map and that Yasir 'Arafat should be extracted 
as "bad grass in the garden"; but he did not care to say what 
are the interests of Iran in all that. 
  There are many people in Iran, among them certain ruling 
mullahs, who are aware that it is dangerous for Iran to be 
singled out as a troublemaker in the region; especially that 
Iran, as any other country, has its own problems which it ought 
to solve before trying to solve the problems of others. 
  The most stupid thing is to instigate unnecessary 
disturbances with the intent to mislead. Iran cannot hinder the 
peace agreement, especially if this latter is accepted by the 
majority of the Palestinians and Israelis. So there is 
absolutely no rational to wish to appear doing something when 
one does not in fact want to do it, nor can he do it, even if he 
wanted to. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59853 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> IRAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Radical Political Change Prescribed for Economic Ills </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LA0009A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 19 Oct 93 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94LA0009A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Column by Amir Tahiri: "The Club of Paris and Iran's </F>
Economic Woes"] 
  [Text] The so-called Club of Paris will convene in a 
special meeting this week to discuss Iran's economic situation. 
The club, comprised of 18 nations ranging from Japan and South 
Korea to Germany and France, has extended credit facilities to 
Iran over the past four or five years. 
  The meeting will be held in absolute secrecy and its 
organizers insist on denying the information media access to its 
proceedings. It is obvious, however, that it will discuss a 
matter of critical importance: Should it be officially declared 
that Iran has stopped paying back its debts? The diplomatic 
phrase "Stopped paying back" is a delicate way of saying that 
the country is bankrupt. Only a few countries, including Zaire 
and North Korea, have so far earned that distinction. 
  It seems that Club members are divided among themselves over 
what to do next. Some say that the worst is over for Iran and 
that it should be allowed new credit in order to begin 
rebuilding its economy and repay old debts. They describe Iran's 
current problems as short term and believe that most of them 
have more to do with monetary liquidity than with deeper 
economic ills. 
  Other members of the Club, however, insist that Iran should 
accede to total reform of its economic system. They say that a 
large portion of Iran's foreign indebtedness, amounting to $40 
billion, is in short-term credit that is difficult to 
reschedule. Those huge amounts were spent largely on the 
purchase of arms and on financing burgeoning imports that 
primarily served the interests of the "parallel economy" 
controlled by Revolution Guard enterprises headed by the ruling 
mullahs. 
  It is significant to note that the acquisition of foreign 
debt is totally prohibited by Khomeyni's constitution and that 
official propaganda has frequently spurned allowing the country 
to become "a city of infidels" since that would be the epitome 
of shame. President Rasfanjani and his dismissed minister of the 
economy, Mohsen Nurbakhsh, take most of the credit for getting 
the ruling mullahs to generally accept the notion of obtaining 
loans abroad, even though they did so without fanfare. 
  Iran's foreign debt problem can be properly dealt with only 
if the constitution is reformed to eliminate the bare threat it 
poses. Until this is done, the government will always be forced 
to deal with that problem in roundabout ways since it must 
continue to deny the existence of Iranian indebtedness in the 
first place but also must, at the same time, raise taxes and 
allocate budgetary appropriations for the repayment of debt 
which is not supposed to exist in the first place. 
  Regardless of what decision Club members reach this month, 
the persisting facts are that Iran's economic problems are a 
function of its political problems and that it is unlikely for 
the Iranian economy to regain health and prosperity without 
radical overhaul of the political system. 
  Iran no doubt has advantages over other Third World 
countries 
in the area of economic development. It does not have the 
problem of runaway overpopulation that burdens such countries as 
Bangladesh, India, and even Pakistan. Nor must it spend large 
amounts of foreign exchange annually in order to purchase oil. 
  Quite the contrary. It in fact has had a foreign-exchange 
source in oil exports amounting to some $200 billion in the past 
14 years. At the time the mullahs took power, the country had 
some $25 billion in foreign currency reserves and deposits 
abroad. Iran also generated additional revenues of $20 billion 
from nonoil exports over the past 14 years, not to mention $40 
billion in foreign loans. The picture thus painted is clear: 
Iran had some $300 billion at its disposal during the past 14 
years and yet its per capita national income declined by 17 
percent from its 1977 levels. 
  A single comparison: Pakistan, whose population is double 
that of Iran and which has no oil revenues, doubled its per 
capita national income during the same period and yet its 
foreign indebtedness stands today at one third of Iran's. 
  Another comparison: South Korea's per capita national 
income, 
which was on par with Iran in 1977, is now triple that of Iran. 
South Korea has no oil and its size is only 1/17th of Iran. 
  [Only] a few countries suffered the economic deterioration 
that befell Iran during the past 14 years and these countries 
include Afghanistan, North Korea, Cuba, Zaire, Ethiopia, the 
Sudan, Liberia, and post-Kuwaiti-invasion Iraq. 
  There is no doubt that Iran's poor economic performance is 
partly attributable to the dislocations caused by the revolution 
followed by the eight-year war with Iraq. The mullahs did not 
gain absolute hold on power until mid-1981 by which time Iran 
was involved in a full-fledged war with Iraq. Furthermore, many 
transgressions took place during the early stages of the 
revolutions. Tens of thousands of Iranian managers, experts, and 
businessmen were executed, exiled, or imprisoned. It did not 
take but one or two years to destroy or deliberately dissipate 
half of the expertise [Iran] accumulated over half a century. A 
comparison with other countries may not reflect a complete 
picture. 
  Rasfanjani announced a policy of normalization because he 
wanted to close the chapter on revolutionary dislocation. His 
was a pragmatic strategy meant to bring an end to executions and 
arbitrary arrests, to allow businessmen to reappear, and to shed 
the government's economic burden through privatization and by 
clipping the wings of the mullahs who drive the black market. 
  The problem, however, was that Rasfanjani was unable, or 
perhaps unwilling, to mobilize populist support for 
normalization containing established interests that benefit from 
a system of political suppression and economic domination. 
  Iran's creditors therefore face a dilemma. They could 
further 
weaken Rasfanjani's position if they continue to supply credit 
facilities without demanding political reform. They make wake up 
one day and realize that they squandered good money after bad as 
they did for years in a number of African and Latin American 
countries. 
  Should Iran be put under credit pressure, as Washington is 
wont to want these days, it may be driven to more extremism and 
any hope of bringing it back into the fold of the world 
community as a "normal member" would be lost. It is easy to 
pursue a policy of imperialistic adventurism whereas it is 
difficult to adopt and implement constructive policies. 
  Iran today is in no position to make a positive contribution 
to world developments. It lacks both the leadership and the 
means necessary. But it still can create a great deal of trouble 
for a large number of nations because it has the means and 
expertise to do so. 
  The situation therefore calls for treating Iran with a mix 
of 
firmness and good will. Future assistance must be linked to 
progress on the road to normalization as explained by Rasfanjani. 
  This is no hope in an early improvement in the Iranian 
economy without changes in its political climate and in the 
general direction of its domestic and foreign policies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59854 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Radicals Go to Tehran To Form New Rejectionist Front </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93AE0603A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 4 Sep p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 93AE0603A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amir Tahiri] </F>
  [Text] While the PLO and Israel are continuing to proceed 
toward realizing the "historical achievement," a group of 
militant organizations have begun sending their envoys to Tehran 
in order to create a new rejectionist front. According to 
reports, 30 organizations have agreed to go in this direction. 
The group will of course include the Lebanese Hizballah Party. 
It will also include delegates from the Sudanese organization 
headed by Hasan al-Turabi, several branches of what is called 
"the Islamic Jihad," in addition to representatives from Hamas. 
It is not yet known whether rejectionists like the Ahmad Jibril 
group and Abu Nidal group will also join the movement. 
  A number of struggle "professionals" from various Western 
countries will also be present. They come under the 
fundamentalist group known as the "East Wimbledon." They are 
individuals fashioned along the lines of the star of a new 
English play. The star is an unemployed man, who, after having 
fallen on hard times for a long time because of the economic 
recession, hits on the idea of getting himself circumcised and 
joining the active fundamentalist groups in Wimbledon. 
  During this month we will see in Tehran a group of people 
who 
would tell us that 'Arafat is a "traitor of Islam" and that the 
Palestinian problem is so important and vital that it should not 
be left in the hands of the Palestinians, for there are people 
there who are more Catholic than the Pope. 
  We became somewhat familiar with the tone that will prevail 
at the demonstration in Tehran through the official media and 
sermons of clerics who usually reflect the government views. 
Many political Middle Eastern cliches are in circulation, such 
as treason, conspiracy, surrender, impostors, imperialist 
agents, backstabbing, demonic plan, and blood-shedding and so on. 
  Fiery and angry speeches are used in order to prevent any 
serious discussion of the deal, since those attending the 
conference did not tell the public what the pros and cons of the 
deal are in their view. 
  A method such as this will encourage the use of man's 
ability 
at criticism. This is a very serious matter for the demagogues, 
because once people start using their brains, then they will 
quickly discover the deceit of the "rejectionists" of all types. 
  It is not difficult to compile militant slogans, 
particularly 
for those who are not directly affected by the Palestinian 
tragedy. Also, it is not difficult for Tehran to sign a few 
documents for its political agents here and there. Also it is 
not difficult to plant a few bombs and fire a few Katyushas. It 
is also very easy to claim heroism at the expense of others, and 
for one to become a revolutionary struggler from a distance and 
let the others fall martyrs so that tears will be shed for them. 
  What's difficult is to produce alternative, harmonious, and 
cohesive policies. It is for this reason in particular that the 
various "rejectionist fronts," which were established in the 
past five decades, have failed, bearing in mind that at a 
certain time Yasir 'Arafat was a member of some of them. 
  The question now is: Can the "Gaza and Jericho first" option 
be a good beginning to realize the Palestinian people's 
legitimate aspirations? The answer in my view is no. I am 
convinced after having closely followed the peace process during 
the past two years that the Palestinians could have obtained a 
better agreement. But I have no right, nor does any foreign 
party, to try to undermine the agreement. The final decision is 
up to the Palestinian people and their leadership. 
  If this agreement has any positive aspects, one of them is 
that for the first time since the mid-forties the Palestinians 
have taken an initiative on their own behalf. In other words, 
the Palestinian people have cut the umbilical cord that linked 
them to the so-called "Arab World," which often exploited their 
problems in order to serve its own interests. 
  Therefore, what is required from the groups meeting in 
Tehran 
is to ask themselves a simple question: How far are they 
prepared to go in order to blow up an agreement they consider 
bad? 
  Discussion and debate are useful and not harmful. The 
Palestinian parties opposing the agreement have every right to 
remove 'Arafat by political means and propose an alternative 
strategy for peace and justice. 
  But what is not permissible is to sow the seeds of a civil 
war in the name of defending the Palestinian problem. For we all 
have seen the grave consequences of this kind of foreign 
intervention in many parts of the world. The massacres being 
committed in Afghanistan are committed by Afghan hands. But 
foreign forces serving their own interest are the manipulators 
behind the scenes. 
  The emergence of Tehran as leader of a new opposition front 
will cause harm rather than good. Iran has absolutely no 
national interest in attempting to blow up an Arab-Israeli 
settlement. Also it is not in its interest to appear in the Arab 
world as a leader of an organization whose strategy is based on 
violence and on suspect ideologies. Iran is a major and regional 
power and, therefore, has to behave accordingly. It is not a 
desert and isolated country like Libya so that it would become a 
laboratory for analyzing the crazy ideas of some people. 
  Finally, it is said that the most serious mistake in 
politics 
is for a politician to do something that he does not need to do. 
This applies to Iran, since nothing is compelling it to embrace 
politicians like al-Turabi and Jibril and the fundamentalists of 
"East Wimbledon." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59855 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   FIS Activists Abroad; Cells Identified </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0053B Algiers ALGERIE ACTUALITE in French 16-22 Nov 93 
pp 6-7 </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0053B </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers ALGERIE ACTUALITE </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Louaifi Bennaoum: "The FIS Overseas"] </F>
  [Text] The FIS [Islamic Salvation Front] has some 500 
activists in foreign lands--many of them salaried cadres--and 
1,500 to 2,000 sympathizers. 
  Anouar Haddam, Dihna Abderrahmane, and Ouli Abdesselam all 
belong to what might be called the foreign "brain trust" of the 
FIS. 
  All three are nuclear physicists. Just coincidence, or 
convergence of interests? 
  The answer lies in the motive behind the assassination of a 
senior officer in the ANP [People's National Army], Redouane 
Sari, a nuclear physicist himself and thus known to the above 
group. 
  Did Mr. Sari rebuff Haddam and his associates when they 
ordered him to join their group?&lt;sup&gt; 1&lt;/sup&gt; 
  The sequel leaves no doubt: Atomic energy and their common 
profession was the tie that linked them. 
  Haddam and his group would instigate a "Chernobyl" within 
the 
Algerian Islamist movement [MIA]. There is no room in their cold 
strategic calculus for the "Djamaat" and their irrationality. 
  Haddam's calculus is that of opportunism and thirst for 
power. 
  The Abassi-Benhadj antinomy has been superseded by a 
polarization that will surely lead to implosion of the 
destructive force that has been at work in Algeria over the last 
two years. 
  The arrest by French police of Algerian-born Islamist 
leaders 
living in France shows that the Islamist movement there is far 
from being, or constituting, a solid organization. 
  The mission of that command post, which looks for all the 
world like an army general staff headquarters, is to prepare and 
design targeted propaganda campaigns. 
  The cell has a substantial budget, in the range of millions 
of U.S. dollars. 
  The Chicago cell has been given the function and title of 
"parliament of the FIS." 
  Algerian Islamists based in the United States have access to 
some of the most sophisticated communications equipment. 
<H5>  Alicante </H5>
  Next in importance after Chicago comes the city of Alicante 
in Spain. There, Haddam has an installation called the "close 
proximity operational command post." The mission of this cell is 
to serve as a relay for communications with Islamist activists 
inside Algeria. 
  Personal contacts take place on a regular basis in Mellilia, 
Nador, and Oujda. 
  The Spanish cell serves as a transit base for "Afghans" 
returning to Algeria. 
  The itinerary is as follows: 
  Oujda-Berguemt (Morocco), then across the Algero-Moroccan 
frontier via Sidi Djillali, El Aricha, Sebdou, and Telagh. At 
Telagh, "Afghans" are taken under the wing of a Saida-based 
logistics network. 
  Profiles of those arrested, the documents seized, and 
reactions of coreligionists in Germany, England, and the United 
States clearly betray a host of weak points in the overseas 
organization of the Algerian Islamists. 
  These weak points are explained by the total absence of a 
base and the fact that the organization is locked tightly in the 
sterile and demagogic rhetoric of its origins. 
  Our investigation has determined that the former FIS still 
has four operational command posts. 
  In order of importance Chicago is first, followed by Madrid 
(Spain), Paris (France), and Berlin (Germany). 
<H5>  Chicago </H5>
  A Black Muslim stronghold, Chicago today harbors more than 
40 
Algerian Islamists, in addition to a Middle East community 
affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood Islamist movement. 
  The Chicago command post is run by Anouar Haddam, a nuclear 
physicist born in Tlemcen. A former Princeton University 
student, he stood as a FIS candidate in the 1991 legislative 
elections. 
  The men responsible for logistical support are all veteran 
black-market traffickers. 
  At every step along the way, Moroccan police and customs 
officials are "softened up" by baksheesh [bribes]. It may be 
that high-level Moroccan authorities have no idea what is 
happening in their country. 
  The Spanish cell's membership includes procurers and a not 
insignificant number of drifters with criminal records (drugs) 
living on the Costa del Sol. Some are well known to Algerian 
police: Back when Ben Bella was in hiding, they had infiltrated 
his MDA [Movement for Democracy in Algeria] and served as 
informers. 
<H5>  Berlin </H5>
  In Germany, where Rabah Kebir lives with some of Abassi 
Madani's close collaborators, Algerian Islamists are less active 
since they lack the necessary base of support. 
  Kebir maintains close ties to members of the neo-Nazi NSDAP 
[Nationalist Socialist German Workers' Party], which helps 
provision it and facilitates acquisition of false identity 
documents. 
  Rabah Kebir himself is a rather interesting personality. 
Passive, vacillating, and unstable, he is regularly denigrated 
and challenged by Haddam, who accuses him of being a compromiser 
and advocate of dialogue with the Algerian authorities. 
  Kebir maintains close ties to Madani's sons, Salman in 
particular, as well as with Kamerdine Kharbane (expelled from 
France to Pakistan). 
  Their faction, "the upholders of the oath," was born from a 
meeting of group leaders in a west Algerian town last spring. 
  During that meeting, there was a stormy debate, with the 
Djamaat asserting the lives of too many of their activists had 
been lost and deploring the activities of the exiled brothers. 
  Kebir's faction has been marginalized by Haddam, who accuses 
the Madanis of maintaining a hegemonic grip on the former FIS. 
<H5>  Paris </H5>
  Dihna Abderrahmane, a physicist who is married with three 
children (his wife is an oral surgeon), had settled in the small 
French town of Ferney Voltaire located 2 km from Geneva 
(Switzerland). 
  A friend of Haddam, Dihna was the FIS's official 
representative in France. On Tuesday 9 November at 0600, French 
police came to his domicile to arrest him, but he fled to Sudan, 
where he is currently staying. 
  Dihna's strategy was based on vigilance. Domiciled in 
France, 
he worked at the Islamic Center in Eaux Vives, a densely 
populated quarter of Geneva. The center was controlled by a 
branch of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood and run by the Ramadan 
family, whose matriarch is the granddaughter of the movement's 
founder, Hassen El Banna. 
  Dihna received faxes in Switzerland at the above-mentioned 
Islamic center and at the mosque of Petit Saconnay, a gathering 
place for members of the former FIS in exile in Switzerland. 
  He received instructions directly from Chicago, from Haddam, 
and relayed them to the French Algerian Fraternity (FAF), which 
in turn passed messages on to the various prayer halls. 
<H5>  FIS in France </H5>
  Some 90 percent of Algeria's overseas cultural community 
resides in France. The former FIS has never succeeded in winning 
the loyalty of this community. 
  However, it has succeeded--with the help of non-Algerian 
Islamists and French converts--in setting up networks. 
  The Tunisian Nahdah provided safe houses and mail drops 
(bookstores, prayer halls, etc.). The Federation of French 
Muslims [FMF] headed by French convert Youssef Leclerc, a 
personal friend of Abassi, is financed by the World Islamic 
League (Saudi Arabia). The FMF supplied volunteers for the cause 
(preparation, printing, and distribution of tracts and 
magazines). 
  To date the former FIS has failed to establish itself in 
France, although it does enjoy the support of a few 
reactionaries. Much has been said about the "harkis" [members of 
harkas or native auxiliary continents of the French Army during 
Algeria's war for independence], most of it untrue. Harkis still 
living are at least 55 years old. Despised in both France and 
Algeria, most are destitute. Their children, at least the great 
majority of them, have no connection at all with the Islamist 
movement. They consider themselves part of France's Maghrebian 
cultural community. 
  That said, the confiscation of large sums of money at the 
domiciles of those arrested confirms suspicions that Islamists 
in France were well funded, enjoying affluent lifestyles that 
contrasted sharply with the standard of living of the average 
Maghrebian immigrant. 
  The former FIS counts some 500 activists living overseas, 
most of them salaried cadres, plus 1,500 to 2,000 sympathizers. 
Their principal activity to date has been propaganda--fiery, 
violent, amateurish propaganda, notable for the absence of 
rational argument. 
  Our inquiries with colleagues in the international press, 
whose response reflected solidarity with Algerian journalists, 
indicate that overseas the former FIS, lacking a popular base in 
the Algerian cultural community or a convincing propaganda line, 
is smoldering with violent discord between the MIA and the 
former FIS triggered by the abduction of the three Frenchmen in 
Algiers--discord that threatens to explode into the open. Iran 
allegedly proffered its good offices in an effort to avert this 
explosion. 
  Added to strains within the Islamist movement are personal 
rivalries and a probable struggle for supremacy among the 
various terrorist groups. On the ground, rivalry between the MIA 
and the Djamaate (FIS groups aligned with Abassi) is quite open. 
<H5>  Pasqua's Message </H5>
  Juridically, the French Republic is fully within its rights 
to take action to protect the security of persons and property. 
  Politically, Charles Pasqua is sending a clear and 
multidirectional message not only to Islamists around the world 
but also to extremists of every kind, Europeans included. 
  The message is a warning: The rules of hospitality in France 
and elsewhere require that guests of the host country respect 
certain obligations and responsibilities. 
  Two imams--a Turk who officiated at services in Nantua and 
was behind the recent Islamic "scarf" [foulard] affair, and a 
Moroccan officiating at Carpentras--have been expelled from 
France to their country of origin. Again, the message was clear: 
French laws will be enforced; which is not in any sense 
inconsistent with freedom of religious practice in France. 
  To avoid driving authentic Muslim believers into alliance 
with Islamists who use religion for political ends, Pasqua has 
reaffirmed his respect, and that of the French Government, for 
France's Muslim community. The government's actions were taken 
in response to the assassination of two Frenchmen and the 
abduction of three others. 
  FAF's publications called for murder and violence. Banned, 
they will continue in other forms. 
Footnote 
  1. Mr. Sari's assassins were killed by security forces later 
in the year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59856 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Attack at Sidi Ghiles Prison Described </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0053C Algiers LIBERTE in French 30 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0053C </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers LIBERTE </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yacine Lahcene: "Sidi Ghiles Prison Attacked"] </F>
  [Text] The terrorist cell, consisting of three armed 
individuals, was apparently well organized, whatever else one 
may think of it. It was about 1800 and night was just beginning 
to fall. The streets near the penitentiary were virtually 
deserted. At that time of day, in that part of town, passersby 
are very rare. The presence of anyone, even strangers behaving 
suspiciously, would thus attract no attention. 
  The prison guard, an accomplice, waited for a sign from his 
confederates. At the appointed hour, he opened the prison gate 
and let the three terrorists inside. Obviously, the guard must 
have given his partners a detailed map of the prison in advance. 
With their pinpoint knowledge of the premises, they proceeded 
first to the office of the warden, who was taken by surprise and 
failed to react quickly enough. They rushed him and--to avoid 
making noise--fell on him with knives. With serious wounds in 
the throat and elsewhere on his body, the warden collapsed on 
the floor of his office in a pool of blood. According to the 
latest information we have obtained, the victim is still in 
extremely critical condition. One crime already behind them, the 
group proceeded with the guard in the lead to the facility's 
armory, carrying off six pistols, an equal number of "mat 49" 
and Seminovs. Armed with all these weapons--the principal motive 
for the attack--the terrorists and the guard took flight. 
  While the facts about this attack discredit recently 
circulated rumors about a spectacular prison breakout of some 
200 prisoners, they do confirm that the Cherchell prison was 
indeed the target of a terrorist operation. 
  Also, we have learned the prosecutor in Saida was seriously 
wounded yesterday in a terrorist attack. 
  Thus we see terrorists are again targeting officers of the 
court. Other magistrates brought down by the beastly terrorists 
include Lardi Baida, deputy prosecutor for the court of Algiers, 
assassinated last July; Mohamed Said, prosecutor general of 
Tlemcen, victim of a terrorist attack last May; and Bekai 
Mustapha, presiding judge for the court at Kolea. 
  Indeed, the attack on Sidi Ghiles prison and attempted 
assassination of Said's prosecutor were part of an almost 
synchronized recrudescence of terrorist attacks throughout the 
country. 
  In several cities, a number of civilians and members of 
security forces were assassinated between last Tuesday and 
Sunday: no less than 21 civilians, including a forest ranger, 
his eight-year-old daughter, a clerk, the president of the 
Guigbab DEC [expansion unknown] (Merouana), and an imam. The 
security services are mourning the loss of 14 of their men, 
including nine policemen savagely murdered last Wednesday at 
Benghazi while trying to remove a police roadblock. Two other 
policemen were wounded in that ambush. Nevertheless, the 
security services have struck back with some effective blows 
against the terrorists in the space of only a few days, 
eliminating 12 and arresting 149 others. 
  The biggest raid was carried out on Tuesday at Tiaret, where 
five terrorists were killed and 46 others rendered harmless, 
while in the Sidi Bel Abbes region seven members of the group 
that set fire to the ENIE [expansion not given] at Telagh were 
neutralized. 
  These results demonstrate once again that despite the 
relentlessness and murderous fury of the armed groups, the 
security services are more determined than ever to wage 
unceasing battle against them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59857 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   General Strike in Rouiba 
Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0053D Algiers LIBERTE in French 23 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0053D </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers LIBERTE </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zoubir Ferroukhi: "28,000 Workers To Strike on 6 </F>
December"--first paragraph is LIBERTE introduction] 
  [Text] Phase two of the Rouiba unionists' action plan to 
win acceptance of their demands: First came the sit-in, now they 
have served notice of a strike. 
  Feelings boiled over this time, and the trade unions of 
Rouiba passed from words into action: a general strike. Top 
union officials from the Rouiba industrial zone required little 
time at their meeting yesterday to decide to serve notice of a 
one-day strike to be held on 6 December. If no concrete progress 
is made toward satisfying union demands (see LIBERTE of 26 
October and 20 November 1993) within the next two weeks, some 
28,000 workers will down tools. In a nutshell, immobilization of 
the Rouiba industrial zone will also paralyze such enormous 
economic entities as CVI (industrial vehicles), SNTR [National 
Highway Transport Company], SNTV [National Passenger Transport 
Company], Naftal-Distribution, ENIPEC (hides and leather), ENEL 
[National Electric Power Board], and ENATB [expansion not given]. 
  Warning signs that a strike was ahead have been building for 
some time now, so the move took no one by surprise. Over the 
last few months (nine months, to be precise), a handful of 
issues--no more than five or six--have dragged on unresolved, 
even though the whole lot of them could have been settled in 
less time than it took union representatives yesterday to vote 
for a strike. 
  What they decided was to stage a thrice-postponed 
"solidarity" general strike, basically to demand that the 
"dialogue" between the social partners (labor and management) be 
more than a polite fiction. 
  Workers and union representatives have been laid off at 
INDEFOC (training), ERWA (salvage), INFRAFER (railroad 
infrastructure), Hydrotechnique, and one or two smaller 
enterprises. UGTA [General Union of Algerian Workers] 
representatives have held that these layoffs were unjustified 
and improper. The national syndicate brought the matter to the 
general inspectorate for labor, which has acknowledged 
unionists' complaints were well founded. Overall, the 
inspectorate opined that the layoffs were not justified, at the 
same time serving notice that efforts by management to 
intimidate or harass served only to expose their incompetence. 
On several occasions the inspectorate demanded, in vain, that 
sanctions be lifted and personnel rehired. Spurred to action by 
the syndicate's national leadership, the ministries concerned 
ended by sending faxes directly to the enterprises under their 
jurisdiction, urging them to act immediately to resolve the 
disputes. This was the situation as it stood a day or two before 
2 November. 
  On that date, at the sit-in held by 500 to 600 Rouiba 
unionists at People's House (site of UGTA headquarters), Mr. 
Sidi Said, UGTA's national secretary for social affairs and top 
conflict resolution expert, claimed victory too soon when he 
happily announced news of the ministerial directives. But the 
unionists quietly dispersed, trusting completely in the promises 
of the authorities as relayed to them by national syndicate 
officials. By yesterday, however, no further progress had been 
made toward resolving this handful of issues. And of course the 
workers, or at least their representatives in the industrial 
zone, believe they were "taken in" for too long. Mr. Sidi Said 
called it a "provocation." Indeed. Even so, the unionists, 
including those in the most moderate wing of the UGTA, have not 
fully appreciated the significance of the fact that these 
relatively simple layoff disputes have not been resolved as 
rapidly as issues much thornier were in the past. 
  One might also ask, in the context of Algeria's current 
situation, whose interests are being served by pushing UGTA out 
of its high-level role as instigator and articulator of 
proposals for economic recovery and social peace and miring it 
down in petty, secondary issues. Along the same lines, one 
wonders whether driving nails into the coffin of some sector of 
an economy already in its death throes might tend not only to 
discredit the UGTA but also to exacerbate social tensions, 
adding fuel to the fire. 
  That said, it must be noted that not all the news is bad: 
Within the Rouiba industrial zone, some enterprises deserve 
kudos for good management and for maintaining good 
communications between the social partners. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59858 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Import Policy 
for High Potato Prices Criticized </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0053E Algiers ALGER REPUBLICAIN in French 13 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0053E </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers ALGER REPUBLICAIN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Potatoes: Imports No Solution"] </F>
  [Text] In the coming days, some 25,000 tons of potatoes 
imported by ENAFLA and ENAFROID [expansions not given] will 
inundate the fruit and vegetable markets. This, essentially, was 
the burden of a communique Tuesday from the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs saying that arrival of the foreign potatoes would 
facilitate a reduction in current prices for this truck-garden 
product so popular with Algerians. 
  Discussing the intolerable increase in the price of 
potatoes--in recent days it has stood at about 30 Algerian 
dinars per kilogram--the ministry communique noted that retail 
prices charged by fruit and vegetable merchants are "not subject 
to controls." According to the ministry communique, "only 
recourse to imports could influence the market situation in 
terms of normalizing prices." 
<H5>  Self-Sufficiency? </H5>
  Well, if resorting to potato imports was the only solution 
to 
the above-noted overheating, why did they wait three months to 
do it? Especially since the decision was actually made on 1 
August. Even back then, potatoes were selling for 20 dinars per 
kilogram, and the need to flood the market to influence prices 
was being felt. 
  Looming behind all these questions linked to the delay in 
provisioning and normalizing markets is the problem of 
self-sufficiency: Is Algeria actually capable of implementing a 
program of potato cultivation that would meet demand? Officials 
have talked ceaselessly in the last two agricultural seasons of 
big projects designed to end importation of potatoes for 
consumption, above all imports of seed potatoes. Looking to 
external markets for food is costing our country millions of 
dollars. This is why the Ministry of Agriculture has made 
intensified cultivation of certain strategic crops (seed 
potatoes, industrial tomatoes, certain grains, etc.) a 
categorical priority. 
  In potatoes, for example, the stated goal was a permanent 
end 
to imports. However, after awhile the ministry indicated that 
"the road was still long before we reach real agricultural 
take-off," despite the "incentives to production" approved for 
strategic crops. 
<H5>  Eating Seed! </H5>
  Unlike last year, when Algeria did not resort to potato 
imports, we now find ourselves unable to do without them. The 
skyrocketing prices, caused in large part by speculation during 
the interval between successive crop seasons, could not have 
been tolerated any longer. Household budgets were being hit too 
hard. 
  But the soaring prices for this tuber, which became a 
popular 
dish because people of modest means could always afford it, 
cannot hide the dangerous phenomenon that has become more 
pronounced during this period of tension. 
  Seed potatoes, normally used to meet growers' needs for the 
current agricultural season, have been diverted to consumption. 
In the last three weeks, and in more than one case, the potatoes 
that ordinary citizens were buying in fruit and vegetable 
markets for 30 dinars a kilogram were actually seed potatoes, 
for which the officially decreed price is 10.5 dinars. 
<H5>  `Scandalized' </H5>
  Reports from CASSAP [agricultural supply coopertive] in 
Cheraga, COPSEM in Staoueli, and COPASSAD [expansions not given] 
in Zeralda--three institutions responsible for provisioning 
farmers and especially for meeting seed requirements--show that 
demand for seed potatoes has been high for some time. The COPSEM 
official says that unlike last year, when his cooperative was 
left with 3,000 tons of unsold seed potatoes, this year--in the 
early vegetable program alone--his organization has already 
delivered 900 tons more than projected, without even meeting all 
the demand. 
  Our interlocutors, while not pointing the finger of blame at 
anyone in particular, declared themselves scandalized by the 
idea of seed potatoes finding their way into the market stalls. 
  We would remind readers that our country requires about 
125,000 to 130,000 tons of seed potatoes per year. 
  In the last two seasons, these needs were met by Algerian 
produce. 
  This saved the country valuable foreign exchange. But if 
there is not enough seed to meet the needs of the agricultural 
season now under way because it has been marketed to households, 
potato production may decline as a result of market pressures 
over the next few months. The early vegetables program is 
already somewhat behind schedule. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59859 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Alternative Palestinian Agreement Offered </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019C Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 29 Nov 93 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019C </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafi Eytan] </F>
  [Text] Is there a chance that the agreement of principals 
will hold up? Is there a chance that the result will bring about 
stability in the system of relations between Israel and the 
Palestinians? In my estimation, no. 
  The agreement of principals was signed with 'Arafat alone, 
and 'Arafat does not have a majority on this issue in the 
Palestinian National Council. Most of the Palestinian 
organizations represented in it, including significant parts of 
Fatah, are opposed to the agreement of principals and stand for 
a continuation of the armed struggle against Israel, in 
accordance to the Palestinian Convention. They all have a 
smashing majority in Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza, especially among 
the young generation, which is the leader. A new generation has 
arisen that cannot reconcile with a co-existence with Israel, 
even in the borders of the Green Line. Most of them are steeped 
in, and believe in, the righteousness of the Palestinian 
Convention as it is, without change. 
  'Arafat, as chairman of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization 
(PLO), succeeded in surviving only by right of compromises with 
the extremists in his camp. In other words, he enabled them to 
continue on a practical, extremist line and did not go out 
against them with weapons. He cannot and would not want to 
absolutely prevent terrorist acts. We saw how he operated in 
Lebanon at the end of the 1970's and the early 1980's: The PLO 
reached a series of repeatedly changing agreements on 
co-existence with the Christians and Shi'ites; 'Arafat did not 
honor a single one of them. There is no reason that he would 
change his ways now. 
  The future Palestinian police, whose job it will be to 
preserve the peace and the citizens of Israel, according to that 
which is indicated up to now, will be comprised of a loyal 
section of the Palestinian population. That is, there will also 
be elements that formally or informally belong to extremist 
camps. To this day, these elements have few weapons, and, 
despite this, the acts of terrorism and shootings are relatively 
many. The weapons that will be given to the Palestinian police 
will increase their arsenal, intentionally as well--under the 
guidance of Yasir 'Arafat, in order to preserve his position, as 
well as by officers and individuals in the police--because of 
organizational or emotional involvement with terrorist 
organizations, as well as by means of acquisition or theft. 
  Under these conditions, how will the economic vision of the 
architect of the agreement of principals, Shim'on Peres, be 
realized, when Israeli businessmen who will have to meet 
colleagues in Ramallah or Gaza will have to risk their lives? 
  And on the matter of the settlers. The settlers of Judaea, 
Samaria, and the Gaza district, by the authority of the 
decisions of the governments of the left and right, feel that 
they are in danger. Our sages of blessed memory said that the 
duty of saving life overrides everything, and from the aspect of 
one who sees himself as a potential sacrifice--he overrides 
democracy as well as the "rule of law." Anyone who feels that 
his life is forsaken in any case will be astonished--where is 
the law [sentence as published]. The settlers, who suddenly 
stand before a wave of hatred, whose barricades were burst in 
the wake of the agreement of principals, cannot not avoid 
defending themselves. It should be remembered that the Israel 
Defense Forces is also made up of fathers and sons whose 
position on Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza district is not 
necessarily that of the Israeli government. If so, Israel is at 
risk of a civil war. 
  All of these factors, and many others, when they accumulate 
at the moment of crisis, like around the division of Jerusalem 
or the removal of a settlement or a severe attack, have no 
chance that they will make possible the realization of the 
agreement as it stands. 
  So, what is the solution? In the situation that has been 
created, it seems to me that the only possible solution is "the 
separation of the mosaic." The Israeli Government must adopt the 
slogan that every Jew, wherever, "is holy, holy in his place, 
and his land is holy." That which was holy to al-Sadat in the 
Sinai, is all the more holy to us in the land of Israel. The 
agreement must be undermined, and, in the event that it cannot 
be reached, it must be effected unilaterally. Leaving under 
Israeli sovereignty all of the Jewish settlements, including 
open access roads. By a rough calculation, we are speaking of 
about 3,500 square km for the autonomy and about 2,500 for 
complete Israeli rule. There would be a separation between them, 
and a fence if need be, giving Palestinians free passage to 
adjacent countries and between different regions. This is a hard 
separation, necessitating efforts and the investment of 
resources, but, in my estimation, only this can succeed, and 
only it should be achieved on the basis of a national consensus. 
  The writer is one of the leaders of the intelligence 
community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59860 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Council To Promote EC Business Opportunities Formed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019A Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 28 Nov 93 p 14 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019A </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Navit Zomer] </F>
  [Text] At a festive dinner, which was held in Brussels 
during the weekend, the establishment of an economic 
European-Israeli council was announced. The council will work 
along with Common Market institutions, and its role will be to 
promote and assist in the economic affairs of the Israeli 
business sector in the Common Market. 
  The initiative to establish the Israeli-European council is 
that of the coordination bureau of the economic organizations in 
Israel. The council will be headed by two chairmen--the Israeli 
one will be Dan Proper, president of the coordination bureau and 
president of the Industrialists' Association. Dani Gillerman, 
president of the Society of Commerce Bureaus, will serve as his 
deputy. The European chairman has yet to be selected. 
  The council's administration will include 12 members who are 
representatives of economic organizations and representatives of 
the business world from Israel, and 12 addition ones from among 
the Common Market countries. 
  The council, which will serve as a sort of lobby to promote 
Israel's dealings in the market and vice versa, will open its 
office in Brussels, and a portion of the financing of its 
activities will be executed by institutions of the European 
Community (EC). 
  Present at the festive meal in Brussels were Foreign 
Minister 
Shim'on Peres; Common Market President Jacques Delors, who 
welcomed its establishment; Dan Proper; Yoram Blizovski, 
director-general of the Industrialists' Association; and Marcel 
Shaton--Israel's commerce representative in Brussels. 
  The leadership of the Industrialists' Association stayed in 
Brussels for three days for talks with representatives of the 
Common Market and administrators. 
  "We feared a significant change in mood toward us," Proper 
related upon his return. "The market revealed a willingness for 
a series of benefits for Israel's position. Among other things, 
we reached an understanding on the subject of their extremist 
declaration regarding the disgrace of the Arab boycott," he 
added. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59861 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea002___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Outlook for Economic Growth in Region Detailed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0019E Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 30 Nov 93 p 15 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0019E </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 30 Nov 93 p 15 </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105>Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sever Plotzqer] </F>
  [Text] Time is working against them. Against the Arab 
Middle East, our neighbors. The changeover of the economy of the 
liberal market--which started Asia and is currently promoting 
South America to its spot--passed over the Middle East. 
  In Iraq, Syria, and Jordan, the same elite dominate who 
dominated 15 years ago, with the same outdated and fossilized 
perception of the world. 
  Even in Egypt, an undesirable process of retreating from the 
modernistic ideas ("the open-door policy") of Anwar al-Sadat has 
begun. 
  Husni Mubarak is more cautious, more conservative. 
  It is likely that the guilt lies with the oil. The abundance 
of oil has created, in all of the Arab Middle East, the delusion 
of easy money. Why make the effort, compete, be enterprising, 
if, anyhow, the desert land is saturated with black gold? 
  But the demand for oil has shrunk, a little in the 
beginning, 
and now, very much--and the producing countries, with the 
exception of the shining Gulf emirates, have begun shortages and 
moderation. 
  And it is likely that the guilt lies with the Muslim 
hostility to the West. The regimes in the Arab countries around 
us, especially in large portions of the public opinion there, 
are closing themselves up in a conceptual and cultural bubble 
that repels the "Western" economic ideas as "unsuitable" to the 
Arab-Muslim uniqueness. 
  Asia began to flourish when it became freed from the feeling 
of isolationism and opened to the world; this is happening now 
in South America and Eastern Europe. This is not yet happening 
in the Middle Eastern Arab world. 
  The longer the Arab Middle East continued to cook in its own 
juices, the further it got from the unavoidable economic 
decisions, and it sunk in hostility and pollution. 
  The result: Regression and regression once again. 
  Recently, with the aid of a number of friends from the 
Middle 
East Department of the World Bank in Washington, I made a 
comparison between the economic strength of Arab countries and 
that of Israel, from the years 1977 to 1992. 
  What happened in the 15 years between al-Sadat's visit to 
Jerusalem and the Oslo accord? 
  The answer: Israel has become an economic Middle East 
superpower, which puts all of the countries surrounding it in a 
deep shadow, all of them together, including Iraq. 
  And these are the data: 
  In 1977, the domestic product of the three countries hostile 
to Israel--Jordan, Syria, and Iraq--was $27.4 billion. Egypt had 
a product of an additional $12.1 in the same year, and, in all, 
the domestic product of the four Arab countries came to $40 
billion in that year. 
  Israel had a domestic product of only $10 billion in 1977. 
  The joint economic strength of the four most important Arab 
countries next to us--Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Jordan--was four 
times that of Israel's economic strength 15 years ago. 
  In 1992, the domestic product of the three countries hostile 
to Israel--Jordan, Syria, and Iraq--was $27.7 billion. That is, 
their current product did not grow at all, despite inflation and 
despite the 50-percent increase in population. 
  Egypt had a product of $30 billion in 1992. The total 
product 
of the four Arab countries reached $58 billion last year. 
  Israel alone had a product valued at $67 billion in 1992. 
Our 
economic strength rose by 20 percent over the joint strength of 
Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Jordan. 
  The Israeli economy is more than three times greater than 
the 
economies of Syria and Jordan, and more than double the joint 
economies of Syria, Jordan, and Iraq. 
  This vast gap to our benefit stands out even more when one 
looks at the product per capita, the accepted indicator of 
productivity and prosperity. 
  The growth of the product in current dollars also includes 
the inflation and devaluation components of the local currency. 
In real terms, only Egypt has succeeded, since 1977, in 
maintaining the economic prosperity of its residents. In the 
other three Arab countries, the real product per capita 
declined--between 10 percent (in Jordan) to 70 percent (in 
Iraq). In Israel, the real product increased by 50 percent per 
capita. 
These economic developments have strategic and political 
ramifications: 

  -  Even when all of the defense expenditures of Israel are 
limited to 12 percent of the domestic product, they cost at 
least five to six times--and perhaps even 10 times--more than 
the defense expenditures of Jordan and Syria together (Iraq does 
not currently have measured defense expenditures). 
  -  There is no apparent danger to Israel's survival or even a 
real 
military risk from the "eastern coalition" of Syria, Jordan, and 
Iraq. The clear economic weakness of these three countries has 
turned them into dwarfs opposite Israel. This is a situation 
which is unlikely to change before the year 2015. 
  -  The only chance for the Arab countries near us to get on the 
track of rapid economic growth is a change in perception and 
method: A sharp transition to the economics of a liberal, 
competitive, open market. 
  Except that such a transition invites democracy--and this, 
from the point of view of the traditional Arab regimes, is the 
problem. 
  There is no other model of economic success except for a 
developing competitive and democratic market. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Domestic Product of Israel and Nearby Arab Countries(in billions of dollars) | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1977                     |1992                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Iraq                     |18.3                     |9.3                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Syria                    |7.1                      |14.5                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Israel                   |10.0                     |67.0                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jordan                   |2.1                      |3.9                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Egypt                    |12                       |30.0                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Arab countries have been learning this from experience 
during the past 15 years. Even though the population grew from 
60 million residents to 88 million residents, they lost the 
economic race with Israel and retreated far behind. 
  Have they learned something? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59862 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage, Comment on U.S. Stand on Kashmir </TI></H3>
<H4>   Raphel Briefing Reported </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0075A Madras THE HINDU in English 30 Oct 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0075A </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by C. Raja Mohan: "U.S. Questions Kashmir's Status </F>
as Part of India"; italicized words as published] 
  [Text] Washington, Oct. 29. The entire State of Jammu and 
Kashmir is a "disputed" territory and Washington does not 
recognise that the State's accession to India in 1947 as meaning 
that "Kashmir is forevermore an integral part of India," says a 
high level official of the Clinton Administration. The official 
was briefing, on background, reporters from the sub-continent 
here late on Thursday. 
  In a series of troubling remarks on Kashmir, the official, a 
key decision-maker in the administration on South Asian policy, 
declared that the Shimla agreement signed by India and Pakistan 
in 1972 may no longer be an effective instrument for resolving 
the Kashmir dispute: "It is 21 years old and there have been 
very few discussions, if any, under that accord in terms of 
resolving the Kashmir dispute." The official argued that "by 
definition, ipso facto, it has not been very 
effective." 
  The remarks of the Clinton administration official now 
complete the comprehensive reversal of the more even-handed 
approach on Kashmir outlined by the Bush administration in 1990. 
In a Congressional hearing in 1990, the Bush administration 
declared that the Shimla Agreement had superceded the United 
Nations resolutions on Kashmir. 
  Responding to the popular concerns in India about the 
remarks 
of Mr. Clinton on Kashmir last month at the United Nations, the 
official said that "it was not a signal to suggest there is a 
secret U.S. diplomatic strategy to insert itself as a mediator 
in the Kashmir dispute." Saying that Kashmir is on the American 
radar screen along with Yugoslavia, Somalia and the former 
Soviet Union, the official pointed out that it is not easy to 
overlook the Kashmir problem. 
<H5>  Ready to Mediate </H5>
  On the question of American role in Kashmir, the official 
said although the Clinton Administration is not now putting 
itself forward as a mediator, it is willing to do so, "if all 
the parties to the dispute want it." The official left the 
reporters in no doubt that Washington considers the Kashmiris an 
indispensable element of any settlement of the Kashmir dispute. 
"There is no way any resolution can be stable and lasting unless 
agreed to by the people of Kashmir," said the official. 
  Confirming the Indian suspicions that Washington is not 
averse to internationalising the Kashmir dispute, the official 
said the United States is now set to engage Russia in a formal 
consultation on South Asia. The senior administration official, 
who is visiting Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan next week, 
is also travelling to Moscow to consider the development of 
joint initiatives with Russia on conflict resolution in South 
Asia. 
  On the question of Pakistani support for terrorism in 
Kashmir, Washington had put a lot of pressure on Islamabad to 
end such activity, according to the official. "Our view is that 
there seems to be less of that going on now." Whatever, the 
external support to militancy in Kashmir, according to the 
official "there are very strong indigenous elements to that 
insurgency." The official also declared the apparently new 
American assessment of the insurgency in Kashmir, that it is 
"really self-sustaining." 
  The remarks of the American official suggest that the recent 
Indian initiatives to set up a Human Rights Commission and the 
offer of the Indian Prime Minister to open a dialogue with 
Pakistan on Kashmir have been the result of sustained American 
prodding. Washington has pushed the government of India "very 
hard to clean up their act." 
  Washington has demanded that the Government of India needs 
to 
"make the security forces accountable for their own behaviour." 
"Making people disappear, encountered killings, extra-judicial 
executions, death in custody, all this stuff, frankly, there is 
no excuse for it. Insurgency is not an excuse for that kind of 
activity and behaviour on the part of security forces." 
  On India's offer to discuss issues related to Kashmir with 
Pakistan, the official pointed out that Washington had been 
encouraging India and Pakistan to engage in a serious discussion 
on Kashmir. The administration official revealed that the United 
States was "pushing diplomatically" in the run up to the 
elections in Pakistan that India "must turn over a new leaf" 
when a new Government takes over in Pakistan. 
  The official regretted that the stand-off at Hazratbal has 
come as an unexpected impediment to the renewal of Indo-Pakistan 
dialogue on Kashmir. Urging restraint on all sides, the official 
said the United States is encouraged by the Indian decision not 
to storm the shrine, and called on Pakistan not to exacerbate 
the situation by making provocative statements. 
  Responding to a question on the growing anger in the Indian 
public opinion on the American intervention in Kashmir, the 
official stated that such public perceptions do not negate the 
broadening and deepening of the Indo-U.S. relationship. She 
pointed out that "the Indian Government and Parliament have come 
to recognise that their own perceptions of the standard of human 
rights was not being met" in Kashmir. 
<H5>  Solarz's Remarks </H5>
  In a related development, the remarks on Kashmir by Mr. 
Steven Solarz, the nominee of President Clinton to be the new 
Ambassador to India are likely to cause some anguish in India. 
At a meeting with a group of Indian parliamentarians organised 
by a Washington think-tank, Mr. Solarz raised the hypothetical 
question of the impact on India's stability in the event Kashmir 
were allowed to secede. He referred to the two alternative 
views, one stressing the damaging consequences to Indian unity, 
and the other suggesting Kashmir is a unique problem, the 
separation of which is unlikely to affect the unity of India. 
Although posed in the form of an academic question, it may 
provide some clues to the emerging mindset in the Clinton 
administration on Kashmir. 
  The rather sharp presentation of its views on Kashmir by the 
Clinton administration leaves no room for fudging and finessing 
in New Delhi. New Delhi's belief that incremental concessions to 
the United States on key issues could buy a more cooperative 
attitude from the Clinton Administration has been, clearly, a 
dangerous illusion. India is on its own in Kashmir. The 
Government in New Delhi needs to demonstrate that it has the 
determination and tenacity to defend India's basic national 
interests. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59863 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage, Comment on U.S. Stand on Kashmir </TI></H3>
<H4>   Raphel Remarks Protested </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0075B Madras THE HINDU in English 30 Oct 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0075B </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by K. K. Katyal: "Protest Over Remarks Conveyed to </F>
U.S."; boldface words as published] 
  [Text] New Delhi. Oct. 29. Taken aback by the stridency of 
the latest note struck by Washington on Kashmir -- that it does 
not recognise the State's accession to India -- New Delhi today 
conveyed its protest and anguish to the U.S. What particularly 
upset the Government of India was the attitude on issues with a 
close bearing on the territorial integrity of India. The acting 
head of the U.S. mission, Mr. Kenneth Brill, who was called to 
the Foreign office by the Joint Secretary in charge of America, 
Mr. Haridip Puri, was told of India's concern. 
  In an aide memoire given to the U.S., India took strong 
exception to Washington's "studied tilt" towards Pakistan, as 
contained in the background briefing of the Assistant Secretary 
of State for South Asia, Ms. Robin Raphel to South Asian 
journalists based in Washington. The perception in Pakistan of a 
considered U.S. tilt, it was pointed out, would not be a helpful 
factor for the commencement of a dialogue between New Delhi and 
Islamabad, for which the U.S. had been playing a useful and 
constructive role. 
  The backgrounder, official sources said, contained elements 
which were most disconcerting because of their fundamental and 
direct bearing on India's vital interest. The aide memoire, 
according to sources, regretted Ms. Raphel's remark, questioning 
the "status" of Jammu and Kashmir, a stand never taken by 
Washington in the past. 
  India drew the U.S. Government's attention to the drastic 
legal and political implications of not recognising the 
accession of Jammu and Kashmir. Did the U.S. intend to question 
the territorial integrity of India and reopen the issue of the 
accession of the erstwhile Princely States? Ms. Raphel's 
briefing, according to the Indian Government, would certainly be 
regarded by the public as biased and tendentious and not in 
harmony with the Indo-U.S. relations. 
  Ill-timed: India's regret was all the greater 
because Ms. Raphel's statement came at a time when Jammu and 
Kashmir was in the grip of a complicated situation. A delicate 
exercise was on to persuade the terrorists to leave the 
Hazratbal shrine, and initiatives were on for reopening the 
dialogue with Pakistan on all sensitive issues of mutual 
concern. Her downplaying of Pakistan's role in instigating 
insurgency in Kashmir was also regarded as a matter of concern. 
This attitude was seen as running counter to the political 
understanding that marked the Indo-U.S. exchanges. 
  One-sided public statements of the type made by Ms. Raphel, 
it was felt, would only encourage obdurate elements. The aide 
memoire was believed to have found Ms. Raphel's remark out of 
tune with the recent diplomatic exchanges, especially between 
the Foreign Secretary, Mr. J. N. Dixit and the U.S. Under 
Secretary of Political Affairs, Mr. Tarnoff. Diplomatic circles, 
which were agog with the talk on the subject, ascribed her 
comments to her inexperience. 
  Fresh dimension: Two days ago, Ms. Raphel, while 
repeating an earlier formulation -- that the entire State of 
Jammu and Kashmir is a disputed territory -- elaborated that the 
U.S. did not recognise the State's accession in 1947 and as 
such, did not regard it as forever an integral part of India. 
This gave a disturbing dimension to what, so far, was 
considered, at the most the U.S. adherence to a technicality. 
  At one stage, when a senior Cabinet Minister conveyed to the 
External Affairs Ministry his worry over the U.S. description of 
the "entire" State as a disputed territory, he was told that 
Pakistan should have a bigger reason to be upset as the areas 
controlled by it too were sought to be covered by the "dispute." 
Ms. Raphel's comment would strengthen doubts about U.S. 
evenhandedness. 
  Some in the U.S. may well argue that its stand, as spelt out 
now, was all along implied in its stated position and, hence, 
there was no departure or a new tilt. However, it was one thing 
to say that the State or the "entire" State was a disputed 
territory or to suggest that its accession to India was not 
valid or that it was not to be regarded forever as part of 
India. Does it mean that the U.S. now did not see any use for 
the ambiguity, consciously maintained in the past for purposes 
of diplomatic flexibility? 
  Doubts over Shimla Pact: Equally surprising now 
were the strong doubts over the efficacy of the Shimla Agreement 
as an instrument for resolving the Kashmir problem. Three years 
ago, the U.S. swore by the Shimla Agreement which, it was 
stated, had superceded the U.N. resolutions of 1949 and 1950. Of 
late, however, doubts began to be expressed on its efficacy on 
the plea that its framework had not been put to use for over 20 
years. Simultaneously, the U.S. began to refer to the need for 
"taking into account the views of the Kashmiri people." There 
was thus, a switch -- from support to bilateralism, incorporated 
in the Shimla Agreement to what may be loosely called 
trilateralism. Significantly, the U.S. also sought to project 
itself as a potential mediator, of course, with one 
qualification -- "if that is desired by both sides." 
  The latest remarks from Washington pointed to a continuing 
U.S. interest, though what shape it could take was not clear. 
According to Ms. Raphel, the cost of the Kashmir dispute was 
"unacceptably high" and "it is time to look at the cost of this 
dispute in human terms and in budgetary terms.... in 1993." At 
another stage, she said the U.S. would consider a mediating role 
if it were requested by all relevant parties, but "we are not 
putting ourselves forward at this time as mediators." 
  The U.S. President, Mr. Clinton's reference to Kashmir, it 
was explained, was meant to convey that "we see Kashmir on our 
radar screen, along with Yugoslavia, Somalia and parts of the 
former Soviet Union where there is a civil conflict." However, 
"it was not a signal to suggest a secret U.S. strategy" on 
Kashmir. 
  Gains neutralised?: The U.S. position, as 
enunciated by her, now went far beyond what was stated some four 
months ago by a visiting official, Mr. John Mallot. His 
utterances led to sharp attacks on him, leading him to complain 
that the messenger was sought to be shot for the message. Then 
followed a conscious bid to undo the resultant damage to the 
Indo-U.S. relations. Mr. Dixit went to Washington along with a 
group of officials for comprehensive talks. The gains of that 
mission may be neutralised now. 
  Ms. Raphel's comments, ironically, came in the wake of steps 
that ought to have met the U.S. concerns -- like the 
establishment of the Human Rights Commission, and the Prime 
Minister, Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao's offer to talk on all issues, 
including those related to Kashmir. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59864 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage, Comment on U.S. Stand on Kashmir </TI></H3>
<H4>   Congress-I Reaction </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0075C Madras THE HINDU in English 31 Oct 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0075C </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "U.S. View Unacceptable, Says </F>
Congress"] 
  [Text] New Delhi, Oct. 30. The Congress(I) today officially 
said the U.S. view, as reflected in the remarks of a senior 
State Department official made known yesterday, questioning the 
accession of Kashmir to India in 1947 was "incomprehensible and 
totally unacceptable." 
  But the Congress reaction released to the media by its 
spokesman, Mr. Chandulal Chandrakar, also pointed out that 
India's reaction would be "balanced" as "we are a mature 
country." 
  The Congress release said the kind of statement that had 
been 
made in Washington adversely affects Indo-U.S. bilateral 
relations and was "best avoided." 
  The following is the text of the two-paragraph Congress 
statement: 
  "It is a matter of profound regret that a senior official of 
the State Department of the U.S. should have questioned the 
accession of Kashmir to India in 1947. We find this attitude 
incomprehensible and totally unacceptable. 
  "We hope that the latest pronouncement reflects the views of 
an individual and not the U.S. Government. We are a mature 
country and our response will be balanced. At the same time we 
cannot but point out that statements of this nature adversely 
affect Indo-U.S. bilateral relations and are best avoided." 
  While the ruling party has kept to a middle-of-the 
road-formulation in a relatively adverse situation, senior 
members of the union Cabinet have noted that the latest 
developments in relation to Kashmir have not been brought before 
the highest council of the Government. 
  The U.S. Government statement on Kashmir, which has caused 
consternation all round in the country, was available here 
yesterday morning, but was not even referred to in the Cabinet 
meeting held at 7 p.m. 
  Nor for that matter was the interim order of a division 
bench 
of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court asking the Government to 
allow food inside Hazratbal, and restore water and electricity 
to the shrine. The Court's direction tends to negate the very 
logic of the siege of Hazratbal laid by the Army to flush out 
armed terrorists, including foreign mercenaries. 
  Cabinet sources said individual Ministers were not always 
expected to have details of every new development that might 
have occurred in the course of a day, especially in a 
pre-election situation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59865 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage, Comment on U.S. Stand on Kashmir </TI></H3>
<H4>   `Unwarranted Pressure' </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0075D Madras THE HINDU in English 1 Nov 93 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0075D </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Unwarranted Pressure"; quotation marks as </F>
published] 
  [Text] The substance and tone of the remarks made on 
Thursday in Washington by a senior Clinton administration 
official who deals with South Asia has brought home the 
uncomfortable reality that American policy in the region is 
becoming increasingly interventionist and that such 
interventionism does not augur well for India. Under the guise 
of "conflict resolution" which has become one of the new 
buzzwords of the Clinton administration's largely amateurish 
effort to stay "engaged" in America's self-prescribed "manifest 
destiny" to lead the post Cold War world, U.S. policy in the 
region is becoming less and less apologetic about an activist 
role in the arena. The Clinton administration's "creative 
diplomacy" in South Asia which seems to have no pretensions to 
any other interest except to strap the region into some kind of 
nuclear non-proliferation regime translates into sustained 
pressure on India and Pakistan to "come to the table." This can 
only result in a substantial erosion of sovereignty in 
decision-making for both countries. 
  The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia, Ms. 
Robin Raphel's questioning of Kashmir's status as an integral 
part of India might not really be the key indicator of the 
discernible tilt in policy against India, given that all 
Washington's pronouncements have had the in-built premise that 
Kashmir is disputed territory. That the U.S. regards part or all 
of Kashmir as disputed is not so much a point of issue, given 
the undeniable historical reality that Kashmir's status was the 
subject of U.N. resolutions, but what is of concern is the 
marked hardening of the U.S. attitude towards India's position 
in the dispute, including a hint of an intervention in the 
problem that will not be in India's interest. 
  There are three new elements that stand out in Ms. Raphel's 
presentation that are the critical indicators of the tilt 
against India. The first is an unsubstantiated assertion that 
Pakistan's support in fuelling the militancy in the Valley is 
not as much as it used to be. Not only would this formulation 
give greater credibility to the claim that the stir in the 
Valley is wholly spontaneous and indigenous, but it would 
reinforce the attempts from across the border to keep the 
militancy "spontaneous." The second disturbing element is that 
in a shift from the stand of the Bush administration the Clinton 
administration now appears to be questioning the efficacy of the 
Shimla Agreement. Until now, the American emphasis on Shimla had 
implied an acceptance of India's argument that Kashmir was an 
issue to be resolved bilaterally. Another indication of the U.S. 
interest in internationalising Kashmir is the suggestion that 
America will sound out Russia on a joint initiative for conflict 
resolution in South Asia. 
  The Narasimha Rao administration appears to have been taken 
by surprise by the unfriendly tenor of these remarks, especially 
because it has in recent months tried to respond to American and 
international pressure by setting up a human rights commission 
and also indicating a willingness to talk to Pakistan on 
Kashmir. But what the Government has not perhaps taken into 
account is that precisely because it took these steps only under 
pressure and is perceived to be amenable to this sort of 
pressure, does Washington find it tactically rewarding to turn 
up the heat. 
  As we had said earlier in these columns, India's position on 
Kashmir is becoming increasingly vulnerable because of the 
continuing inability to initiate a political process in the 
State, the sharpening perception of the Indian State as an alien 
oppressor, reinforced by the image of the Army laying siege to 
the religious symbols of the Kashmiri people. But most troubling 
is New Delhi's reluctance to accept the reality that the only 
way to take Kashmir off the world's radar screen is to engage 
Islamabad in a mutual confidence building exercise so that an 
insecure regime in Pakistan does not feel compelled to invite 
external mediators in, at the cost of the region's sovereignty. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59866 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Comment, Analysis on U.S. Stand </TI></H3>
<H4>   `A Dangerous Volte-Face' </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0076A Madras THE HINDU in English 3 Nov 93 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0076A </F>
<F P=104>  Madras THE HINDU </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Prem Shankar Jha; quotation marks, italicized </F>
words as published] 
  [Text] U.S. officials may swear till they are blue in the 
face that the statements made by the Assistant Secretary of 
State for South Asia, Ms. Robin Raphel on Kashmir, do not spell 
any change in the U.S.' policy towards Kashmir. But no 
subsequent clarification can change the fact that Ms. Raphel's 
remarks constitute the most dramatic and inexplicable turnabout 
in U.S. foreign policy since the Clinton administration came to 
power. It is not impossible that Ms. Raphel did not mean to 
question the validity of the Instrument of Accession, but 
despite being inundated with queries from Washington think tanks 
and newspapers all over the world, the U.S. State department has 
not issued a contradiction. Policy makers in New Delhi have no 
option but to take Ms. Raphel's statement seriously and fathom 
the motives behind it. 
  The shift has not really been sudden. Ms. Raphel started 
several weeks ago by saying that the U.S. considered the whole 
of Kashmir a disputed territory. She has since elaborated that 
the U.S. no longer considered the Simla agreement a valid basis 
for the settlement of the dispute. In support of this she cited 
the fact that there had been very few discussions under the 
agreement in the last 20 years. At this point observers in India 
assumed that the U.S. was considering reviving the U.N. 
resolutions of 1948, which proposed a plebiscite in the State 
once peace had been restored. But in her latest briefing Ms 
Raphel has broken entirely new ground. 
  The U.N. resolutions envisaged only two choices for the 
people of Kashmir, whether to belong to Pakistan or India. If 
Ms. Raphel's briefing truly reflects government policy, the U.S. 
has explicitly delinked itself from that resolution. It now 
believes that the Kashmiris must have the right to choose 
independence if they so wish. What is more this right must be 
exercised by the people in the whole of the princely state of 
Kashmir, i.e., both Jammu and Kashmir and `Azad Kashmir,' 
including Gilgit, and the other areas that Pakistan has already 
explicitly annexed. 
  The possibility can no longer be ruled out, therefore that 
the U.S. is now questioning the validity of the Instrument of 
Accession that made Kashmir part of India because it would not 
mind seeing a fourth nation in the subcontinent, carved out of 
bits of India and Pakistan. If this is indeed so, Ms. Raphel's 
remark questioning the accession was only undiplomatic and not 
inaccurate. 
  What is genuinely surprising about the above stance is its 
illogicality. To begin with, it is simply not true that the U.S. 
did not accept India's sovereignty over not only present day 
Jammu and Kashmir but over the whole of the original princely 
state as it existed in 1947. During the Security Council debate 
in April-May 1948, the U.S. permanent Representative, Warren 
Austin stated categorically that with the signature of the 
Instrument of Accession sovereignty over Jammu and Kashmir 
passed from Maharaja Hari Singh to the government of India... 
That was why, he said, it was India that had come to the U.N. as 
the petitioner (Security Council Official Records, Vol. 1-15, 
Page 371). 
  The acceptance of Indian sovereignty is implicit in the 
U.S.' 
support for the Security Council resolution of May 1948 which 
called for the vacation of the entire state by Pakistani forces, 
the maintenance of a sufficient number of troops by India to 
ensure the return to peace, and a plebiscite after an 
unspecified period of time to be held under Indian auspices. 
Thenceforth every time the U.S. endorsed a plebiscite, it willy 
nilly endorsed the fact that Sovereignty over the whole of 
Kashmir vested in India till the time when it was held. 
  Ms. Raphel's remark that the Simla agreement ought to be 
scrapped because very few discussions had been held under it, 
turns logic on its head. Every border between nation is the 
result of an agreement, sometimes explicit, at others implicit. 
When both countries recognise the border there are no 
discussions. These arise only when there is a dispute. Between 
1972 and 1990 there were very few such discussions because 
Pakistan accepted the LoC as the de facto 
international border. They began to question it once more only 
when an insurrection, carely fomented by them for four years, 
broke out in 1990. It was India's mistake that it even agreed to 
discuss Kashmir in any form or shape after that. That has given 
the opening to the U.S. that it may be seeking to exploit today. 
  In questioning the Instrument of Accession the Clinton 
Administration has questioned the basis of not only the 
accession of Kashmir to India, but of more than 600 princely 
states to India and Pakistan. What is more, since the Instrument 
was the lynchpin of the transfer of British paramountcy over the 
princely states to the successor governments of India and 
Pakistan, it calls into question the transfer of power itself, 
and consequently the legal basis for the existence of Pakistan 
and India. 
  Why on earth should it want to do so? If one were to believe 
its protestations it is with the noblest of motives -- Peace and 
Human Rights. 
  Both of these are reasonable, even unexceptionable goals. 
But 
so far as the maintenance of peace is concerned, the U.S. would 
achieve it far more easily if it put pressure on Pakistan to 
stop fomenting rebellion in Kashmir, told it to forget its legal 
claim to `PoK' [Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir] and told both 
countries to respect the status quo and turn LoC into the 
international boundary, with perhaps minor modifications, as was 
envisaged beyond a shadow or doubt in the Simla agreement. 
  As for the Human Rights, Ms. Raphel who was in India when 
the 
Babri Masjid was demolished and quizzed several senior 
journalists, including this writer, about its fallout on 
Hindu-Muslim relations, knows better than anyone else in the 
State department just how tense these relations are today. She 
can hardly be ignorant of the holocaust that would follow if 
Kashmir was snatched away from the country. 
  The U.S. did start down the road outlined above in 1991 and 
to curb Pakistan activities in Kashmir it put the country on the 
terrorist watch list, and it repeatedly urged both countries to 
settle the dispute under the Simla agreement. But that was the 
policy of Mr. George Bush. 
  To gauge what this might be just take a look at where 
Kashmir 
-- the whole state and not just Indian Jammu and Kashmir -- is 
situated. 
  Kashmir is like a broad dagger thrust between Sinkiang and 
Tibet. What is more it is ideally suited to dominate the largest 
of the Central Asian republics, Uzbekistan. A free Kashmir, 
acutely vulnerable to both India and Pakistan, because it is 
dependent on both for markets, tourists and access to the sea, 
will immediately look for a Godfather. Who could fill the bill 
better than the Americans? 
  There could be a secondary purpose also. This would be to 
drive a physical wedge between China and India. Unlike our own 
intellectuals, U.S. analysts could not have failed to grasp the 
significance of the Sino-Indian agreement on the Border areas, 
of Prime Minister, Mr. Narasimha Rao's nearly four hours of 
talks with the Chinese Premier, Mr. Li Peng, the great 
importance that China attached to the visit, and the 
unmistakable hints given by the latter that he expected much 
closer cooperation with India on international issues in the 
future. It is even possible that the outcome of Mr. Rao's visit 
to China tipped the scales within the U.S. administration in 
favour of the policy that it is now unveiling. 
  The above analysis admittedly gives a concreteness to U.S. 
design that could be misleading. U.S. analysts must know that an 
independent, united Kashmir will be resisted by both India and 
Pakistan. They have also learned from the public's reaction to 
the involvement of U.S. troops in Somalia, that Americans are 
not deeply interested in international affairs, and especially 
in military adventures abroad, if these mean a loss of American 
lives. Despite this when India's very nationhood is at stake, if 
the government's repeated assertions do not bring forth an 
explicit endorsement of the validity of the Instrument of 
Accession, it will do well to put the worst construction on Ms. 
Raphel's statement. 
  The first need is to explore afresh whether Pakistan 
realises 
that it has finally reached a situation where it stands to lose 
more from its adventurism than to gain from it. If so, an 
agreement to settle somewhat along the LoC and then work jointly 
to give the Kashmiris the maximum possible autonomy within 
existing boundaries, may begin to look a lot more attractive 
even to them. If it does not, then India will do well to close 
the Kashmir dispute unilaterally, by declaring unambiguously 
that the accession of the State to India is no longer open to 
debate. 
  Secondly, India will do well to strengthen its bridges with 
China. China faces similar problems with regard to Tibet and may 
therefore welcome cooperation on this issue in its own 
self-interest. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59867 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Comment, Analysis on U.S. Stand </TI></H3>
<H4>   Importance of Remarks </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0076B Madras INDIAN EXPRESS in English 9 Nov 93 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0076B </F>
<F P=104>  Madras INDIAN EXPRESS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arati R. Jerath: "The Raphel Rhetoric; U.S. Line </F>
on Kashmir Might Spur New Strategic Alliance"] 
  [Text] We must indeed thank Robin Raphel. Deliberately or 
inadvertently, she has given us a peep into her mind and 
forewarned us of the direction in which her thoughts are running 
and the shape she intends to give to U.S. policy on South Asia. 
  Whatever the State Department may say now to defuse her 
bombshell, India cannot afford to ignore the signals coming loud 
and clear from her comments. She is, after all, the point person 
in Washington for South Asia. Moreover, she has a blank page on 
which to write and was hand-picked for the job by President Bill 
Clinton whom she knows personally. When a key person such as 
Raphel gives a backgrounder, her statements cannot be dismissed 
as off-the-cuff remarks and must be presumed to be inputs for a 
policy in the making, if not a part of official policy already. 
  The most disturbing element in Raphel's statement 
questioning 
the validity of Kashmir's accession to India is that she has 
sought to give a quantitatively new dimension to the entire 
issue. She has chosen to revive a 1947 U.S. position, which held 
Jammu and Kashmir as disputed territory even before the United 
Nations put an international seal on it in 1948, thus taking the 
dispute beyond the confines of Indo-Pak rivalry over the state 
and the consequent threat of a nuclear war in the subcontinent 
which Washington has been touting as the reason for its 
excessive concern. In fact, Raphel's comments clearly hint at a 
direct U.S. interest in Kashmir which is not necessarily 
circumscribed by its policies on India and Pakistan. 
  Washington's escalating interest in Kashmir must be seen in 
the context of its strategically sensitive location. It provides 
direct access into Tibet and consequently China. It is also 
contiguous with the Islamic Crescent with a border just 20 
kilometres away from the Central Asian Republic of Tajikistan 
where the battle lines currently being drawn by the U.S., Russia 
and Iran to gain supremacy could change the destiny of the 
entire region. If the U.S. desire for a toehold in this area 
after the Second World War was primarily to contain Russia, 
today, its guns are trained on China and Iran. And Kashmir, with 
its unique position, has the potential of becoming a key factor 
in the new geopolitical strategy being fashioned in Washington 
to deal with the two nations the U.S. sees as major threats. 
  It is worth noting that the U.S. was the first country to 
open an embassy in the Tajik Capital of Dushanbe. It is also 
significant that Raphel's present tour, said to be aimed at 
acquainting herself with South Asia, takes her to Dushanbe and 
Moscow after Dhaka, Islamabad and Kabul. 
  To give Washington the benefit of the doubt when it says 
that 
Raphel's remarks are not a policy statement, it is true that the 
attempt to redraw the geopolitical map of the region by linking 
Kashmir to the Central Asian belt is merely one of the options 
being explored by strategists in the U.S. The Clinton 
administration's bewildering flip-flops on the Kashmir issue 
indicate that a policy has yet to be formulated. But the 
mounting pressures and the red herrings that pop up from time to 
time clearly suggest that the U.S. intends to keep its options 
on Kashmir open. 
  By letting the cat out of the bag on the new thinking in 
Washington, Raphel may have done us a great favour. If, indeed, 
her statements do not yet constitute U.S. policy, India must 
move in before they do and firmly link Kashmir to its own 
survival as a modern, secular, market democracy. An independent 
Kashmir, subject to buffeting pressures in a region where 
ambitious powers are striving to carve out spheres of influence, 
cannot benefit anyone, neither India, nor Pakistan, nor even the 
Kashmiri people. One only has to look at Afghanistan to see the 
consequences of meddling in areas where dormant tribal 
affiliations can resurface with a vengeance in bloody ethnic 
strife. 
  Has the world already forgotten the brutal onslaught on 
Kashmir by Waziri tribesmen from the North-West Frontier in 
September 1947 when the state was not under India's protective 
umbrella? Can Pakistan afford a sharpening of existing 
fissiparous tendencies in Baluchistan and the NWFP [North-West 
Frontier Province] once a free Kashmir which includes POK 
becomes a reality? 
  As for India, the Kashmir question has never been so vital 
for its future. A second partition, once again on religious 
lines, fostered by Pakistan, could destroy the foundation of the 
Indian nation. An independent Kashmir is bound to raise a big 
question mark on the status of 120 million Muslims in the rest 
of India, making the bloody aftermath of the Ayodhya crisis look 
like a teddy bear's picnic. 
  The trouble is that the perceptions of the Raphels of this 
world are shaped by shallow interactions on Delhi's cocktail 
circuit where flippant remarks pass off as studied analysis, and 
compounded by a decidedly grim situation on the ground in the 
Valley. Raphel is therefore not alone in believing that India 
has lost Kashmir, that it never was a part of the Indian 
maintream, that severing the state from the rest of the country 
will not have any economic, social or political consequences 
here. 
  It is imperative for India to disabuse policy makers and 
strategists, not just in Washington but in other Western 
Capitals as well, of the fundamental fallacies in their 
perceptions without indulging in xenophobic hysteria or 
jingoism. The unanimous outburst here against Raphel's 
statements is a good beginning. The strong reactions Raphel has 
provoked send a more effective message than any official 
exchange. 
  Unfortunately, Washington is too far away to understand the 
depth of feeling in India. There must be a follow-up to the 
protest. What is needed is a concerted strategy -- some 
"creative diplomacy," to use Washington's new catchword -- to 
hammer in some home truths to those who think they can resolve 
the problems of this region. 
  Here again, the Clinton administration may have unwittingly 
helped us. In trying to extricate itself from the tight spot in 
which it finds itself thanks to Raphel, the State Department has 
trilateralised the Kashmir issue by including China-held parts 
of the state in its definition of disputed territory. Although 
there has been no reaction from Beijing yet on the controversy, 
China cannot but be aware of the implications for its security 
of Washington's formulations. Similarly, Iran, which considers 
itself a major player in a region which has opened up with 
demise of the Soviet Union, will be watching events here very 
closely. 
  Quite clearly, the Clinton administration has ended up 
muddying the waters and if it is not careful, it may soon find 
that its ham-handed attempts to redraw the lines in this region 
will make allies of those it wants to see least in a strategic 
convergence -- India, China and Iran. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59868 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Comment, Analysis on U.S. Stand </TI></H3>
<H4>   `Two-Faced U.S. Foreign Policy' </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0076C Bombay THE SUNDAY TIMES OF INDIA in English 7 Nov 
93 p 9 </F>

<F P=103> 94AS0076C </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay THE SUNDAY TIMES OF INDIA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bhaskar Menon; quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] New York, November 6. Robin Raphel, United States 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs, lobbed a 
smoke-bomb into Indo-U.S. relations last week when, at a 
briefing for South Asian journalists in Washington, she said: 
"We view the whole of Kashmir as disputed territory, the status 
of which needs to be resolved." Responding to a question on why 
President Clinton in his United Nations speech had mentioned 
Kashmir, she said: "It was meant to say we see Kashmir on the 
radar screen along with Yugoslavia and Somalia and lots of other 
places in the former Soviet Union, Georgia, where there is civil 
conflict going on. We can't easily overlook it and there is a 
message in that." 
  At about the same time, former Congressman Stephen Solarz, 
who is expected to be the next American ambassador to India, was 
knocking the socks off a group of visiting Indian members of 
Parliament. At a meeting with them in Washington, with the media 
present, he asked a "hypothetical" question: "What effect would 
the secession of Kashmir have on the rest of India?" 
  In sum, these incidents point to the fact that after two 
decades of agreeing with New Delhi that the Kashmir issue should 
be settled bilaterally under the Simla Agreement, Washington has 
decided to internationalise it, and is doing so in the most 
disruptive manner. In negating Kashmir's accession to India, it 
is in effect questioning the integrity of the country as a 
whole. And by picturing India as analogous to Yugoslavia or 
Somalia, it is quite deliberately introducing tensions into a 
relationship that otherwise has improved substantially in recent 
years and looked ready to take off into a growing economy 
partnership. Despite State Department clarifications, there is a 
clear perception among Indian observers of a new and dangerous 
thrust to American policy. 
  To make sense of that policy, it is necessary to see it as a 
product of powerful domestic forces contending to shape the role 
of the United States in the post-Cold War world. Largely 
responsible for what Indians would consider the negative aspects 
of American policy are the forces of the national security 
establishment, involving the military sectors of the economy, 
the vast intelligence and cover operations community, and the 
military itself, with the Pentagon serving as their joint 
institutional power-base. And largely responsible for what 
Indians would consider the positive elements of American policy 
are the mainstream forces of the country's vital and liberal 
democracy, its enormously productive industrial and trading 
establishments, and its cultural and intellectual institutions. 
During the Cold War, these forces worked coherently together to 
face the common threat of communalism, but since the collapse of 
the USSR, they have been in an increasingly uncomfortable 
relationship domestically. Inevitably, that is projected into a 
Jekyl and Hyde foreign policy. 
  This split personality of American foreign policy emerged to 
public view in 1992. At precisely the time when the Bush 
administration was talking of a New World Order centred on a 
revitalised United Nations, the Pentagon was circulating a 46 
page strategy document that called for the Untied States to 
maintain a one-superpower world by thwarting the development of 
any potential rivals. The secret document was leaked to The New 
York Times, which, in a front-page story on 8 March 1992, said, 
"The Pentagon document articulates the clearest rejection to 
date of collective internationalism," the post World War II 
strategy incarnated in the United Nations. 
  In essence, the Pentagon strategy aims at blocking any 
country from going down the road to global competition with the 
United States. Nuclear proliferation is deemed a high priority 
in that context, and the paper supported the use of violence to 
prevent it. Articulating the Pentagon's priorities in South 
Asia, the document said that the United States "should 
discourage Indian hegemonic aspirations over the other States in 
South Asia and on the Indian Ocean. With regard to Pakistan, a 
constructive U.S.-Pakistani military relationship will be an 
important element in our strategy to promote stable security 
conditions in South West Asia and Central Asia. We should 
therefore endeavour to rebuild our military relationship, given 
acceptable resolution of our nuclear concerns." 
  In another section pertinent to India, the Pentagon paper 
referred to nations "that could, in the future, develop 
strategic aims and a defence posture of regionwide or global 
domination." Because the United States no longer faced either a 
global threat or a hostile, non-democratic power dominating a 
region critical to its interests, it said, "We have the 
opportunity to meet threats at lower levels and lower costs." 
What steps might be involved at these lower levels was not 
addressed in the excerpts published in The New York Times. But 
in some cases they have been clearly evident. In Iraq, it 
involved the American ambassador suckering Saddam Hussein into 
invading Kuwait and precipitating international action to rid 
the country of all weapons of mass destruction. In North Korea, 
it involved getting the government to sign the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty in the expectation of economic 
largesse, and then conducting war games in South Korea that 
drove Pyongyang to violate its agreement with the IAEA. 
  In South Asia, faced with democratic India on one side and 
long-standing American ally Pakistan on the other, the approach 
has been more covert, and can be described only by resorting to 
a kind of join-the-dots journalism. Harshad Mehta's allegations 
against the Prime Minister and the fact that Ms Robin Raphel, a 
CIA analyst before she joined the Foreign Service, was the 
political Counsellor at the American embassy in New Delhi till 
the summer of 1993 could be some of these dots. The picture that 
merges is of an attempt to destabilise India and split it along 
communal lines. Recent American attempts to highlight the issue 
of Kashmir would fall into that pattern, and it behooves Indians 
to take that as a working hypothesis in formulating popular and 
policy response, especially to possible terrorist events during 
the current elections. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59869 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea002___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     11 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Comment, Analysis on U.S. Stand </TI></H3>
<H4>   China Policy Related </H4>
<F P=102> 94AS0076D Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA in English 10 Nov 93 pp 
1, 17 </F>

<F P=103> 94AS0076D </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Subhash Kirpekar: "U.S. Exploiting Kashmir"] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi, November 9. The United States desire to 
contain China is being perceived here as a possible reason for 
its exploiting the Kashmir dispute to further its own national 
interests. 
  It is being said in influential circles here that the U.S. 
is 
not as much interested in India, Pakistan or Kashmir directly as 
it is in using the Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir (PoK) region to 
gain direct access to Tibet, sit at the doorstep of China and 
needle China on human rights violations in Tibet. 
  A second U.S. objective is to compel India and Pakistan to 
sign the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT). The Kashmir 
dispute comes handy to the U.S. in trying to achieve this other 
objective also. 
  The "China factor" is important as the U.S. never reconciled 
itself to Pakistan ceding certain areas in the northern 
territory of PoK to China in 1962. This made possible the 
Karakoram highway and gave a motorable road to China leading to 
Karachi and the waters of the Arabian Sea. 
  As it happened, Sardar Swaran Singh was India's foreign 
minister then and leading a delegation to hold the first of five 
rounds of talks with Pakistan. Some of the senior members of the 
delegation, including Mr G. Parthasarthy, India's high 
commissioner to Pakistan, were in favour of calling off the 
talks in protest against Pakistan's act of ceding territory to 
China which did not belong to Pakistan. 
  However, Mr Swaran Singh, after gathering a second opinion 
from other delegates and also those who were not part of the 
delegation, like Mr Pran Chopra, felt it more prudent to 
continue with the talks as walking out in protest would be 
portrayed as India having wriggled out of a situation. 
  During the Indo-Pak talks then, India lodged its protest 
with 
Pakistan over its ceding of this territory to China. When China 
conveyed its displeasure over the Indian stand, it was stated 
that the agreement provided that what was subsequently to be 
done with the ceded territory depended on the settlement reached. 
  The view of a leading American journalist, Mr Tom Brady, 
then 
was that it was a clever move by China to get Pakistan to cede a 
territory that gave it access to the Arabian Sea and the Gulf 
region. As things stand, that territory is still with China and 
it rankles not only India but the U.S. also. 
  It is possible that in this backdrop, the U.S. could be 
floating the idea of a "unified independent Kashmir" through 
various Kashmiri groups. There is no hard evidence for this 
inference but considering that an independent Kashmir might be 
more amenable to U.S. influence than to that of India or 
Pakistan, it would be logically desirable from the U.S. 
viewpoint to cultivate this proposition, more so because of the 
unforeseeable kind of problems that might arise in the Central 
Asian region and in Pakistan in the not too distant future. Put 
simply, an independent Kashmir serves U.S. interests better. 
  It is known that the U.S. policy on China is to contain it 
and continue to involve China in the world mainstream so that it 
could convert itself into a democracy at some point of time. Its 
first major approach to China, incidentally, was through 
Pakistan when Dr Henry Kissinger paved the way for the 
President, Mr Richard Nixon, to visit Beijing in the full glare 
of international publicity. 
  Although U.S. regards Tibet as an autonomous region of 
China, 
it continues to use Tibet as an important stick to beat China 
with on the issue of human rights violations in Tibet. If only 
the U.S. can get to play a role in sorting out the Kashmir 
dispute, it feels, it can increase the pressure on China by 
focussing more sharply on human rights violations in Tibet. 
  In this context, when Ms Robin Raphel spoke of Kashmir being 
disputed, the U.S. interest in the PoK part therefore cannot be 
lost sight of by Indian policy makers. It is that part of 
Kashmir, more than the part with India, that gives direct access 
to Tibet and China and serves U.S. interests better. 
  There is a strong view among Kashmiri groups also that 
neither the U.S. nor the European Parliament should be allowed 
to play the broker in resolving the Kashmir issue. Despite that, 
if the U.S. does get to play a role because India and Pakistan 
cannot solve the problem through bilateral talks, the the U.S. 
could well use that influence, after resolving the Kashmir 
problem, to force India and Pakistan to sign on the NPT [Nuclear 
Proliferation Treaty]. 
  Unfortunately, there is no Policy Planning Group in the 
external affairs ministry today. Such a think tank existed 
during the days of Mrs Indira Gandhi's prime ministership and 
was led by Mr G. Parthasarthy. 
  There is a view that such a group needs to be set up now to 
provide valuable inputs and help avoid the impression that 
government's responses were of a knee-jerk type. Apart from 
experts, strategists and academicians, it could also have 
articulate businessmen who can play an important role in 
lobbying abroad for India. 
  As far back as 1988, a former foreign secretary had 
recommended to the government to employ Mr Mark Siegel as a 
lobbyist for India in the U.S. 
  Taking into consideration that the Israeli ambassador to 
India has backed India on the cordon around Hazratbal shrine 
issue, India could build on it and involve the powerful and 
influential Israeli-Jewish lobby to which Mr Siegel belongs to 
serve indian interests. 
  At a time when Pakistan is going all out to befriend and 
convert U.S. Senators and British MPs [Member of Parliament] to 
support its weak case on Kashmir, observers feel it would be 
prudent for India to get its act together and make the best of 
its strong case on Kashmir which might otherwise go by default. 
  Also interesting is the fact that relations between Israel 
and China are warming up as are Sino-Indian relations. Sources 
say it is perhaps time for a New Delhi-Beijing-Tel Aviv axis to 
swing into operation to thwart evil designs on Kashmir. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59870 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Turkey Called Subservient to U.S. Interests </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0001A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 30 Oct 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0001A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muzhir 'Arif: "Turkey: Illusion and Reality"] </F>
  [Text] A state of irresolution still reigns over Turkey's 
foreign policy toward Iraq. Attention to America still is 
stronger than attention to Turkey's real interests with Iraq. 
  Although everyone in Turkey now agrees on the need to lift 
the blockade on Iraq, and Turkey's prime minister herself has 
spoken more than once on the subject, particularly during her 
recent visit to the United States, the Ankara government has 
given no open sign of taking the initiative in this direction, 
although Turkey is one of the countries most harmed by the 
blockade imposed on Iraq. Official Turkish pronouncements 
sometimes can be interpreted (this is my personal opinion) as a 
kind of inducement to the United States and other Western 
countries to give Turkey financial and economic aid. American 
President Clinton's vacillating statements on aid to Turkey 
perhaps give something of an impression about the truth of what 
I have indicated. 
  It should be said here that the continued foreign military 
presence on Turkish soil to confront Iraq means that Turkey's 
movement with regard to lifting the blockade on the Iraqi people 
is restricted. This is because any official Turkish move to this 
effect will be met by an unannounced reaction by the coalition 
forces to impede the Turkish move in this direction. 
  The Kurdish card will be one of the most powerful cards used 
to pressure the Turkish government and prevent it from resuming 
full relations with Iraq. Other cards that can be used against 
the Turks include Cyprus, relations with Greece, relations with 
the former Soviet republics in Asia, and relations with Iran 
that can ebb and flow for many reasons and motives. 
  Ending the foreign presence in Turkey will free Turkish will 
and Turkish official and popular decisionmaking from heavy 
shackles. This, however, does not mean that turning the words of 
Turkish officials about lifting the blockade on Iraq into deeds 
is a matter difficult to achieve before achieving the withdrawal 
of the coalition forces from Turkey. 
  Every day that passes with Iraq under blockade increases 
Turkey's economic and security problems, as Turkish officials 
themselves acknowledge. Though this acknowledgment is sincere, 
it has not yielded the desired results. At best, it has seemed 
to be a campaign to elicit the sympathy of others to aid Turkey, 
or it may be an expedient for domestic consumption, to rally 
public opinion that will accept nothing but the historic good 
relations with Iraq and lifting the blockade from the Iraqi 
people. 
  A well-known political principle is that the advent of a new 
president and a government from another party means that one 
need not retain the old policy of the previous president and 
government when that policy is unacceptable to the people as 
being at odds with their interests and those of the country. 
  However, the current administration and government in Turkey 
have in no way acted on this principle, despite comments about 
the harm that Turkey's previous president caused to Turkey by 
facilitating military aggression against Iraq, approving the 
concentration of coalition forces in Turkey, and participating 
in imposing a blockade on Iraq. Add to this the fact that 
continued penetration by the Turkish army and air force into 
Iraqi territory on the pretext of pursuing elements of the 
Turkish Kurdistan Labor Party and continued cooperation with 
renegades subservient to Iraq's Kurds is against the official 
policy of the new president and government in Turkey. This is 
something that conflicts with the agreements on borders and 
relations between Baghdad and Ankara. It conflicts with 
international laws and practices, and it also conflicts with the 
conviction of Turkish officials and political figures that the 
border with Iraq cannot be brought under control if the Iraqi 
state is absent from the area of self-rule. 
  Desire and embarrassment (desire to resume relations with 
Iraq, embarrassment at behaving rationally, not to say fear of 
America) is not a fruitful policy. I have great hope that 
Turkish officials will realize that foreign financial aid, 
however great, comes with heavy conditions. Whatever this aid 
may be, it can never compensate Turkey for its continued losses 
because of the blockade of Iraq. Turkish security will be 
realized outside of bribes paid from the Turkish treasury to 
renegades who have no future. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59871 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reasons for Semolina Shortages; Tension Mounts </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0053A Algiers EL WATAN in French 2 Dec 93 pp 1, 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0053A </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers EL WATAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tahar Hani: "Semolina: Causes of the Shortage"] </F>
  [Text] People are becoming increasingly concerned about the 
availability of semolina in a number of towns and cities around 
the country. While the populace grumbles about shortages, 
officials of ERIAD [five food industry enterprises, the agency 
that produces and imports the commodity, are peddling a very 
different line. 
  Mr. Hanoun, ERIAD's marketing director for the central 
region, claims that 90 percent of this year's distribution plan 
has been implemented, noting too that between 1992 and 1993 
there was a 17-percent augmentation of product availability and 
several new outlets were opened in remote, rugged regions. In 
fact, if demand had been normal--in other words equal to last 
year's--the total quantity of imported and domestically produced 
semolina would have been ample. "What has happened is that 
rumors and the current situation in the country have combined to 
allow insecurity to creep in." 
  Mr. Hanoun said there were three principal causes. First, 
semolina of late has become a "blue-chip" commodity. Second, the 
tripling of prices of other food products has made them 
prohibitively expensive. Finally, private households have been 
hoarding as much semolina as possible to prepare for any 
eventual shortages. 
  So far this year, ERIAD's central branch has marketed close 
to 3 million quintals of semolina, a volume that ordinarily 
would have been sufficient for the region, meeting the 1993 
target of 3,500,000 quintals set at the beginning of the year. 
"We have a distribution plan that is still being implemented," 
Mr. Hanoun explains. "Production units are working round the 
clock. ENIAL [expansion not given] is also working very hard to 
implement the import program and more or less stabilize the 
market." 
  The regional marketing director acknowledges that at present 
the market is absorbing all the semolina being distributed and 
admits the enterprise is not really in a position to go beyond 
its current program at this time. But he remains optimistic 
about next year. 
  In fact, two mills, one at Corso and the other at Baghlia, 
will be going into operation. Also, the Algerian market will 
doubtless be inundated once the cost of imported semolina 
declines. 
  Skyrocketing prices have been a factor in their own right. A 
100-kg bag of semolina sometimes costs as much as 1,300 Algerian 
dinars, even though the official price is only 450. Our 
interlocutor pointed out that ERIAD is only a retailer, not a 
price control agency. 
  At Tizi Ouzou, shortages began to appear about mid-August. 
Substantial quantities were programmed for the region but 
somehow never found their way to consumers. Local officials 
suggest the problem stemmed from household overstocking and 
"organized diversion" by speculators of semolina set aside for 
the region. 
  ERIAD maintains it met all its targets. During the first few 
months of 1992, the wilaya received 484,966 quintals, whereas 
corresponding deliveries for 1993 were up by 15 percent to 
606,159 quintals. 
  In the west, the problem does not seem to be as acute as in 
the central region, since people in the western region consume 
more flour than semolina. 
  The enterprise's western region branch, which has not had a 
single day of down time this year, produced 103 percent of its 
quota. Whereas the target was 2,346,000 quintals, actual output 
was 2,413,000. In other words, there was surplus production. In 
Annaba, the shortage is due in part to the purchasing 
preferences of some livestock producers who prefer to buy bags 
of semolina at 450 dinars to feed their stock rather than pay 
750 dinars. Livestock producers carried off 20 percent of the 
production intended for households. This has been an especially 
acute problem in pastoral regions such as Khenchela, Tebessa, 
and Batna. 
  ERIAD's manager for the eastern region sings a quite 
different tune. He maintains that the annual importation and 
distribution program was fulfilled and that the only snag was 
delays in merchandise arrival. An example: In October, 45,000 
quintals went on the market at cooperatives and other 
supermarkets. The wilaya of Annaba alone said it needed about 
38,000 quintals, while the other wilayas of the eastern region 
claimed they needed much more than that. 
  In November, 81,316 quintals were delivered to the port of 
Annaba, compared to the target amount of 104,000. In 1992, for 
that same period, the enterprise distributed altogether 416,235 
quintals, while in 1993 the volume of semolina was 510,202 
quintals. 
  The two semolina plants in the town of Guelma together 
produce more than 1,000 quintals per day. The actual needs of 
the populace are estimated at 37,000 quintals a year. 
  The shutdown of the two plants for maintenance caused some 
minor shortages. Even though supply now slightly exceeds demand, 
people are worried. Semolina sales in September amounted to 
41,500 quintals. More than 43,512 quintals went on the market in 
October, including 13,850 quintals of imported product. 
Officials say several factors are behind the prevailing mood of 
insecurity. Many growers marketed their crop themselves instead 
of through CCLS [Special Cooperatives for Grains and Dry 
Legumes], since a quintal of wheat costs 1,000 dinars. Also, the 
semolina market has been victimized by "trabendo" [black-market] 
operations. Traffickers in the commodity jack up the price to 
several times the official rate. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59872 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Superpowers, UNSC Accused of Violating Country's Human 
Rights </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0008B Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 17 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0008B </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Iraqi Journalists Condemn Mad </F>
Attacks on Iraq"] 
  [Text] Iraqi journalists have condemned the mad Western and 
Zionist campaign against Iraq. 
  The Syndicate of Iraqi Journalists confirmed, in a 
statement, 
that this notorious attack was aimed at prolonging the hostile 
and criminal sanctions against the people of Iraq. 
  It explained that human rights in Iraq were protected and 
safeguarded by the Iraqi constitution, at a time when human 
rights were willfully and bloodily violated with the knowledge 
of the big powers in many countries of the world. It pointed out 
that Britain, France, and America ignored these excesses and 
ongoing violations of human rights because the rulers in 
question were serving their interests and goals. 
  The Syndicate of Iraqi Journalists accused the big powers 
and 
the Security Council of violating Iraqi human rights by 
persisting in continuing the sanctions. Was not forbidding the 
Iraqi people food, medicine, and common necessities, they asked, 
an intentional violation of the rights accorded them by 
international conventions and laws? 
  The Syndicate of Iraqi Journalists called on Arab and 
foreign 
press organizations and federations to take a stand for justice 
and right, and to expose the hidden goals of this oppressive 
campaign. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59873 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Achievements, UNSC Oppressions Detailed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0009A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 18 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0009A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Abd-al-Jabbar Muhsin: "An Accounting of </F>
Failures"] 
  [Text] Iraq cuts the lifeline to the south. Iraq blockades 
the north. Iraq impoverishes the central region. What is this 
Iraq that works against its south, north, and everything in 
between? What is this Iraq that works against Iraq, trying to 
assassinate it? 
  Ask the Security Council and those who dominate its 
resolutions. They are the ones dominating and besieging all of 
Iraq. They forbid all Iraq to have a loaf of bread, medicine, 
and cloth--with official resolutions they are proud of, which 
they are delighted to agree upon. They allege that all is well 
in the world, even that the world is new and pure, as stable as 
a mountain top. Why? Because the big people who are manipulated 
by the United Nations agree to extend the sanctions and to 
deprive Iraq of all imports and exports. And shamelessly, 
without any feeling of fraud or deceit, they claim that Iraq is 
besieging itself. 
  Iraq has become, from their point of view, a hook on which 
they may hang all their errors and evils, including their crimes 
against Iraq. 
  Again: Why? 
  First, because Iraq is a huge reservoir of oil in the grip 
of 
a powerful people; they want its oil for free or almost free, 
down to the last drop, not just down to the last barrel. 
  Secondly, because Iraq has reclaimed its [oil] wealth from 
the clutches of big companies and gone on to handle it justly, 
neither oppressing buyers nor cheating sellers. 
  Third, because Iraq has used its oil revenues to benefit 
people: to build factories, roads, and bridges, universities, 
schools, clinics, and residential buildings; to eliminate 
illiteracy and to liberate people from ignorance. In short, Iraq 
has moved quickly toward modernization, to bridge the gap 
between it and post-industrial society. That is to say, its 
resources have not ended up at roulette wheels, or in banks to 
be brazenly stolen, nor have the revenues from our resources 
been distributed among kings and princes. 
  Fourth, Iraq has become a power, a force for the truth that 
it defends. It is a power, a treasury of civilization, a power 
to strive toward a future where everything is new and honest. 
  Iraq is a force for a unique mind and a powerful arm. These 
factors have all strengthened the philosophy and logic of 
Commander Saddam Husayn, and his management of matters of state 
and society. I say these factors have been strengthened, making 
Iraq a material and military power. 
  This power has nothing to do with aggression, nor do its 
people have any time for aggression against anyone else. It is 
not in their character to encroach on other people's rights, 
though they may respond to aggression. It is enough that they 
safeguard their building; it is enough that they are protective 
of justice, and profoundly opposed to all evil. 
  Fifth, when they failed in their plan to alienate the leader 
from those he leads; when God, the people, and Saddam Husayn 
thwarted their efforts to destroy the people's spirit, to kill 
the conscience of the resistance, then their hatred increased, 
and these failed people's hatred grew even more bitter and 
crafty. 
  Today the whole world knows that Iraq has departed from the 
script written in the West. Countries have fallen, blocs have 
collapsed, people and countries have been torn apart. Leaders 
have crumbled under American pressure; some have chosen to rely 
on the refuge and the mercies of their enemy. All this has 
happened, yet Iraq remains as it wants to be, not as 
they want; as God, not they, has decreed. 
  And so? 
  The masters of many traitorous individuals admitted their 
failure even before we said so. 
  These many utterances from the marshes, mountains, coasts, 
and valleys are unmoved. We are and will remain justified 
because we are believers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59874 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Iraqi Versus Foreign View of Kurdish Rights Stated </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0012A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 4 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0012A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Abd-al-Jabbar Muhsin: "Rights of the Kurds"] </F>
  [Text] What rights does any national minority want in any 
country? 
  The impostors of "the Kurdish struggle"--traitorous 
groups--have never raised this question, nor has it been raised 
by the nations that pretend to be concerned about the Kurds and 
seek to protect them by falsehood and slander. 
  As for the traitorous groups, their foremost concern has 
been 
how to serve America, serve Iran, or serve any big or 
neighboring country--indeed, how to achieve for the Zionist 
entity its goals in the region. As a result, what price does 
each of the parties pay? It is not in the form of rights for the 
Kurds, but in the form of money that accumulates on gambling 
tables and personal pleasures. 
  They have completely ignored in their talk and in their 
cooperation with these parties the goal of the role that they 
have termed "a struggle"--that is to say, its relation to the 
rights of the Kurds. This is because the traitorous groups have 
perceived before others and more than others that national 
rights for the Kurds are utterly anathema to the customary 
practice of their masters. 
  As for the international parties, they want the Kurdish 
issue 
to become an instrument to dissipate some of Iraq's thrust, 
drain Iraq's resources, distract Iraq from its pan-Arab role, 
and divert Iraq from building itself up; then they would push 
Iraq into surrender to what the West wants and to the goals that 
Zionism wants in the area. 
  When the Soviet Union split up, each nationality, however 
insignificant, obtained a state or ministate as an acknowledged 
right or rights, while this was kept from the Kurds as an 
exception. No one in the new international order or in the 
remains of the Soviet Union uttered a word about the rights of 
the Kurds--bear in mind that Zionism, the United States, and the 
West generally were in the position of being able to dictate 
conditions to the new governments that the collapse left behind. 
  Since the eternal Mother of Battles, America, the entire 
West, and the Zionists have wanted northern Iraq to remain 
isolated from the body of the country. Their airplanes still fly 
over this section, units of their armies still pollute it, and 
the men and women of their intelligence agencies are still 
plotting a role for one person and charting the course of 
someone else. They extend the hand of generosity to leading 
traitors and block the flow of aid to other Kurdish citizens. 
Their audacity has gone as far as to accuse Iraq of blockading 
the Kurds, while they blockade Iraq as a whole. 
  Amid this penetration and intervention unsanctioned by 
international law and unjustified by custom or law, everyone has 
ignored the question of what the Kurds' rights are and what 
their condition is. In fact, talking even in a whisper or in 
lies about these rights raises the resentment of one party and 
the anger of another, and thus is a cause of discord. Iraq alone 
and its leader Saddam Husayn in particular have raised the 
question about the rights of the Kurds. The question was not 
raised to deal with a difficult situation through which the 
revolution was passing. It was not raised in the context of the 
violent confrontation with the West. It did not come about in 
order to avoid a sudden danger or to seek desired but threatened 
security. 
  The subject of Kurdish rights was raised on the basis of an 
ideology that regards people as equals--an ideology whose root 
is in the Noble Koran and whose branches nourish themselves on 
the facts of the age. The rights of the Kurds came from the 
position of the state's power and ability--politically, 
economically, and militarily--above all else. 
  The Kurds are Iraqi citizens first, and therefore they have 
the rights and duties of every citizen. 
  The rights of the Kurds begin with their being recognized as 
a minority with a special character on the one hand and 
incorporated into the formation of Iraqi society on the other 
hand. The Kurds consequently have the right to use their 
language--indeed, to be educated in it alongside Arabic. They 
have the right to adhere to their own customs and to develop 
their culture. 
  Iraq, under the leadership and guidance of Saddam Husayn, 
added that the Kurds should participate in governing Iraq as a 
whole and that they should act as rulers in local affairs in the 
context of the unity of Iraq and without prejudicing the rights 
of the Iraqi people as a whole or of its central government in 
guiding affairs so as to benefit everyone and prevent harm to 
all. 
  Thus, Kurds have become members of the central government, 
the central parliament, and central institutions--just as they 
have come to have their local authorities. 
  Indeed, the Iraqi state has not neglected the right of the 
Kurds to disagree among themselves in opinion and ideology in a 
multiparty system to which all doors have been opened. In the 
forefront of these parties were those who are now seeking the 
sympathy of Iraq's enemies and inciting these enemies against 
their own country. 
  What, other than what we have mentioned, are national 
rights? 
  Furthermore, is it not Iraq, which is accused of blockading 
the Kurds, that has spent billions to develop life in the 
Kurdish regions, while the neighboring countries that the 
traitors serve want to keep the Kurdish people locked in the age 
of pastoralism? 
  Today, after the years of fighting in the Mother of Battles, 
the Kurdish citizen realizes that under the leadership of Saddam 
Husayn a free and dignified life for himself and his national 
rights exist for the first time in history. 
  Certain it is that this truth will someday be transformed 
into affectionate action that will amaze the world when, after 
all the noise of propaganda, it is seen that Iraq's Kurds want 
no alternative to their dignity and will accept no one but 
Saddam Husayn as leader. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59875 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Subject of Kuwaiti Prisoners Called Baseless </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0004A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 8 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0004A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nuri Najm al-Marsumi: "Once Again, Dwarfs </F>
Playing With Fire!"] 
  [Text] Every time it seems that the Security Council agrees 
to review the issue of the criminal sanctions imposed on Iraq, 
the dwarfs ruling the governorate of Kuwait start to fabricate 
some problem or promote some dead problem, long after it became 
clear to all that what was called the "Kuwaiti prisoner crisis" 
has no basis in fact, that it is merely a card played by the 
al-Sabah dwarfs to put pressure on Iraq. A few days before the 
criminal aggression against the border control station, they 
fabricated and began to agitate about the tunnel they dug and 
its passage through Iraqi territory that Iraqi farmers refused 
to give up. No one but them, with the bribes they paid so some 
hirelings and agents content to live on the crumbs from 
foreigners' tables, and to media mercenaries and Western 
intelligence--it is they who made up the lies and fabrications 
about Iraq's use of chemical weapons in the south. 
  The dwarfs, installed by force of arms by the 
American-Zionist alliance as rulers in the governorate of 
Kuwait, are playing with fire and have apparently become 
proficient at committing crimes against the people and the 
nation, having incited and taken part in committing the crime of 
the age against Iraq and continuing their futile efforts against 
the enduring and steadfast nation. 
  We say it frankly: Iraq has honored all of its commitments 
relating to the Security Council resolutions, despite the 
suffering and oppression it endured. If it is expected to 
continue this policy, it is awaiting a positive and honorable 
stand from the Security Council, not influenced by the dwarfs of 
the governorate of Kuwait and the other terrified agent rulers 
in the region, who have sold out their countries and peoples for 
a pittance. 
  A final word about the al-Sabah: they will be judged at a 
time when regret will be of no avail. And when that time 
comes--and it will come, God willing--they will regret the day 
they were born. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59876 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Realism Advised: No `Magical Solution' to Problems </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0003A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 6 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0003A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mazhar 'Arif: "Economic Ideas"] </F>
  [Text] We must admit to ourselves, at least, that the 
government does not have a magical solution to the problems 
which, we all agree, have been caused by the sanctions. The 
philosopher's stone, never found throughout history, is still 
nonexistent as we and the world stand on the threshold of the 
21st century. 
  The sanctions, however, do not mean that there are no means 
for a domestic struggle against its economic and 
social effects on the people and the nation, by focusing on 
agricultural production to provide the people's power and 
organize ration cards to put Iraq's house in order despite the 
political and economic conditions imposed on Iraq. 
  [This could be done by] restoring life to the destroyed 
laboratories and factories and relying on the private commercial 
sector, especially to get the wheels of society moving for 
citizens as far as possible, if not to the point of providing 
all the necessities for a dignified life for citizens and 
achieving total comfort for the people in their present 
circumstances. 
  All the measures and actions, as is well known, were 
accompanied by other measures and resolutions some of which have 
continued for the past few years, some of which were amended, 
with still others subsequently abandoned for various reasons. 
  We do not want to keep talking about matters that have 
become 
facts of life for the people, because it is all already well 
known. But we do just want to allude to the fact that the 
sanctions have been used, by and large, as a peg upon which all 
the problems that existed before the sanctions have been hung, 
and these problems have thus been aggravated. We point this out, 
though some of us have fallen into the sanctions trap. Its 
resolutions have come on the basis of the interpretation and the 
proposition used by those directly responsible, reaching its 
higher authority in the office, institution, and ministry, 
mistakenly, not well studied, and in constant need of balance. 
  We all know about the prices of domestic products, which 
have 
risen several times higher than their imported counterparts, 
before they were banned, even though the purpose was completely 
otherwise. Arab and non-Arab visitors paying in dollars at big 
hotels and other places, the sale of productive factories and 
state farms before the sanctions themselves, to individuals and 
the private sector, and the entry of ministries and institutions 
into dollar purchases from the market in one day, changed the 
distribution of the process among these parties waiting for 
days, weeks, and months, freeing large, well-known families and 
major merchants to speculate in dollars. This went on until 
price rises continued in line with dollar rates, then kept 
rising despite drops in the rate of the dollar at certain times, 
resulting in what might be described as the dinar's secession 
from the dollar. 
  The withdrawal of the government from dollar-buying 
operations was an appropriate decision. Even so, the process 
remained the province of major merchants and rich and merchant 
families, who ruled by the dollar in the name of breaking the 
economic sanctions. 
  Is the Central Bank capable of intervening to regulate 
dollar 
rates? Is it possible for the government to establish a large 
financial institution, under current conditions, to buy dollars 
when needed and maintain the market price? 
  Perhaps the Central Bank has a limited opportunity to 
intervene by way of foreign exchange. However, the question of a 
financial institution at present is beyond the government's 
powers, because of the sanctions, the ban on exporting oil, and 
Iraq's frozen assets abroad. Achieving this now is not possible, 
though, unless we were to rely on domestic lending from private 
banks, industrialists, and merchants in exchange for certain 
concessions, guarantees, and facilities. 
  The conversion of governmental industrial companies into 
joint stock cement and brick companies played a part in driving 
up the price of the dollar. 
  The citizens' interest in buying shares seemed to be greater 
than their interest in supplying goods to market, and this, too, 
sent prices up. The people--non-merchants--were surprised at 
what the media was saying about purchasing dollars in the long 
term without prior assessment of the harmful effects of this 
kind of media presentation. 
  There are possible solutions which, in my view, must be 
mentioned in this article. In brief: reviewing the distribution 
outlets for goods to citizens; a ban on hoarding and realizing 
profits based on hoarding; and enacting punishment as severe as 
execution for that, as happens in capitalistic America itself, 
and other countries. And on top of that, the cancellation of 
agents' security, as occurs with cigarettes, and subjecting 
domestic production to ration cards on the basis of "taking 
turns" for the regions. This would influence prices and reassure 
citizens that they can get batteries, tires, cloth, leather 
products, oils, and other goods and commodities at one time or 
another during the year. What might really cause surprise on 
this subject is the appearance of what might be called the 
secret purchase of a certain commodity in a company or 
institution, and the purchase of rebate receipts for cement, for 
example, on the part of some people afflicted with monopoly 
fever. 
  Turning the central markets and social cooperatives into a 
mixed sector may seem to be an acceptable idea because it will 
give citizens a better chance to obtain various goods and 
commodities at prices that, whatever they were, would still be 
far below market prices. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59877 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> IRAQ </F>
<H3> <TI>   Party Standards Called Model for Government Offices </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LH0007A Baghdad BABIL in Arabic 13 Nov 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94LH0007A </F>
<F P=104>  Baghdad BABIL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muzhir 'Arif: "The Model Official"] </F>
  [Text] A model is a human and social case that begins from 
the home and expands and grows up outside it. A good model leads 
to the welfare of individuals and society in a particular 
environment in a process of interaction between the model and 
those who deal with it and are close to it. The opposite also 
exists. 
  The model in general is between fathers and mothers, between 
the administrative official with his employees and others, and 
between the employee and the citizen. It is between the party 
comrade and his comrades and the people who surround him in the 
home, the town, and the party organization. 
  The son looks to his father and mother and to his older 
brother, how they behave in life; he is affected by them and 
learns from them. The student looks to his teacher and learns 
much from him, taking on his character, though incompletely. The 
employee learns from his superior, and the citizen first trusts 
a particular employee and a particular department on the basis 
of recourse to this employee and this department. I am not 
calling for an ideal society in a material world. I cannot 
dream, even for the sake of dreaming, of a nation of angels; for 
that contradicts the nature of life, which is motivated by the 
laws of good and evil, angel and devil. I am not looking for 
miracles, whose age ended with the death of the Seal of 
messengers and prophets, Muhammad (may God bless him and grant 
him peace). I am seeking something else that unites idealism in 
action and behavior with a lawful human livelihood through 
legitimate gain and effort to realize a certain economic profit 
in the spirit of fair and legitimate competition and no other 
spirit. I am looking for teachers of the sort who taught us to 
read and thereby acquired us as their servants--with a debt of 
conviction and gratitude, not in the sense of the servile 
slavery--after everyone has spoken and still speaks critically, 
talking about teachers who have bestowed of their knowledge in 
costly private lessons and have been as stingy as possible to 
their students in the schools, colleges, and institutes. Some 
have dispensed with formality between themselves and their 
students not out of humility and to create bridges of trust 
between the professor and the student and pupil, but for other 
reasons basically material. I am looking for doctors who do not 
give a patient in their private clinics more than they give to 
one in the government hospital and the people's clinic--doctors 
who do not force the patient to return three times to the 
private clinic for diagnosis and go to a particular laboratory 
and particular pharmacy on the pretext of the professional 
knowledge of the laboratory doctor and the pharmacist. Of 
course, I am sure that physicians need greater care by the 
government in salary, provision of scientific resources, and 
making a qualitative shift in the life of the physician and 
pharmacist in various areas of scientific and social life. I am 
looking for lawyers and judges who are great in all things, now 
that time has buried the names of lawyers and judges who were 
renowned for learning, knowledge, justice, and honesty in Iraq's 
political and legal history. I am looking for sons who do not 
call their fathers by their names or by nicknames such as "Abu 
So-and-so," and for fathers who do not encourage their children 
to smoke, drink, and do other things in the name of changing 
times and overlook their truancy from school or lack of 
diligence. 
  Party work had a sanctity, and the party official was an 
object of respect: such was secret party life in Iraq. Thus it 
was and thus it ought to be in public life, but society's 
shortcomings have left their mark on the life of many party 
figures from the point of view of the people. The meeting no 
longer retains its old spirit, as I, who am not enrolled in any 
party, hear. The meeting has come to be regarded as one regards 
a job that permits vacations, laxity, and absence for various 
excuses and pretexts. 
  What will others do when the traffic policeman neglects to 
fasten the seat belt in his car, goes through the light, and 
crosses the street not at the crosswalk? How can someone sick 
because of smoking heed the advice of his attendant physician 
who smokes? 
  How will an employee deal with a citizen when his superior 
deals bureaucratically with him? What position will the citizen 
take toward an official who gives him such and such advice, 
while not carrying out anything he has promised to do? 
  Aristotle says that anyone who would do good should avoid 
its 
opposite, or else he will be called evil. In political science 
it is an error to retreat from a gain that a group of people has 
realized for the entire nation. In government departments and 
institutions the anger of an official often leads to 
unacceptable measures against a particular employee or group of 
employees for various reasons. As everyone knows, any number of 
thank-you letters cannot prevail against a letter of sanction 
against a certain employee. We thank God that our nation has 
preserved its historic characteristics of courage, generosity, 
and patriotism. Yet certain individuals from this great nation 
have deserted "village ethics" in the name of progress. Using 
the blockade as a crutch, they justify theft itself. They 
justify bribery by the persistence of the blockade and the 
complexity of economic life. They regard crime as something 
normal under such circumstances, as something similar to what 
goes on throughout the world, though in mitigated form. Among 
these people are some who have good social and professional 
positions. Where is the model in this type of person in the 
positive sense? 
  The inferior will continue to regard the superior with an 
eye 
of wonder, admiration, and the force of the ideal and the 
principle, or with an eye of disapproval. My following proposal 
may seem difficult to realize, but it is not impossible to 
implement. Simply stated, it calls for electing the model 
official at the level of ministers, governors, district 
administrators, and institution heads--with this or another 
title--in accordance with the standards and principles contained 
in the revolution and the thoughts and views of the leader 
Saddam Husayn for behavior that will not be so negative and that 
will not occasion disapproval and pain on the part of the 
majority. There are those who commit excesses because their 
director or section chief, if it is a government department or 
institution, scorns creditable behavior and dealing despite the 
slogans he has raised among his employees and others concerning 
work, serving the people, developing the country, and following 
the principle of criticism and self-criticism by officials. 
Being essentially members and supporters of the Ba'th Party, the 
latter must, as the leader Saddam Husayn has recommended, carry 
the party's traditions into their departments, not the reverse. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59878 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beni Begin on Oslo Agreement, Danger to Security </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0022A Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 14 Dec 93 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0022A </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Beni Begin] </F>
  [Text] During yesterday's cabinet session, the prime 
minister described the results of his talks with 'Arafat in 
Cairo as a "grave crisis," and spoke mainly about the questions 
of control of the border checkpoints and the size of the 
"Jericho region," which will be turned over to the PLO. These 
are important topics, but the real problem Israel is facing is 
much deeper than this. 
  Three months have passed since Yitzhak Rabin and Yassir 
'Arafat shook hands on the White House lawn. Many grasped then 
at the straw of confused hope that the Middle East would be able 
to adopt the type of relations that exist between France, 
Belgium, and Luxembourg, but they, too, knew the history of the 
leader of the PLO murder organization, so that in their hearts 
they gave the PLO a trial period, as we would with a dangerous 
convict freed on parole. 
  In the three months that have passed, all the warnings have 
been proven true, and not one of the hopes has come to pass. In 
a great engineering innovation, Shimon Peres suggested that we 
stop a rising flood by blasting streams of water, while Yitzhak 
Rabin suggested an innovation in physics: fighting fire with 
fire. The innovation of the Israeli left, of curbing terror 
against Jews by using an anti-Jewish terror group, has been 
repudiated by reality. There is not a single sign, as of now, 
that supports any possibility that this theory can be put into 
action, and, indeed, signs are multiplying that say precisely 
the opposite. 
  Unlike the accepted theories, the basic problem is neither 
Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement] nor the little PLO 
rejectionist groups, but the main rejectionist group--that is, 
Fatah and its never changing leader. In 1974, the Palestinian 
National Council [PNC] decided upon its famous policy of moving 
in stages. Old hat, right? Why be so small and narrow-minded as 
to bring it up today, three months after the handshake in 
Washington? The answer can be found in Arafat's speech that was 
broadcast on Jordanian television at the same time as the 
ceremony at the White House. While the Biblical verses poured 
from the mouths of the prime minister of Israel and his 
second-in-command, the chief of the PLO band said the following 
words in Arabic: "Oh my beloved, do not forget that the PNC made 
this decision in 1974. It called for establishment of a national 
entity on some portion of Palestinian land that would be freed, 
or which Israel would withdraw from. This is the fruit of your 
struggle, your sacrifices, your jihad...this is the moment of 
return, the moment of setting foot on the first Palestinian 
territory to be freed...this is an important, definitive, and 
basic step.... May Palestine live, free and Arabic." 
  Slowly, as is his fashion, Yitzhak Rabin is apparently also 
beginning to understand that there will be no security for 
Israel if the "freed" territory is handed over to the PLO and 
Hamas. Last week, the prime minister said in the Knesset that 
after the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] has withdrawn from the 
Gaza and Jericho regions, Israel learns that terrorist squads 
are preparing themselves to attack Israelis, Israel will stand 
on its right of hot pursuit, "and hot pursuit, for us, means not 
only during an incident, but also to prevent an incident." 
  This new condition of Israel's completely contradicts the 
Oslo accord, which stipulates that in the hands of the PLO will 
be both authority over the territory Israel has withdrawn from, 
and responsibility for the war against terror ("internal 
security"); while the IDF will have freedom of movement on the 
highways alone. If Mr. Rabin follows through with his 
announcement, there will be no agreement: either it will not be 
signed, or it will explode after the first foiling hot pursuit. 
In any case, it is clear today that Mr. Rabin already 
understands that carrying out the agreement as it is written 
would completely abandon the security of Israel and her citizens. 
  This is the time to stop, think, and look at the Oslo 
agreement dispassionately and without illusions. To those who 
approve of the agreement, the PLO is being given a trial period. 
The gang and its leaders have failed this trial. Calling off the 
process now will avert serious perils in the future. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59879 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kach 
Takes Responsibility, Seeks Publicity </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0022C Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 13 Dec 93 p 1-2 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0022C </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tzvi Zinger] </F>
  [Text] Every time someone brings up the idea of putting the 
Kach movement outside the boundary of the law, Kach members rub 
their hands together in glee. Suggestions of that sort are 
exactly what the leaders of the movement are looking for; they 
put the movement into the headlines on the front pages of the 
newspapers, and at the top of the daily news bulletins and 
roundups. 
  The Kach movement, now as always, has a developed sense of 
publicity. Even in cases where Kach and its offshoots have had 
no tie to an attack against Arabs or a pogrom against their 
property--Kach spokesmen have hurried to take responsibility for 
the incident, or at least to announce it in the papers. 
  An outstanding example of this happened after Rabbi Avraham 
Toledano--a former leader of Kach--was arrested at Ben Gurion 
airport a few weeks ago, thanks to the alertness of an airport 
customs officer. Kach hurried to spread the news among the 
reporters that settlers from the extreme right were stockpiling 
weapons and explosives, partly smuggled from Russia and 
Czechoslovakia, and partly stolen from IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] camps. "We are not doing it," the Kach members hastened 
to say, "but we know about cases of weapons hoarding, about 
smuggling in dismantled Kalashnikov rifles, about explosives in 
suitcases, and information pamphlets on how to prepare 
bombs--things from Red Army surplus." 
  Kach's knack for public relations is proven daily, both 
through the exploits, real or imaginary, of the "Committee for 
Safety on the Roads," considered the "military arm" of the Kach 
movement. Every time an attack against the Arabs is reported, 
the newspapers receive a notice over the beeper from an unknown 
person who calls himself "Ronen" and takes responsibility for 
the action in the name of the Committee for Safety on the Roads. 
Up until last Friday, his announcements always arrived after the 
attack on the Arabs had already been reported over the media. 
  Thus, for instance, the committee claimed responsibility for 
the murder of the Arab in Thurmosaiah near Shiloh, last week. 
But, as everyone knows, the suspect the police arrested in that 
attack was a young man from Shilo who is not known at all as a 
Kach activist or a member of the committee. We should say, 
though, that Ronen's announcements usually are--reliable. 
Investigation shows that the announcements he has turned in have 
usually had a basis in fact. 
  So it was, too, with the murder of the three Arabs last 
Friday. Except that this time, Ronen's announcement to the 
newspapers arrived over the beepers even before the murder was 
reported over the radio. This would seem in itself to prove that 
this time Ronen did not hitch a ride on the actions of others, 
and that the anonymous announcer knew about the murder from 
sources of his own. These things, at any rate, should certainly 
start the security officers investigating the case thinking. 
  Is Kach really as dangerous is it seems? Are its activists 
stockpiling illegal weapons, in addition to the legal weapons 
they have in their hands? Did members of the Committee for 
Safety on the Roads really carry out the murder of the three 
Arab workers in Tarkomiah? 
  The police and General Security Service expend great energy 
following the trail of the activists of Kach and its offshoots. 
Kach leaders and activists are constantly brought in for 
questioning, under suspicion of various things. But it usually 
turns out that the security forces and the law cannot find the 
proof they need to get them convicted of anything more 
substantial crimes than disturbing the peace, rioting, or 
aggressive behavior. 
  The movement's members and leaders are almost always freed 
on 
bail the same day. Sometimes they have to spend a few days in 
jail--and then are freed in court. Only very occasionally are 
members of Kach found guilty of crimes that require them to be 
locked up for periods of a few months or more. 
  Members of Kach customarily explain this phenomenon as 
"political persecution" and as "the Bolshevik methods" of the 
government and its representatives--which are always blocked in 
the courtroom. But the real explanation apparently lies in the 
fact that the leaders of Kach are much more sophisticated about 
treading right on the edge of legality than they seem. It is 
very hard to catch one of them "in the act" committing a crime. 
Thus it also was when members of the "Committee for Safety on 
the Roads" put on their "nightly show" before a TV team a few 
months ago in the alleys of Hebron. Except for the game of 
"Hasamba" which is not illegal, the only crime photographed was 
breaking a street light.... 
  So far, for example, nobody has been arrested in the case 
where a number of hand grenades were found in the courtyard of a 
Kach branch several weeks ago. Nor was anyone arrested for 
murder, or for inciting others to murder, because even in what 
they say to the press, the movement's spokesmen are always 
careful to emphasize that although they "understand" the 
phenomenon of murder of Arabs--they are not doing it. 
  Since Rabbi Meir Kahane was murdered in November 1990, Kach 
has been led by a triangle of leaders. That triangle already 
served as the operative arm of the movement when Rabbi Kahane 
still served as spiritual and ideological leader of the movement. 
  At the top of this trio stands Baruch Marzel (34), chosen to 
be the leader of Kach after a short period of several months 
when Rabbi Avraham Toledano took Rabbi Meir Kahane's place. When 
Rabbi Kahane was still alive, Marzel served as secretary of the 
Kach faction in the Knesset, as spokesman for the movement, and 
as the Rabbi's right-hand man. 
  Marzel, who lives with his large family in a caravan at Tel 
Romeida in Hebron, is an artist at media and public relations. 
He knows all the "shticks" and "tricks"--and at the same time is 
careful of what he says and does. So far, he has proved that he 
knows exactly how to get his messages across without falling 
into legal traps. Still, he has been convicted for violence, 
rioting, and disturbing the peace, and sentenced a number of 
times to spend several months in jail. 
  Another quality that helped him to be chosen to head the 
pyramid was his organizational ability. Thus, for example, 
Barukh Marzel was one of the main organizers of the mass funeral 
of Mordehai and Shalom Lapid, which began at Yeshivat Ponevitch 
in Bnai Barak and finished in Hebron. Marzel is very accepted in 
"Gush Emunim" circles, and takes part in councils of the joint 
leadership of the right. 
  The two other points in the trio are Noam Federman, the 
movement's spokesman; and Tiran Pollak, chairman of the 
Committee for Safety on the Roads, and Kach candidate for the 
Jerusalem city council. 
  Federman joined Kach when he was just 14. Since then, he has 
managed to chalk up a long list of criminal arrests and 
convictions for rioting, damaging property, and acts of 
aggression. Thus, for example, he was found guilty several years 
ago of setting fire to the church of St. Paul and of damaging 
the property of Arabs and leftists--among them former Shalom 
Ahshav spokesman Amiram Goldbloom--and also sentenced to 20 
months imprisonment. 
  Tiran Pollack also has a very long criminal record of 
similar 
offenses, but has spent less time than the others have in jail. 
Among other things, he has been under suspicion at various times 
of spraying Arab vineyards outside Hilhul with poison, setting 
the door of Jerusalem leftist activist Reuven Kaminer's house on 
fire, and organizing the big revenge crusades in Jerusalem after 
the murder of Yeshiva student Eliyahu 'Amadi in 1986. He joined 
Kach for tragic reasons, after losing his two sisters, Nurit and 
Esther, when Bus No. 18 was blown up on Herzl Boulevard in 
Jerusalem on 6 December 1983. 
  The High Court of Justice ruled in 1988 to outlaw Kach as a 
racist movement, and forbade it to participate in elections. 
Now, Knesset members are demanding that its members be banned 
from the territories of Judaea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip. 
There are about 200 active members in the movement today, and it 
is very possible that in many of them will find themselves 
facing a wave of administrative arrests and forcible removals in 
the near future. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59880 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Treasury To Compensate Laid-Off Aircraft 
Workers </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AA0022B Tel Aviv YEDI'T AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) in 
Hebrew 9 Dec 93 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94AA0022B </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'T AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arye Egozi] </F>
  [Text] The management of Aircraft Industries (AI) will 
begin sending pink slips next week to 2,900 of the company's 
workers. This is part of the framework of the new work agreement 
that was initialled day before yesterday.The management intends 
to finish the massive layoff process by the beginning of 1994. 
Now that the agreement has signed, the treasury will transfer 
the money that will make it possible to pay November's salaries. 
  According to the new agreement, hundreds of workers will be 
laid off, in all the AI plants and in the top leadership. Those 
50 and over, will leave the company in the framework of early 
retirement, while workers under 50 will go as part of a round of 
layoffs with compensation. The management decided yesterday to 
open a counselling center for laid-off workers. This center will 
try to help them find alternative work and also advise them on 
how to invest their severance pay. 
  The treasury has committed itself to funding the layoffs of 
all 2,900 workers, and for that, will be transferring 
approximately $330 million to AI's accounts, in accord with the 
rate the layoffs are carried. 
  The AI management began yesterday preparing to pay debts 
amounting to $70 million to the company's suppliers and 
subcontractors. They are also preparing for a similar settlement 
with the banks, which the company owes $500 million. The company 
will finish the year with an operating loss of about $70 
million. The total loss will be much greater, because it will 
include the severance payments and the early pensions for those 
who have been laid off. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59881 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Outlook for IDF in Year 2000 
Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0035F Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) in 
Hebrew 19 Nov 93 pp 8-9 </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0035F </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Weekend Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arye Qizal: "IDF (Israel Defense Forces) 2000: </F>
Taking No Chance"] 
  [Text] This is the situation: at least until the end of 
1994, the IDF [Israel Defnse Forces] will pay the price of the 
peace. More reserve duty, more attacks, more current security 
duty. Only at the end of 1994, they hope in the military, will 
it be possible to begin to enjoy a few of the fruits of the 
peace. Less reserve duty, fewer attacks, less current security 
duty. More training for war. 
  The IDF work plan for the coming year, on the preparation of 
which they are now busy, is based on the assumption that the 
spirit of the agreement of principles--and the emphasis is on 
spirit--will only blow in the territories a year from now. Until 
then, the refusal organizations and the opponents of the 
agreement will heat up the region. 
  The goals of the work plan are not much different from those 
of the past year. The combat reservists will serve more. The 
noncombatants will serve less. What can be done, this year, as 
well, the fighting part of the military will continue to bear 
the burden. The length of the girls' service will be reduced, 
millions of shekels will be cut from the current expenditures. 
Procurement of advanced weapons will continue. The scout units 
will go into a lower gear. Their objectives may change. 
  The pull-out from Gaza and Jericho and the new deployment in 
the territories, which will be completed in a few months, will 
cost money. The new regular soldiers will be directed to duty in 
the territories, to replace the reservists. The armored corps 
will be equipped with Merkava 3 tanks, the Air Force will 
receive the F-15E and the F-16, whose purchase Prime Minister 
Yitzhak Rabin agreed to this week in the United States. The 
artillery corps will improve the 155-mm cannons, the corps' 
workhorse. The IDF training plan will proceed slowly. If the 
situation in the territories is a good surprise, it will be 
possible to direct units to orderly training. 
  A senior person in the defense establishment explained this 
week: "The agreement with the PLO will not allow the IDF to get 
smaller, to close units, and to reduce the burden of reserve 
duty in the territories. The months that passed since the 
signing can be instructive on the extent to which, at this 
stage, we are talking about illusions. The field has its own 
rhythm. There are attacks and there were attacks, and there is a 
need for deterrence. If everything "ticks" as in the agreement, 
and the PLO takes matters in hand--things will change towards 
the end of 1994, or at least then we will be able to experience 
a tendency to change. 
  "Only then, at the end of the year, will we be able to see, 
for the first time since 1987, a decline in the need to allocate 
so many forces to tiring and wasteful current security duty. But 
those are hopes. The need to defend the Jewish settlements in 
the territories and the need to redeploy army points will 
require money, resources, and, especially, days of reserve duty. 
And everything is at the expense of the training program, which 
suffered during the years of the intifadah." 
  The agreement of principles, the Taba talks, and the Cairo 
talks led the Planning Branch in the General Staff to work on a 
new multiyear work plan. 
  Aside from the regular annual work plans, Mirkam, a 
multiyear 
plan that reaches to 1998, is being implemented in the IDF. The 
plan talks about a reduction in forces, about raising quality, 
and about equipping with modern fighting systems in the armor, 
on the sea, and in the air. Mirkam is a smaller, more efficient, 
and higher quality military. 
  And what is after 1998? Please meet: "Tarash 2000," the new 
multiyear plan. In the Planning Branch, headed by Major General 
'Uzi Dayan, they have already begun to discuss "Mirkam's" heir. 
The plan is meant to foresee the changes that will ensue from 
the agreement with the PLO and the future agreements with Syria 
and Lebanon. 
  In the IDF they were frightened this week by the publication 
in HA'ARETZ of the name of the plan. In the high ranks they 
feared political interpretations. The military was already burnt 
by the involvement in "drawer plans" for a withdrawal from the 
Golan and changes in the border with Jordan. Each time that the 
issue arose, the IDF denied it: "We are planning for withdrawal? 
No way!" 
  A senior officer explained this week: "There is still no 
talk 
about a new multiyear plan, rather only the determination of 
preliminary principles for planning. Only in the course of 1994 
will the men of the Planning Branch sit down for real work, and 
that, too, is conditional on an evaluation of the situation that 
will obtain at the time. Diplomatic changes will be included in 
the new plan, but we have not yet begun to plan anything and 
there are still no basic assumptions. There is no point in 
building interpretations." 
  With or without commentary, Tarash 2000 will deal with the 
Israeli concept of security, with the structure of the military 
force, with its size, with the relation between air force and 
ground forces, with various combat scenarios, with development 
plans, and with procurement. The plan will attempt to prevent a 
situation of signing of procurement contracts with entities for 
whose wares there may be no need in a few years. The plan will 
try to envisage the changes in the region on the basis of what 
is expected "to be closed" at the negotiations table. For the 
first time in years, the leaders of the military will have to 
examine the manner of handling long-range threats, including 
nuclear ones, and to propose updated situation evaluations. 
Every arm, as is customary, will try to present "its" threats as 
the central ones. 
  A senior officer related to the emphases of the plan: "We 
will have to provide answers on the subject of manpower. The IDF 
will have to examine the possibility of returning to a regular 
training plan, which will lead to a serious reduction of the 
burden of reserve duty. It will be necessary to determine the 
character and the organization of IDF civilian employees. The 
work will be based, among other things, on a report that was 
written by a committee headed by Major General (Res.) Herzl 
Shafir. The committee recommends that consideration be given to 
a reduction of four months in the compulsory service of males." 
  In the IDF they estimated this week that in the course of 
1994 the issue of a reduction of compulsory service will come up 
again for discussion. In the military they already know the 
story. As the idea comes up, so it will go down. "This is 
already a regular ceremony. There is nothing new in it," said 
the senior officer, "It is not realistic to cut the compulsory 
service when tasks are added, when there is a new deployment, 
without us having knowledge of what will happen in the 
territories, and without it being clear to us what will be the 
effect of the withdrawal from Gaza and from Jericho on internal 
security." 
  In the event that Jordan and Syria join the diplomatic 
circle, they estimate in the Planning Branch that it will be 
possible to reduce the IDF order of battle. The terror in the 
territories will die down, and it will perhaps be possible to 
improve dramatically the training framework--to allocate 
resources to a new armor training program and an investment in 
training installations. 
  A senior armor officer estimates how the peace will affect 
the black berets: "The moment that the armor will not sit on the 
Heights and in the Valley, we will be pressed into two 
areas--the Tze'elim installation and an additional area in the 
south. We must plan how we will sit with so much armor in such a 
space. I would have preferred that already a year ago they had 
dealt with that." 
  "Diplomatic agreements will allow us to carry out a 
revolution in the simulation installations and to divert to 
training the money that is today directed to current security. 
It is a tremendous opportunity to put the armor through a 
process of modernization in society, in which the army will 
become less and less popular. In any event, in the next seven 
years it will not be possible to cut significantly the armor 
order of battle, certainly not the regular forces." 
  "Even if we arrive at agreements, we will need a strong 
regular armored force. On the subject of the reserves, it will 
be possible to take risks and to cut. The Yom Kippur War taught 
us that if we had one more regular tank brigade--the Syrians 
would not have been able to break through." 
  Maj. Gen. (Res.) Uri Or, the chairman of the Knesset Foreign 
Affairs and Defense Committee, also thinks that in the coming 
years the IDF will not become smaller. Or: "Up to the year 2000, 
there cannot be any significant change in the size of the 
military. Only one change is required: the replacement of old 
weapons with new ones. At the same time, we will reduce the 
burden of reserve duty, we will train more, and we will carry 
out a revolution in maintenance." 
  Or estimates that it will be possible to cut the compulsory 
service a bit. "I foresee that approaching the year 2000 the 
question will again arise whether we need a popular army or an 
economic army. The IDF will want the possibility of drafting 
only the best. The public will resist." 
  Or does not envisage a decline in the defense budget, rather 
a significant decline in its share of the national product. "If 
the agreements prove themselves, we will be able to weigh the 
threats and to assume that in the coming circle they will 
decline and therefore it will be necessary to give greater 
weight to the air arm." 
  Former air force commander Maj. Gen. (Res.) Avihu Ben-Nun 
holds that the IDF will have to continue to invest in the skies. 
Ben-Nun scatters illusions about the contraction of the 
military. "Our deterrent force must remain for many years. The 
Middle Eastern reality is fluid. We have seen how things can 
change overnight in the nearby states. The component of the 
threat and the component of the deterrence are intertwined in 
our reality. If the borders change--the need for deterrence will 
only grow." 
  "If Israel will not have a real deterrent," he warns, "we 
can 
find ourselves in a war. Iraq and Iran had a peace agreement, 
and Saddam opened a lightning war. A deterrent force is strong 
and quality air power." 
  Ben-Nun argues that one should not denigrate the quantity of 
air power: "If you have a lot of strikers and forwards--you need 
a lot of goalkeepers. We must take into account a scenario of 
"war within peace" against a crystallized and aggressive 
coalition. It may seem far-off, but in another 10 or 15 
years--or less--it could be real. Our quality must be in the 
area of the platforms--in advanced aircraft, in helicopters, in 
weapons, in guided and precision ordnance, in electronic 
countermeasures--that will ensure technical superiority. 
  "The physical performance of the airplanes, such as range, 
will be a minor component of quality. The complementary 
components must be radars and sophisticated weapons. The Air 
Force must receive more, because it is the most flexible, and 
with a relatively small force can arrive at big achievements. In 
the Air Force it is possible to use quality. In other arms, 
quantity is necessary." 
  Colonel (Res.) Dr. Ze'ev Eytan, a researcher in the Center 
for Strategic Studies, holds that "the army of peace" must 
continue to be strong. He seeks to warn against euphoria and 
proposes to expect with worry the instability of Arab regimes. 
"All of those who are talking about Iran and about Iraq as 
central threats in the year 2000 forget the danger of 
instability in the confrontation states. I do not foresee a 
possibility of reducing the military significantly, unless 
astounding democracies arise in the region. I foresee that the 
IDF will be able to go over to a defensive strategy, and to 
continue to operate with offensive tactics. The IDF will have to 
take into account the possibility of striking a preventive blow 
and afterwards passing the attack over to the enemy's territory. 
This approach is especially correct if the borders change to our 
disadvantage." 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59882 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea003___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Changes in New Recruit Training Reported </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0035E Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) in 
Hebrew 18 Nov 93 pp 16-17 </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0035E </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (24-Hour Supplement) </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arye Qizal: "Absorption and Classification </F>
Center Without Shock"] 
  [Text] Enough of Absorption and Classification Center 
shock. An end to the uncertainty of the new recruits. Enough of 
"the slave market" in the courtyard of the Absorption and 
Classification Center, to the bargaining between the corps of 
the army and "the fresh meat" that is unloaded from the buses. 
  Next week, the first class of recruits, of which a portion 
already knows where it is going in the army even before it sets 
foot in the Absorption and Classification Center, will be on its 
way. The other part, which does not yet know, will still go 
through the old route. In February, so they are hoping in the 
IDF [israel Defense Forces], everything will change, everything 
will be new. 
  The IDF worked for years with a method that was not 
examined, 
but became a norm. The method was called "the orders method": 
every candidate for defense service (Mashlab) received sometime 
in 11th grade "the first order," that white envelope with the 
army stamp. He opened it, understood that the end of youth had 
arrived, and ran immediately to his buddies. 
  The Mashlab was called to report to the Mobilization Bureau 
and to go through the first of the seven circles of Hell, at the 
end of which he would get a personal number and he would become 
a soldier in the army of the Jewish people. 
  Afterwards, after a few months, the Mashlab--the high-school 
pupil who had not yet lost his long hair and the 
earring--received "the second order," another nail in the coffin 
of youth, and he again made his way, with some scorn, to the 
Mobilization Bureau. The goal this time--psychotechnical 
examinations, medical examinations for evaluation, with a female 
soldier only a few months older than he but who thinks that she 
is at least as smart as God. 
  On the basis of these examinations, a profile was determined 
for the Mashlab (another number, mightily fateful) and the Kaba 
(quality group), and afterwards he was given a mobilization 
date. With these statistics, the recruit arrived at the 
Absorption and Classification Center (generally after a massacre 
of a haircut), to the meeting with the classification officer. 
On the way, he went through the chain of becoming a soldier, 
which included injections, a photograph with a number, 
fingerprints, and one unavoidable question: "To whom to you wish 
to bequeath the money if, heaven forbid..." 
  In that discussion with the classification officer, which 
generally lasted a minute and a half (depending on the patience 
and the length of the line), the impatient classification 
officers would present the frightened recruit the possibilities 
before him. For example: artillery, armor, or combat 
engineering. The recruit had only to rank these possibilities by 
preference. That is exactly how it worked, but around this rapid 
and nervous process they wrapped high-sounding words like 
"consideration for the desires of the soldier and the 
requirements of the system." 
  The chief of the Manpower Branch of the general staff, Major 
General Yoram Ya'ir, was the first one, who during the past year 
set a target before his people: to change the clumsy, outmoded, 
and wasteful method of classification and mobilization. 
  Ya'ir brought a new idea, which was intended to make the old 
method more efficient, to spare the young soldier the tension 
and the uncertainty, and to spare the IDF system the traffic jam 
in the Absorption and Classification Center. In the previous 
method, the recruit was sometimes forced to wait a number of 
weeks until the completion of the quota required for opening 
basic training. Meanwhile, the recruits would carry out 
"interesting" busy work such as painting the trees in the 
Absorption and Classification Center or repainting the curbs. A 
pleasure. 
  A deep and fundamental change was made in the new method, 
which begins to go into operation, as was stated, next week. The 
basic idea: instead of examining the recruit's preference only 
in the Absorption and Classification Center, the stage of the 
questions and the clarifications will be carried out several 
months before induction. A form, with a summary of his data and 
the possibilities open to him, will be sent to each recruit at 
home, just like the registration process for university. 
  Under the heading "The Mobilization Method Mobilizes for 
You," the recruit is asked to specify the unit to which he 
prefers to be called, the classification is carried out 
afterwards, and in the end each recruit receives a notice of 
where he has been assigned. This happens a few months before 
induction. 
  Maj. Gen. Ya'ir, the father of the method, presented it to 
Prime Minister and Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin and to Chief 
of Staff Ehud Barak, and the two approved it. There were those 
who raised an eyebrow and asked why did they wait with it for so 
many years. Where were all of the geniuses before that. 
  In the IDF they say that the new method will make it 
possible 
for the military to get an overall picture of the recruits and 
will prevent pressure on the Absorption and Classification 
Center. The end has come for the era of lobbying by the members 
of the various service arms to entice the soldiers with worn-out 
image films, presented by smiling paratroopers, that hid the 
blood, the sweat, and the tears. 
  The commanders of the units to which they will be mobilized 
already await the recruits who will arrive next week at the 
Absorption and Classification Center. The commanders will 
accompany them throughout the process, and will reduce, so it is 
hoped, their tension. Those recruits who will seek to challenge 
their attachment to an armored company and who will prefer to 
serve in the IDF spokesman's film unit, for example, are 
promised a hearing. The answer also is promised. (Army, baby, do 
not deceive yourself. Armor!) 
  The military is saving tens of millions of shekels through 
the new method. After the run of the test program in the 
November mobilization, it will continue also in the following 
mobilizations. 
  And if you, those who have not yet been drafted, receive the 
questionnaires at home in these days--sit quietly, think for a 
moment, fill out the questionnaires carefully, and cross your 
fingers. Hard. You are next in line. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59883 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea003___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreigners Invest in Ari'el-Based Companies </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AF0035D Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 23 Nov 93 p 4 </F>

<F P=103> 94AF0035D </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT (Financial Supplement) 
in Hebrew 23 Nov 93 p 4 </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105>Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yisra'el Tomer: "Investors? Russians? And in </F>
Ari'el of All Places?"] 
  [Text] The skies darkened over Ari'el. The winter came down 
on the hills all around. But the mayor of Ari'el, MK [member of 
Knesset] Nahman Ran, is beaming. "There are," he says. "There 
are foreign investors in Ari'el..." 
  While I wonder who is able already to invest these days in 
Ari'el, whose fate is shrouded in mist, the energetic Nahman Ron 
springs the second surprise: "The investors are Russian non-Jews 
from the Urals..." 
  The truth is, that I didn't believe [him] in the first 
moment. But MK Nahman Ron does not relent. "Come and get 
acquainted with them," he says and pulls me to a table in the 
Knesset dining room. Most of them around the table are Russian 
speakers. Some of them are immigrants from the former Soviet 
Union and two of them are representatives of Russian investors 
from the city of Ekaterinburg, formerly Sverdlovsk, in the 
Urals. One is Feminov Sergey, the manager of the "Layet" 
company, which is registered under another name also in the 
British Virgin Islands. The second one is Kokarkin Viktor. 
  So what? You want to invest in Israel?--I ask 
without hiding my doubts. 
  "We have already invested," Mr. Feminov cuts in and pulls 
out 
an agreement that was signed with the "Tel-Basis" company of 
Ari'el. 
  How much have you invested? 
  "Half a million dollars," replies Feminov. 
  Micha'el Zeldner, the director-general of "Tel-Basis" 
company, joins the conversation: "The money has already been 
deposited in a bank in Israel." Zeldner himself immigrated to 
Israel from the Soviet Union 10 years ago. By profession he is 
an engineer, who worked in Ta'as. 
  According to the agreement, a joint company was founded by 
the Russian investors and the "Tel-Basis" company for producing 
software for inspecting digital circuits. The software was 
developed in Ari'el's technological incubator by a group of 
immigrants from the Commonwealth of Peoples. [sentence as 
published] 
  At the meeting there was also Naftali Raz, the 
director-general for technological initiatives in Ari'el. 
According to him, this is only a first project. In the pipeline 
there are additional projects, whose development is based on 
know-how from the former Soviet Union. Like, for example, the 
manufacture of reinforced plastic pipes. 
  "Half a million dollars is a lot of money in Russia. 
How did you raise this sum there?" 
  Feminov smiles: "Yes, among us that is a large sum. But 
there 
is money. How did we raise it? That is our commercial secret..." 
  Why in Israel of all places and not anywhere else in 
the world? 
  The investors from the Urals explain: "First, it is a lot 
easier to speak with people in Israel than elsewhere. Our 
partners in Israel came from Russia, they know the language, 
they are acquainted with the conditions. Aside from that, we 
already worked with some of them in the Urals. In addition to 
that, Israel has a developed technological infrastructure and 
trained and superior manpower. Another reason: because of the 
agreements and the contacts that Israel has with Western Europe 
and with the U.S.A. it has become an economic bridge between the 
West and the East, and we want to use it. Finally, there are now 
chances for peace and stability in the Middle East." 
  We did not want to embarrass Nahman Ron and ask why in 
Ari'el 
of all places. But it turned out that the reason is quite 
simple: in Ari'el there are some of the acquaintances with whom 
the investors already worked in Russia. 
  "Among us," explains the entrepreneur from the Urals, "the 
inventions and the developments are getting lost..." 
  MK Nahman Ron holds in his hand a memorandum that was 
composed two months ago under the somewhat historical heading 
"The Soviet Connection." The memorandum, which was composed by 
Tamar Guy and Vladimir Aks, is an analysis of the tremendous 
potential afforded by exploiting the know-how from R&amp;D in the 
former Soviet Union. 
  The political and economic chaos in Russia caused, among 
other things, the collapse of the entire government R&amp;D 
system. 
According to a rough estimate, about 4,000 Russian research 
institutes, which employ about 600,000 scientists, were left 
without government support. For that reason, there appeared the 
phenomenon of Russian scientists who continue to work, in 
theory, in these institutes, and try to sell privately the 
know-how and the technologies that they developed. In Russia, 
there are no legal limitations on such activity. 
  In Israel, there operate today 27 "technological 
incubators," 
in which are employed hundreds of recent immigrants, who are 
working on 300 different projects. Tens of projects are already 
ripe, and they can be shifted to production. Such a 
technological incubator also operates in Ari'el. 
  Among the new projects that are being offered to 
investors--in addition to the software for inspecting digital 
circuits and for manufacturing reinforced plastic pipes: a 
sophisticated system for exact measurement of heat at 
temperatures of 2,000 to 3,000 Celsius, a new kind of ink that 
withstands high temperatures, and which costs half as much as 
ordinary ink, and more. 
  They are now trying to shift from research and development 
to 
business initiatives, and the Russian investors are taking part 
in this. Of course, while taking advantage of the system of 
grants and incentives that the laws provide to foreign investors. 
  The mayor of Ari'el, MK Nahman Ron, is now planning to 
travel 
to the Urals. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59884 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea003___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-003 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     13 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> SAUDI ARABIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Al-'Adhl Discusses Solar, Nuclear Energy </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94AE0056A Jeddah 'UKAZ in Arabic 22 Nov 93 p 27 </F>
<F P=103> 94AE0056A </F>
<F P=104>  Jeddah 'UKAZ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr Salih al-'Adhl, chairman of the King </F>
'Abd-al- 'Aziz City for Science and Technology, by Fahd al-Zuman 
in Riyadh; date not given: "Dr. Salih al-'Adhl: Now That Kingdom 
Has Headed Atomic Energy Agency, Our New Plan Is To Produce 
Hydrogen From Solar Energy; We Have Utilized Atom for Peaceful 
Purposes"] 
  [Text] Riyadh--Because it is the distinguishing mark and 
the decisive factor in a nation's progress and superiority, 
sophisticated technology and its dazzling means have become the 
constant concern of nations. Consequently, this sphere has 
witnessed a terrible race and a bitter struggle among the 
advanced nations in their effort to settle the struggle for 
power in their favor. 
  Out of its awareness of the importance and necessity of 
entering this sphere struggle and of waging the struggle with 
all our strength so we will not lag behind civilization's 
bandwagon, the government of King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, 
custodian of the two holy mosques, has built the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz City for Science and Technology to be a scientific 
bastion that shoulders the responsibility of bolstering and 
enhancing technology so this bastion will serve the Kingdom's 
development objectives. 
  Although relatively young, the city has achieved numerous 
accomplishments in the areas of research and technology transfer. 
  To trace the march of the city's accomplishments and its 
future plans and programs, the weekly ['UKAZ] conducted this 
interview with Dr. Salih al-'Adhl, chairman of the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz City for Science and Technology. This interview 
has gained an added dimension with Dr. al-'Adhl's return from 
abroad after he headed the International Atomic Energy Agency's 
[IAEA] general conference. It focuses the light on the 
significance and importance of the Kingdom's selection to head 
the conference. 
<H5>  Scientific Accomplishments </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] King 'Abd-al-'Aziz's City for Science and 
Technology has achieved numerous scientific accomplishments in 
various fields of technology and research. What are your most 
prominent current and future plans? 
  [Al-'Adhl] We have 20-year plans, five-year plans, and 
one-year plans. At present, we have a project to produce 
hydrogen from solar energy. It is being implemented in 
cooperation with the German Ministry of Scientific Research and 
Saudi universities. This is a pioneer project in the world, 
especially in the field of solar energy. We launched our efforts 
in this field even before other countries contemplated it. The 
main problem in solar energy is the problem of storage, which 
makes it possible to use this energy as a fuel to generate 
energy. 
  We have completed the first phase and begun the second 
phase, 
embodied in implementation and in developing equipment that uses 
hydrogen to generate energy, whether for cooling, for heating, 
or for other purposes. 
  We have been able to build a station that is the first of 
its 
kind in the Arab world and Africa, namely the Saudi station for 
receiving photos from artificial satellites, be they the French, 
the Japanese, or other satellites. 
  This station is the most sophisticated accomplishment 
achieved by science and technology in this field. It covers an 
area that has a diameter of 2,500 km. This station's photographs 
are used in all areas, especially in exploring natural resources 
and in city planning. Since this station was built, we have 
developed a training program andr telescopes and radio-wave 
observatory. We have other activities as well. I do not look 
forward so much to the completion of these projects as I look 
forward to the results for which we aspire. Results are the most 
important thing. We also have a laser have sent specialists to 
train on the use of this technology in the United States. The 
objective is to secure trained national cadres removed from 
bureaucracy and red tape. 
  Other projects we have include an earthquake-observation 
network and the lunaproject. We also have the Research and 
Computer Institute, which has Arabic-language programs. We have 
a project to train the disabled to use computers. We also have 
several activities connected with automatic translation through 
the use of computers. Regarding the "surveyor," we now have 
Arabic-language survey programs that make it easy to enter data 
all at once. 
  All these projects are good. But I look at the manpower 
comprised of Saudi youth and I hope that it possess a [high] 
degree of capability because this manpower is what lasts. 
Sincere and energetic manpower is the most important element. 
This is why we will focus on youth training and development 
programs so that our young men will get higher degrees. I 
believe that this is where we start laying the foundation on 
which we can build. This is something of which we can be proud. 
<H5>  Atom and Water Desalination </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] At a conference held recently in Vienna, you said 
that the Kingdom uses the atom to desalinate water. Can your 
excellency tell us about this program? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Because we must not rely on a single source of 
wealth, we have decided to plan for the future, considering that 
availability of the oil energy cannot make us dispense with the 
search for alternatives so as to develop other sources. We have 
had to consider the long run. The current circumstances require 
us to embrace certain policies that reflect the economic 
situation. We have to have the technology to desalinate water, 
to generate power, and for use in the various economic and 
social areas. We also have to have the capability to deal with 
this technology. 
  Nuclear energy has its several aspects, including the 
negative aspect of radiation and the possibility of radiation 
accidents. It also has its peaceful aspect. Because problems 
have developed in the advanced countries that use nuclear 
energy, we will be more conservative before we embark on this 
field. 
  Despite all this, we must have the technical capability 
first. Protection from radiation is very important, and we have 
made a stride in this regard in the area of the peaceful use of 
the atom. 
<H5>  Not True </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] An accusation was made against the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz Science and Technology city and those who made it 
believe that you are close to the King Sa'ud University but that 
you are not as close to other academic circles. 
  [Al-'Adhl] This is a misplaced accusation. The city is eager 
to have close cooperation with all of the Kingdom's 
universities, and such cooperation does, in fact, exist even 
though the city is specialized in technological sciences. 
<H5>  Specialized Institutes </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] The city has established a number of specialized 
scientific institutes. But we notice that there is a delay in 
developing programs for these institutes. Perhaps your 
excellency can shed light on these institutes and their goals. 
  [Al-'Adhl] The city performs three major and important tasks 
in supporting and promoting scientific research throughout the 
Kingdom. First, the city seeks to support research at 
universities and at private and public sector academic and 
research centers. Second, the city conducts applied scientific 
research. Third, the city coordinates cooperation between the 
Kingdom and other countries in the area of science and 
technology. There is another axis connected with research by 
research centers. The main objective is not to set up centers 
but to conduct new research and to use the accomplished research 
to serve development. The objectives are the same but the 
programs must vary so as to serve this effort. We have to have 
flexibility and capability. It is not so easy to establish such 
institutes because they require manpower. Building construction 
must be completed at the time when cadres become available. We 
must have the main seed, namely qualified youth, and I must not 
be compelled to conclude contracts [with foreigners]. 
  So there has to be planning, especially since it is not easy 
to create a scientific establishment, which is not just a 
building. This is why we have built a multipurpose premises. The 
existing research institutes building was constructed to be a 
first-phase nucleus of all these research institutes. Each 
building is constructed according to a specific design and it 
becomes a specialized institute when completed, such as the 
energy and petroleum research building, the petrochemical 
industries building, the space and astronomy building, and the 
natural and environmental sciences building. 
  [Al-Zuman] It is noticed that the city is interested in 
purely scientific research and we find that human research is 
neglected, despite its importance. What is your excellency's 
comment on this? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Human research is important. However, it is 
conducted at universities. As planned, a most important 
objective of the city's is to devote attention to applied 
research, which requires laboratories and technicians, meaning 
that that this research has a special characteristics whereas 
human research is focused on researchers, libraries, and so 
forth. Yes, this accusation is true. But there are other 
institutions in the Kingdom which have a greater role in this 
type of research. 
  [Al-Zuman] The city has enjoyed the attention of the 
custodian of the two holy mosques, as proven by this equipment 
and these enormous buildings. But the question that obviously 
persists is: what has this city offered in return for all this 
support? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Some aspects may be disclosed and others may not. 
I have already answered some points, such as energy, lunar 
observatories, and so forth. 
  So, I do not believe that the city has been lax. It is true 
that one aspires for more. But we do all we can within the 
limits of our resources. 
  [Al-Zuman] Is there a plan to hold international scientific 
symposiums? 
  [Al-'Adhl] The city participates in numerous conferences and 
symposiums, especially those of an applied nature. Next Shawwal 
[April], the city will hold a technology symposium in 
cooperation with the various governmental sectors. The purpose 
will be to raise the questions: How can we improve our work? 
Have completed studies achieved their desired outcome or have 
they been shelved away and forgotten? 
  So our objective behind this symposium is to probe the 
aspects of failure, if they exist, especially since development 
is the objective that we all seek. 
  We have invited guests from Japan, the United States, 
Malaysia, Australia, and China to participate in this symposium 
so we can familiarize ourselves with their experiences. We have 
also invited Arab guests to participate and familiarize us with 
their experiences and with the methods they have employed. 
  [Al-Zuman] What is your evaluation of the selection of the 
Kingdom, represented in your person, to head the IAEA 
[conference] and how do you see the world community's impression 
of the Kingdom in this regard? 
  [Al-'Adhl] There is no doubt that this is the first time 
that 
an Arab country has headed the IAEA's general conference. If 
anything, this choice shows the place that the world community 
gives the Kingdom in this regard--a place that truly reflects 
what the Kingdom has accomplished. This is testimony for the 
Kingdom from everybody. I would like to point out here that 
international representation in the IAEA's general congress is 
done on the basis of blocs. 
  There is the European bloc and the North and South America 
bloc. The general conference chairman is selected annually. This 
chairmanship is alternated annually between the various blocs, 
thus entitling a certain bloc to the annual chairmanship. This 
bloc selects or nominates one of its members to the chairmanship 
and the general conference then votes on the candidate. 
  In some cases, things proceed smoothly and agreement is 
reached within the bloc to nominate just one country to chair 
the conference. In such a case, approval by the general 
conference is almost guaranteed. But in other cases, one finds 
that more than one country is competing for the chairmanship. 
The conference decides by vote. 
  This time, the Kingdom sought the chairmanship. The city 
represents the Kingdom in the IAEA and the ambassador of the 
custodian of the two holy mosques is the permanent resident 
representative at the agency. Royal approval was given to the 
Kingdom's nomination. There were some countries that wanted to 
nominate themselves but they decided to withdraw their candidacy 
out of appreciation for the Kingdom. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59885 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   Talks on Removing Ukrainian Nuclear Weapons </H4>
<F P=102> LD1712210893 Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 2010 
GMT 17 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD1712210893 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 17 Dec (UKRINFORM-TASS) -- Two-day Russian- 
Ukrainian-U.S. talks on problems relating to the strategic and 
tactical nuclear weapons remaining in Ukraine after the break-up 
of the USSR ended here today. 
  Issues relating to the ratification of START-1 were 
discussed. Ukraine demands, among other things, guarantees of 
its security from Russia and the United States following the 
elimination of missiles and claims financial compensation for 
the strategic nuclear weapons subject to elimination, including 
compensation for the tactical nuclear weapons withdrawn to 
Russia after Ukraine's declaration of independence. 
  The talks were conducted in a dynamic way. They will be 
continued by agreement of the three sides. 
  The following took part in the talks: Russian Deputy 
Minister 
of Foreign Affairs G.Mamedov; special envoy S. Talbott, and U.S. 
Deputy Defense Secretary W. Perry; and Ukrainian Deputy Prime 
Minister V. Shmarov. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59886 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   Further Report on Talks in Kiev </H4>
<F P=102> LD1912104793 Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service in Ukrainian 
0900 GMT 19 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD1912104793 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Talks on issues of strategic and tactical nuclear 
weapons, inherited by Ukraine after the disintegration of the 
USSR, were held in Kiev on 16-17 December. Representatives of 
Ukraine, Russia, and the United States of America took part in 
the talks. The sides discussed issues connected with the 
ratification of the START I Treaty and the reservations 
contained in a resolution by the Supreme Council of Ukraine. 
They expressed readiness to tackle these issues jointly. In 
particular, the talk was about the security guarantees to the 
Ukrainian state on the part of Russia and the United States of 
America in connection with the elimination of nuclear weapons, 
about technical assistance aimed at eliminating these weapons, 
and about compensation to Ukraine for the fissionable materials 
contained in the nuclear warheads, including those [mounted on] 
the tactical nuclear weapons that were transferred to Russia 
after the Supreme Council of Ukraine had adopted the known 
resolution of 12 September 1991. 
  It was pointed out at the talks that the stand of the 
Ukrainian side on this issue was correct, substantiated, and 
that it rested on the principles of international law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59887 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   Ukraine's Deputy Premier Cites Pledges on Debt, Fuel </H4>
<F P=102> AU2112103093 Paris AFP in English 0939 GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU2112103093 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, Dec 21 (AFP) -- Ukraine claimed Tuesday the 
United States and Russia offered to erase energy debts and 
supply fuel for the country's nuclear power plants in exchange 
for the atomic weapons on Ukrainian territory. 
  Deputy Premier Valeriy Shmarov also confirmed that Ukraine 
had already removed 17 of the 46 modern SS-24 missiles it 
possesses from their silos and had disconnected their nuclear 
warheads. Each has 10 warheads. 
  Shmarov, the government's point man on nuclear disarmament, 
told AFP the United States had proposed that Ukraine receive 
free fuel for its nuclear power stations for the next five years 
as compensation for giving up the 176 strategic missiles it 
possesses. 
  "This is a big step by all sides towards reaching a 
compromise," Shmarov said. 
  He stated that the United States had also proposed that 
Ukraine's estimated two billion-dollar debt to Russia for energy 
supplies be erased to compensate for the smaller tactical 
nuclear weapons withdrawn from Ukrainian territory by May 1992. 
  Shmarov said Russia had agreed to the scheme. Russian 
officials declined to comment. 
  He said that within 10 days another three SS-24s will have 
been deactivated as a "goodwill gesture" by Ukraine. 
  Shmarov stated that Kiev may consider the deactivated SS-24s 
as among the missiles it agreed to get rid of under its 
qualified ratification of the 1991 START treaty. 
  "We retain the view that the missiles representing the 
biggest ecological danger must be destroyed first," Shmarov 
said, referring to 130 older SS-19 long-range missiles. 
  Ukraine signed agreements last year in which it pledged to 
respect the START treaty, accede to the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and get rid of all the nuclear weapons 
on its soil. 
  The Ukrainian parliament however ratified START earlier this 
year with the stipulation that it only applied to 42 percent of 
the 176 strategic nuclear missiles from the former Soviet 
arsenal based in the country. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59888 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   Kravchuk Predicts Nuclear Accord </H4>
<F P=102> LD2212092093 Moscow Ostankino Television First Channel 
Network in Russian 0600 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2212092093 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow Ostankino Television First Channel 
Network </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Novosti" newscast] </F>
  [Text] The United States, Russia, and Ukraine will sign a 
tripartite agreement with regard to compensating Ukraine for the 
removal of its nuclear weapons and also security guarantees. 
This has been announced to journalists in Kiev by Ukraine 
President Leonid Kravchuk. 
  In his words, reports Interfax, this will be an agreement 
which will not affect the interests of any state. He also 
confirmed that 17 SS-24 missiles have been stood down from 
combat duty. The president said that they cannot be used, even 
by Russia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59889 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   Zlenko Comments </H4>
<F P=102> WS2212163893 Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network in 
Ukrainian 1500 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> WS2212163893 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Journalists also asked a question that stood apart 
from the main point of discussion at the briefing held by 
Ukrainian foreign affairs and foreign trade ministers. 
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Zlenko was asked to comment on the 
situation that has taken shape after the United States of 
America refuted yesterday's statement by President Kravchuk. 
Here is what the minister replied. 
  [Begin Zlenko recording] The only thing that I can tell you 
is that following the decision about START I ratification by the 
Supreme Council, the Ukrainian foreign minister has undertaken 
extremely active efforts to resolve conditions and reservations 
put forward in the resolution. I could tell you about the whole 
range of measures that the ministry has taken over this short 
stretch of time. They include negotiations with the Russian and 
American delegations and trilateral consultations recently held 
by Ukraine, Russia, and the United States. In other words, we 
are currently looking for approaches to settle the issues 
connected with the destruction of nuclear weapons, as stipulated 
by the Supreme Council resolution. This is why I would like to 
say that there is nothing here to refute. The fact is that the 
negotiations were held and the search for solutions to this 
problem is under way -- including the participation of such 
great nuclear states as Russia and the United States of America. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59890 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ashgabat Summit </TI></H3>
<H4>   May Decide Fate of Kazakhstan's Missiles </H4>
<F P=102> PM2112154493 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 22 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 1 </F>

<F P=103> PM2112154493 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Vinogradov report: "The Fate of Kazakhstan's Nuclear </F>
Warheads May Be Decided in Ashgabat"] 
  [Text] At the meeting of CIS leaders in Ashgabat, Boris 
Yeltsin and Nursultan Nazarbayev will meet face to face to 
discuss the question of the status of the strategic nuclear 
forces that are on Kazakhstan's territory. 
  Almaty is proposing the formation of a joint command. Moscow 
has rejected this idea, because it would be a violation of its 
international commitments. 
  There is general satisfaction that the Ukrainian option of 
"privatization" of strategic missiles did not start a trend. 
The Kazakh parliament, at its recent session, ratified the 
Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
  At the same time Russia looked on jealously at the 
U.S.-Kazakh agreement, signed 13 December, on the safe 
dismantling of nuclear warheads belonging to the strategic 
arsenal of the former USSR. Washington promised to grant Almaty 
$84 million out of the total sum of $1.2 billion allocated by 
the U.S. Congress to the CIS countries for these purposes. 
Russia, which has great experience in such operations, had 
expected to find a common language with Kazakhstan and do the 
dismantling itself. 
  In formal terms, all 108 SS-18 missiles stationed in 
Kazakhstan, and the 1,400 warheads, are Russia's property. The 
total value of their nuclear contents, after dismantling and 
reprocessing, will amount to about $1 billion. The world 
uranium market is strictly limited by IAEA [International Atomic 
Energy Agency] guidelines. But the Americans would like to buy 
all the uranium left after the warheads are dismantled, and have 
made it clear to Kazakhstan that money is no object. 
  Almaty, having willingly renounced the status of a nuclear 
power, expects to receive compensation for the missiles. 
Nursultan Nazarbayev's edict banning the exportation from the 
republic of anything that is on its territory applies not only 
to missiles, but also to weapons [zaryady] that have been 
removed from alert status. Kazakhstan's storage facilities are 
packed with nuclear ammunition. 
  Russia is willing to share, but insists that the dismantling 
and the uranium reprocessing takes place at its own plants. 
Ukraine's uncompromising position cannot but influence 
Kazakhstan's behavior. Kiev has decided, by the end of this 
year, to remove all the warheads from 20 SS-24 ICBM's, and to 
keep them. But Ukraine also does not have the plants and 
technology for reprocessing the uranium, which it could use as 
fuel for its five nuclear power stations. 
  After the Russian elections, the former certainty that the 
safest course is to ship all the former USSR's nuclear weapons 
to Russia's territory is not shared by everyone. Russia may 
come up against more persistent claims from Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan to keep the nuclear weapons. 
  It has yet to be decided how Kazakhstan's warheads will be 
dismantled and by what means their uranium content will be sold. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59891 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ashgabat Summit </TI></H3>
<H4>   Kravchuk, Yeltsin Discuss START I in Ashgabat </H4>
<F P=102> WS2412151293 Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network in 
Ukrainian 1100 GMT 24 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> WS2412151293 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Today, in the capital of Turkmenistan, where the 
meeting of the CIS heads of state is being held, a meeting of 
Ukrainian and Russian presidents has taken place. During the 
talk the presidents discussed a package of current questions 
with regard to mutual relations between the two countries. 
Special attention has been paid to topics related to the START 
I agreement. The presidents agreed that the resolution of this 
problem should be approached with great consideration and 
responsibility. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59892 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia Insists on Removing Ukraine Nuclear Arms </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0712175493 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1430 GMT 7 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD0712175493 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature: Reports by </F>
Diplomatic Correspondents Dmitriy Vosboinikov, Igor Porshnev, 
Vitaly Trubetskoi and others] 
  [Text] "Considering our international commitments and 
proceeding from the interests of Russia's security, we cannot 
allow the emergence of new nuclear states on our borders." This 
statement was made in an exclusive interview with INTERFAX in 
Murmansk on Tuesday by Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrey Kozyrev. 
  That is why Moscow intends to firmly insist on removing 
nuclear arms from Ukraine for their further scrapping in Russia, 
he pointed out. 
  According to the foreign minister, the stand taken by Russia 
gained "unanimous support" at the Brussels session of the 
North-Atlantic Council for Cooperation. At Russia's insistence 
the Council urged Ukraine to ratify the START I treaty, "since 
no one in the world recognizes the Ukrainian parliament's 
resolution on this score as ratification." 
  As Kozyrev said, "Ukraine's interpretation of this issue is 
fundamentally wrong." "Kiev's arguments to the effect that the 
Ukrainian parliament ratified START I, and that this is its way 
of claiming the right to possess nuclear weapons deployed in 
Ukraine, cannot be taken seriously," he stressed. 
  Russia, Kozyrev pointed out, "did all it could to conduct a 
peaceful dialog with Ukraine." "However, the problem of nuclear 
weapons makes the situation hopeless. The same relates to the 
Black Sea Fleet whose division is absurd in itself," he said. 
  According to the head of Russian diplomacy, "Sevastopol was 
Russia's naval base and it must remain as such." "The process of 
placing the fleet under Russia's jurisdiction must proceed 
painlessly by means of making compensation to Ukraine, 
notwithstanding the fact that Ukraine owes Russia enormous sums 
of money for oil and gas, as well as in the framework of trade," 
he said. 
  Kozyrev is confident that relations between Russia and 
Ukraine can be normalized as soon as Ukraine begins to honor the 
bilateral agreements reached in Massandra. "But we have no right 
to go along with the absurd ideas of proliferating nuclear arms 
and dividing the Black Sea Fleet," Kozyrev said. 
  When asked about Russia's attitude to the possibility of 
expanding the number of permanent members in the UN Security 
Council by means of including Germany and Japan in it, Kozyrev 
noted that this is not a pressing problem. 
  With reference to the Russian Choice bloc, he is a 
co-founder 
of, Kozyrev said that in the future parliament the bloc may "in 
principle" enter into coalition with "any reformist movements." 
"However let's wait and see how many seats in the parliament 
Russian Choice itself will obtain," he added. 
  Kozyrev said he fears that members of the future parliament 
"will spend a year or two on their accomodation and training 
alone." "As a result we'll lose the Duma. To prevent this from 
happening we'll have to elect real professionals, such as those 
who belong to the Russian Choice bloc, to the Yavlinskiy bloc, 
to the Shakhray bloc," Kozyrev said. "In the next two years 
we'll have to 'push through' several laws which would enable the 
country to live in peace. Let the new deputies who will come 
later improve them." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59893 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Ministry Warns Ukraine on Nuclear Status </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0712141793 Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 1246 
GMT 7 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD0712141793 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, 7 Dec (ITAR-TASS) -- The Ukraine's 
compliance with its commitment to assuming non-nuclear status 
and acceding to the nonproliferation treaty is now a problem 
that will brook no delay, the director of the Russian Foreign 
Ministry's Information and Press Department, Grigoriy Karasin, 
told a briefing today. 
  After giving an analysis of international reaction to the 
Ukrainian Supreme Soviet's resolution on START-1 and on the 
Ukraine's commitments under the Lisbon Protocol, he said that "a 
consensus against Kiev's denuclearization maneuverings" is 
forming in the world. In his opinion, "Kiev should take 
account" of the sharp reaction by European countries to the 
Ukraine's intention of keeping the nuclear weapons that are on 
its territory. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59894 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ukraine's Security Fears Over START Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WC0017A Moscow LITERATURNAYA GAZETA in Russian No 47, 24 
Nov 93 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94WC0017A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow LITERATURNAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Rogov, president of the Center for </F>
National Security and International Relations: "Ukrainian 
Nuclear Missiles, Targeted at the Skies, Could Alter the Balance 
of Forces on Earth"] 
  [Text] The amendments that deputies of the Supreme Council 
of Ukraine made in ratification of the START I treaty could 
upset the balance of forces in the world. 
  The consequences of the step taken by Ukraine have not been 
recognized with us as yet, unfortunately. The point being that 
we are present not simply during Ukraine's revision of its 
former position in respect to nonnuclear status. A new nuclear 
power, a nuclear superpower, even, is being created before our 
eyes. After all, in terms of the quantity of strategic nuclear 
arms deployed on the territory of Ukraine and declared by the 
Supreme Council to be its property, it is today entirely 
comparable with what the Soviet Union had 25 years ago, in the 
period when the Soviet-American negotiations that led in 1972 to 
the signing of the SALT 1 treaty began. Even following the 
reductions to which the Ukrainian leadership has consented, 
Ukraine will have more nuclear arms than Britain, France, and 
China put together. 
  Why has this happened? Why has Ukraine renounced its former 
positions? Such an outcome of events was, I believe, to have 
been expected. The commitment to the adoption of nuclear-free 
status was made by Ukraine in the period when the struggle for 
sovereignty was under way. Ukraine was not an independent state 
at that time. The situation changed drastically following the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union, when the formation of new 
independent national states began, and Ukraine, like any other 
state, is taking the path of recognition of power factors, 
primarily military-power factors, as the basis of its position 
in the international arena and status in the system of 
international relations. And if Russia, the United States, and 
other nuclear states are not about to give up their nuclear 
arms--it is only a question of a reduction thereof--why should 
we expect any different a position of Ukraine? The formation of 
a new independent state, when its position is still quite 
fragile, is evoking in Ukrainian political circles--and not only 
among nationalists--an aspiration to rely on some power levers. 
Nuclear weapons under these conditions are coming to be 
perceived as a guarantor of Ukraine's independence and as a 
means of deterrence against interference in its internal affairs. 
  From Russia's viewpoint, such a development of events is, 
naturally, extremely undesirable. After all, this means that 
Soviet nuclear weapons have not one successor--Russia--but two 
and, possibly, three, considering that Kazakhstan also is 
refusing to recognize the nuclear weapons on its territory as 
Russian property and is essentially, albeit with a certain lag, 
taking the route carved out by Ukraine. Thus, Russia will become 
the sole state in the world that will have on its borders three 
nuclear neighbors, counting China. This geostrategic situation 
could have extremely negative consequences if account is taken 
of that entire complex of territorial national border 
contradictions that exist even now and that could emerge for 
Russia with its neighbors in the future. 
  Ukraine's step will have negative consequences also for the 
system of international relations as a whole. After all, the 
appearance of a new nuclear power or superpower, even, is a most 
severe blow to the status of the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty, which is already experiencing the strongest pressure as 
a result of the actions of North Korea, Iran, Iraq, India, and 
Pakistan as it is. How might the world community impede the 
nuclear ambitions of some states and agree to the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons and nuclear status by others? The logic of the 
Nonproliferation Treaty is confounded, and it may be expected 
that at the conference reviewing this treaty, which is scheduled 
for 1995, Ukraine's actions will be used by many opponents of a 
continuation of the nonproliferation regime to undermine it and 
to deny an extension thereof. In addition, in the new multipolar 
world that has come to replace the bipolar system of the cold 
war period, the prospect of the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
would bring about an abrupt destabilization of the situation. 
Use of the nuclear factor to become a power center could make 
the process of the preservation of stability in the multipolar 
world practically unmanageable. 
  It has to be said that the Ukrainian leadership's decision 
represents a most important miscalculation of Russia. Two years 
ago at Belovezhskaya Pushcha, and in subsequent agreements of 
the CIS, the question of ownership of the nuclear weapons was 
avoided. Nebulous, essentially meaningless wording of the 
"unified control over nuclear weapons" type was employed 
instead. Under conditions where each republic had become a full 
successor of all Soviet property on its territory, such wording 
could not have prevented a division of the military inheritance 
among the republics, and now, it is becoming clear, the nuclear 
inheritance also. 
  For a long time, unfortunately, the Russian leadership 
ignored the problem, putting its faith in the United States and 
the West forcing Ukraine to abandon its claims. But this did not 
happen. And Russia itself contributed to the increased 
suspicions in respect to itself in Ukraine, making territorial 
demands, inflating the conflict over the Black Sea Fleet, and 
using economic levers as a stick in relations with Ukraine. All 
this played into the hands of the circles in Ukraine that are 
doing everything possible to rid themselves of the Chernobyl 
syndrome and build Ukrainian sovereignty on the classical 
factors of power politics. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59895 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Provisions of New Cryogenic Deal With India </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM0401113394 Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 4 Jan 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> PM0401113394 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Naumov report: "Fate of `Cosmic' Deal"] </F>
  [Text] The new year is beginning propitiously for 
Russian-Indian cooperation in space matters. The editorial 
office possesses reliable information that the sides have at 
last succeeded in emerging from the ticklish situation which 
developed following the suspension of the Agreement on the Joint 
Development of a Cryogenic Booster Unit [CBU]. 
  It was signed by the Glavkosmos [Main Administration for the 
Development and Use of Space Technology for the National Economy 
and Scientific Research] and the Indian Space Research 
Organization [ISRO] in 1991 and provided for the transfer of 
Russian cryogenic space technologies to India and for the 
instruction and training of specialists. The contracts were 
worth 2.35 billion rupees. By the time the agreement had been 
declared a violation of the missile technology control regime 
[MTCR] (in the opinion of some experts, the very fact of a 
violation is highly debatable), the Indians had already paid us 
1.297 billion rupees (approximately 60 percent of the total). 
  For this money the Glavkosmos passed to the ISRO 90 percent 
of the technical documentation and certain equipment needed to 
organize production. In an instant all this "property" became 
useless, since there could be no question of continuing 
deliveries worth more than 1 billion rupees. In addition, the 
Indian space program, which is entirely dependent on the joint 
development of the CBU, found itself in jeopardy. 
  It was in these starting conditions that the sides started 
debating the project's future. Three times the talks were on 
the verge of failure. Nevertheless, an acceptable solution was 
found. In the opinion of specialists, the new version of the 
agreement will fit fully within the "Procrustean bed" of the 
MTCR. 
  What, then, has been agreed? Instead of technologies, the 
Glavkosmos will supply two additional CBU flight stages and 
technological equipment for their operation for the outstanding 
sum. It will pass to India two mockup units: A service one to 
complete the ground servicing complex and a dynamic one to "fit" 
it to the launch complex. 
  In addition, an additional agreement has been concluded on 
the delivery of three more Russian-made finished flight stages. 
Each of them will cost $3 million. This will enable India not 
to curtail independent space research but merely to correct its 
program. 
  The purchaser has pledged to use the equipment obtained from 
the Glavkosmos exclusively for peaceful purposes -- to launch 
telecommunications satellites and other useful civilian payloads 
into orbit. India has agreed to a requirement not to reexport 
it to third countries and not to modernize without Russia's 
consent. Our specialists' access to places where all the space 
rockets which will use the units being sold as the third stage 
are assembled, tested, and launched will also be ensured. 
  The first Russian CBU's will be handed over to the ISRO in 
1996. But the Indians are prepared to pay one-half of the cost 
in advance ($4.5 million) as early as January 1994. In 
conditions when the Glavkosmos is finding it hard to find the 
money to support the space rocket complex, these dollars will 
come in handy. 
  The accords that have been reached are very important. They 
will not only enable Russia to "save face" as a reliable partner 
in international cooperation but will also ensure employment for 
15,000 of our compatriots -- working people in the space 
industry -- through the year 2000. 
  Thanks to the new agreement, experts believe, Russia and 
India will preserve the trade and scientific ties developed over 
the years. It is not hard to predict what the outcome would 
have been if this had not happened: In full accordance with the 
proverb "nature abhors a vacuum," our niche in the market for 
space services would be taken over by leading French and U.S. 
firms. They have long been looking longingly at this region. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59896 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Possible U.S.-Russian Retargeting Agreement </TI></H3>
<H4>   IZVESTIYA Commentary </H4>
<F P=102> PM0812164993 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 9 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 3 </F>

<F P=103> PM0812164993 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Sychev: "Moscow and Washington Will </F>
Keep World Ocean in Their Sights"] 
  [Text] Colonel General Igor Sergeyev, commander of the 
Russian Strategic Missile Forces, has had talks with top 
Pentagon officials and the command of the U.S. strategic forces 
regarding the retargeting of strategic nuclear missiles. 
  At his latest press conference President Bill Clinton did 
not 
specify whether the consultations had gotten far. Russian state 
institutions are also refraining from comment. 
  The Russian and U.S. presidents are examining at least two 
ways of implementing the initiative suggested in April by Boris 
Yeltsin to President Clinton in Vancouver. According to one 
option it is planned to retarget ballistic missiles, designed by 
Russia and the United States for mutual destruction, on 
godforsaken corners of the world ocean. According to 
unconfirmed reports 24 desert regions have already been 
identified as suitable for the role of false targets. Another 
option envisages not targeting the missiles anywhere. 
  "The idea of retargeting has long been discussed in academic 
circles," a staffer at a Russian department said. "It is useful 
and it is good that we are moving from theory to practice. 
Russia and the United States are no longer adversaries yet to 
this day they have been keeping each other in their sights." 
  What will the implementation of the Russian idea provide? If 
there is an unsanctioned launch there will not be mass human 
casualties or a retaliatory nuclear missile strike. Because of 
its military-technical flaws the agreement could become a 
touchstone of the sincerity of the friendship between Moscow and 
Washington and a confidence-building measure. After all, apart 
from secret agents there are no other means which would allow us 
to assure ourselves of the honesty of our partner and his 
fulfillment of his commitments. 
  In addition it takes only about 15 minutes to retarget 
individually targeted missiles and warheads. You only have to 
put the necessary programs into the computers. 
  Nonetheless it is better to have "disoriented" missiles than 
missiles which "know" precisely the point which has been 
targeted in the United States or Russia. In given circumstances 
the time necessary for reprogramming could save mankind. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59897 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Possible U.S.-Russian Retargeting Agreement </TI></H3>
<H4>   Technical Aspects </H4>
<F P=102> PM2312094393 Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 23 Dec 93 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2312094393 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Roman Zadunayskiy article under "Details" rubric: "Where </F>
U.S. and Russian Missiles Are Targeted"] 
  [Text] In the past B. Yeltsin's words to the effect that 
henceforth Russian ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads were 
no longer targeted on U.S. cities were given quite a restrained 
welcome by the Bush administration and did not meet with any 
special desire on the part of the White House and the Pentagon 
to take an analogous step. It now comes to light, however, that 
the Russian military was also in no hurry to retarget the 
missiles -- talks on this are proceeding only now both at the 
highest level and directly between military chiefs. 
  Thus, Colonel General I. Sergeyev, commander of the 
Strategic 
Missile Forces, recently met in the United States (Omaha) with 
Gen. L. Butler, chief of the U.S. Strategic Air Command, and 
with high-ranking Pentagon representatives. It is too soon to 
speak of the result of the talks but, according to available 
information, they discussed precisely the retargeting of U.S. 
and Russian ICBM's at deserted areas of the World Ocean. 
According to U.S. data, 20 such regions have already been 
identified. 
  The retargeting scheme itself is not complex: The 
coordinates of targets in the Russian Federation and the United 
States which had been entered into the missiles' computer 
operational memory will be replaced by the coordinates of 
regions in the ocean. These are the main targets, while the 
reserve targets, also entered in the computer memory, will 
remain untouched. In general, the coordinates of the main 
targets have to be entered in the computer memory, since the 
possibility that the missile will fall onto the territory from 
which it was launched cannot be ruled out. The flight mission 
-- the coordinates of the main target -- can be changed in 15 
minutes, so retargeting is a symbolic, diplomatic step rather 
than a military, operational-tactical one, and a demonstration 
of the significant warming of Russian-U.S. relations. 
  At the same time there are several aspects which complicate 
even this, at first sight simple and understandable diplomatic 
maneuver. It is not clear, for example, how Ukraine, on whose 
territory 176 missiles with 1,240 nuclear charges are stationed, 
will react to this. In addition, 81 missiles (81 charges) are 
on the territory of Belarus and 98 missiles (980 nuclear 
charges) in Kazakhstan. Under interstate treaties all these 
silo-housed ICBM's with their nuclear multiple reentry vehicles 
belong to Russia, but the Ukrainian leadership is known to 
dissent on this question. Therefore the possibility cannot be 
ruled out that Kiev will once again show self-will and refuse to 
retarget "its" missiles (which L. Kravchuk has transferred to 
the jurisdiction of the 42d Missile Army of the republic's Armed 
Forces), offended that the talks were held without involving the 
Ukrainian military department. 
  The retargeting of ground-based ICBM's will reduce the 
danger 
of their unsanctioned launch and, thus, of a nuclear war arising 
by accident. But similar missiles with nuclear warheads (Russia 
has 788 of them with 2,652 charges) will remain on submarines of 
both states, and there seems to be no question of retargeting 
these. In addition, problems of inspection arise with regard to 
where the missiles are actually targeted. It only remains for 
us to take the Pentagon at its word that henceforth Russia will 
not be the main target of the U.S. military, but only a reserve 
target. States bordering on the regions of the World Ocean at 
which the missiles will be retargeted and also Greenpeace will 
be indignant. The possibility cannot be ruled out that the 
retargeting of missiles at "abstract" targets will dampen the 
ardor of missilemen and lessen their attention -- which could 
lead to unsanctioned launches. 
  The most radical option for preventing an accidental 
unleashing of nuclear war is to remove the nuclear warheads from 
the carriers and store them. Incidentally, this simple solution 
to the problem, proposed by Bruce Blair, a U.S. specialist in 
questions of nuclear weapon command and control systems at the 
Brookings Institution, as well as by some Russian specialists, 
is categorically rejected by both Washington and Moscow. The 
fact that, apart from the United States and Russia, which have 
"become friends," other nuclear states exist in the world, and 
the policies of some of these inspire real fear, serves as a 
weighty argument. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59898 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Large Quantity of Mustard Gas Said Missing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  MK2112123093 Moscow KURANTY in Russian 21 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> MK2112123093 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KURANTY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Kaverin report under the "Scandal" rubric: </F>
Thousands of Tonnes of Mustard Gas Disappeared] 
  [Text] Professor S. Novikov, a Russian Democratic Reform 
Movement leader, laboratory chief at the Russian Academy of 
Sciences' Chemical Physics Institute, and a well known 
specialist in chemical weapons, accidentally "straying" from the 
subject of elections, stunned invited journalists by saying that 
the latest register of chemical weapons subject to elimination 
(under the convention on banning chemical weapons, which was 
signed by Russia) lists only five tonnes of mustard gas. It 
also clearly indicates that these are Russia's entire mustard 
gas reserves as of today. If this is so, a chilling question 
arises: What happened to tens of thousands of tonnes of this 
deadly chemical substance? Professor Novikov knows for sure 
that according to all post-war "catalogues," the quantity of 
mustard gas operational with the Armed Forces and located on 
Russian territory was measured precisely in these figures and 
that it has never been exported, destroyed, or dumped. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59899 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Agreement On Cosmodrome in Papua New Guinea </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD1712093293 Moscow Radio Moscow World Service in English 
0800 GMT 17 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD1712093293 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow Radio Moscow World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Russia's space industry has a chance to strengthen 
its position on the world market. Under an agreement with 
Australia, Russia's specialists will play a key role in building 
a new international private space launching site. This will be 
on one of the islands of Papua New Guinea. The islands are 
close to the equator, and that makes it possible to put in orbit 
twice as big a payload as that in the more northern and southern 
latitude. The launching will be done by Russia's powerful 
Proton rocket. The first rocket will be launched from the new 
cosmodrome in 1998. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59900 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   French Inspection Under CSCE Arrangements </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM1712114193 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 17 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> PM1712114193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Russian Federation Ministry of Defense Press and </F>
Information Directorate report: "Inspection Carried Out"] 
  [Text] On 10 December 1993, in accordance with the 
provisions of the 1992 Vienna document resulting from the talks 
on confidence-building and security measures, the French 
Government made a request to the Russian Federation Government 
to conduct inspections of military activity on the territory of 
the North Caucasus Military District. 
  The Russian Federation Ministry of Defense Information and 
Press Directorate reports that the French side's request has 
been met. 
  On 13 December a French inspection group comprising four 
representatives of the French Armed Forces arrived in the 
aforementioned area, where it carried out a 48-hour inspection. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59901 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   NASA Chief Gives News Conference on Joint Space Project </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD1612184293 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 1815 GMT 16 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1612184293 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Anna Bakina and Vladimir </F>
Rogachev] 
  [Text] Moscow December 16 TASS -- Neither Russia nor the 
United States could carry out such a project alone, head of the 
U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Daniel 
Goldin, told a news conference in Moscow on Thursday. 
  The news conference devoted to the signing of a package of 
bilateral agreements on space cooperation between Russia and the 
United States by Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and 
U.S. Vice-President Al Gore. 
  The documents confirm Russia's participation in the project 
to build an international orbiting station Alpha which is 
expected to go into service in the beginning of the next 
century. The project also involves the European Space Agency, 
Japan and Canada. The 20-year project will provide with jobs 
about 60,000 to 70,000 people and will cost 400 million U.S. 
dollars. 
  This is the largest and most impressive project ever, Goldin 
said. Additionally, Russia's participation will help reduce the 
time needed to bring the first module into orbit by two years, 
he added. 
  Yuriy Koptev, director-general of the Russian Space Agency, 
told ITAR-TASS that the project will also allow Russian 
enterprises to test the most advanced technologies and raise 
international cooperation in space research to a new height. 
Speaking about the content of the project, Koptev said that two 
mission control centres will be engaged to monitor the station 
flight, one in Houston, Texas, U.S., and the other one in the 
city of Kaliningrad outside Moscow. Russian specialists will be 
working in the United States while their American colleagues 
will come to Russia. 
  Koptev also said that a contract has been signed to conduct 
joint work under the project between 1994-1997. He said an 
agreement will be signed next week to determine all basic 
characteristics of technical means to be used within the project 
framework. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59902 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Correspondent Views Plan To Dismantle Nuclear Submarines </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  OW2712165693 Vladivostok Radiostantsiya Tikhiy Okean 
Maritime Network in Russian 0815 GMT 2 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> OW2712165693 </F>
<F P=104>  Vladivostok Radiostantsiya Tikhiy Okean 
Maritime Network </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Pacific Ocean" Program] </F>
  [Text] Folk wisdom says that a promise takes three years 
to keep. Sovetskaya Gavan residents have found this saying to 
be true. A decision was adopted exactly three years ago to 
withdraw nuclear submarines from the Sovetskaya Gavan Bay. This 
decision was adopted by the Pacific Fleet command and by the 
former commander Admiral Khvatov personally, under public 
pressure. However... our correspondent Yevgeniy Chuyev comments 
on this significant date. 
  [Chuyev] Military chiefs had promised to begin a gradual 
withdrawal of the dangerous submarines from the teeming waters 
of the bay by 1991. The rest of story proceeded as usual, and 
the situation just dragged on. You might remember an old joke: 
The important thing is not to achieve anything, but to show a 
readiness to do so; after an order is given, the main thing to 
do is to say: Yes, sir! The year 1991 was noted for the 
turbulent political events in our country, and for the August 
putsch attempts. The year 1992 saw economic collapse and 
financial failures of well- intentioned schemes, such as the 
intention to withdraw the submarines. As this year was nearing 
its end, money was finally found for the withdrawal of the first 
submarine. Here is where the problem started. As some officers 
have said, this is how it started: A submarine arrived at one of 
the restricted factories of Maritime Kray -- or, to be exact, in 
one of the Maritime Kray units. The moment it arrived they 
shouted: We cannot accept you, there is no place we can put 
you. In short, the submarine was received like a stepdaughter: 
it was supplied neither provisions nor water, and the sailors 
had to carry their own provisions just to survive. Allow me to 
quote a part of the story as told by Captain Third Rank 
Aleksandr Orlov, who witnessed it all first hand. He said: 
People who work at the factory are not practical, and the 
principle of pay before work is very well rooted here. It is 
called early pay nowadays. However, even this solves nothing 
because first, there was no [word indistinct] conversion order 
-- namely, for disarming the submarine; second, the floating 
pier where the submarine was supposed to dock was missing; 
third, the submarine was considered to be cruising independently 
still, and thus had not really arrived. Can you believe it? 
Although they say that the situation at the factory has calmed 
down, the crew still wonders about its future. 
  The submarine will leave the factory and head to [words 
indistinct], where it will await its turn to be dismantled. 
Considering the fact that the waiting line is very long, it is 
safe to assume that the grueling waiting and ordeal will drag on 
for years. But what about the others? After all, three more 
nuclear submarines remain in Sovetskaya Gavan, and there are 
many more in the Far East region's waters. Undoubtedly, it is 
simpler just to build submarines than to think of a proper way 
to dispose of them. This situation involves ethical issues as 
well as material ones. It is not the sailors' fault if someone 
failed to think of their future. But as for civilians -- people 
like you and me, those who live on the coast -- we should not 
also be forced to carry the burden of nuclear hostages and bad 
planning. The submarines have certainly done no wrong, and 
after faithfully serving the Motherland, they have the right to 
eternal peace without having to undergo the current ordeal and 
tribulation. We have waited patiently for three years, but the 
promise is sticking in our throats. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59903 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> RUSSIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   CW Destruction Investigated by ROSSIYA </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WC0019A Moscow ROSSIYA in Russian No 50, 8-14 Dec 93 
(signed to press 7 Dec 93) p 8 </F>

<F P=103> 94WC0019A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lev Fedorov under the rubric: "Investigation for </F>
ROSSIYA: The Chemical Death Complex"] 
  [Text] Having arrested ex-KGB General O. Kalugin in 
London recently, the British police, in their words, were 
counting on obtaining additional information about the 
participation of USSR special services in the murder of the 
Bulgarian dissident writer G. Markov. But even Kalugin was able 
to shed little light on the origin of the ricin poison, three 
micrograms of which were used to commit this murder. Other 
people could give answers to these questions. But they are 
silent. True, not all of them. In September of last year Doctors 
of Chemical Sciences Vil Mirzayanov and Lev Fedorov reported to 
the world from the pages of MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI about Russia's 
production of chemical weapons, including the latest kinds of 
binary ones. In spite of the postcommunist times, there were 
immediate attempts to silence them. Criminal charges were filed 
against V. Mirzayanov, accusing him of divulging a state secret. 
Lev Fedorov took one more step: He prepared and turned over to 
the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation a document on the 
production of chemical weapons. The fate of the document was 
sad. It burned in the Supreme Soviet building on 4 October. But 
manuscripts, as we know, do not burn. On the basis of 
information he had, Lev Fedorov prepared the article published 
below. 
<H5>  The Granary of the Homeland </H5>
  On the whole during the past two years a good deal has been 
written about problems of destroying chemical weapons and the 
military- chemical complex as a whole. Practically everything 
coming from official sources can without hesitation be called 
deceptive rubbish. To sum up what has been said by the chemical 
generals, we now "have the good fortune" to possess 
approximately 40,000 tonnes of combat toxic substances. 
  The list is surprisingly short. Shorter than the one in the 
brochures on civil defense used in the campaign for eliminating 
illiteracy. It includes: 
  --blister agents (mustard gas, lewisite, and mixtures of 
them); 
  --nerve gases (sarin and soman); 
  --V-nerve gasses; 
  --police CS gas. 
  From civil war times until the 1960's the concept of 
chemical 
weapons and also their arsenals included many other substances 
in addition to those mentioned above: phosgene, diphosgene, 
hydrocyanic acid, adamsite, diphenylchlorarsine. They were not 
only used in military service of the Red Army but were also 
produced on a large scale. 
  During the Vietnam War our press castigated the American 
aggressors who used chemical weapons. It was not chemical 
warfare in the classical form, but a herbicide war--chemical 
means of destroying vegetation were used as combat toxic 
substances. It is known that within the framework of the 
symmetrical response to the imperialist threat the USSR was also 
preparing for herbicide war. The Institute of Phytopathology of 
the USSR Ministry of Agriculture and its numerous divisions and 
branches were particularly successful here. Something was also 
set aside for the practice of waging the herbicide war. One can 
inquire about this in the Moscow Scientific Research Institute 
of Chemical Means of Plant Protection (VNIIKhSZR), its branch in 
Ufa, and also...incidentally, now it is already in a foreign 
country. 
  The Bulgarian dissident G. Markov was killed with ricin. 
"Big 
brother," the USSR special services, shared it with his brothers 
in the socialist camp. It should be added that installations for 
manufacturing ricin as a combat toxic substance until quite 
recently were working along happily in the Moscow State-Union 
Scientific Research Institute of Organic Chemistry and 
Technology (GSNIIOKhT) and/or its Volsk branch (now the State 
Institute for Organic Synthesis Technologies). 
  The chemical generals are guarding their secrets. Toxic 
substances are assigned numbers and names that reveal no 
information to the ordinary person. But the official press of 
the military-industrial complex sometimes gives out state or, 
rather, departmental secrets. Recently KRASNAYA ZVEZDA mentioned 
"Item 33," "Item 35," and a model with the code VX. In the same 
place they mentioned the "binary nerve gas `Novichok.'" The 
British press found out about "Novichok" and its code--"Product 
A-232." 
  Product R-33 is a so-called V-gas. For 15 long years it was 
produced in Novocheboksarsk at the Chuvash Production 
Association Khimprom imeni Leninskiy Komsomol. At the beginning 
of the 1960's two of these combines were planned: one in 
Chuvashia and the other in a place that is now outside the 
country. The Chuvash Production Association placed on the altar 
of the Cold War (according to official data) 15,200 tonnes of 
Product 33. 
  Product R-35 is a toxic substance named "sarin" by the 
Nazis, 
and a plant to produce it was constructed in Diechernfurt on the 
Oder. But the Red Army arrived in time and the plant "turned up 
missing." It materialized in Stalingrad, at the present 
All-Union Production Association Khimprom imeni Kirov. Because 
of their technological backwardness they were not able to put 
the equipment they had won into operation quickly. They did not 
begin to fill ammunition with Product R-35 in series production 
in Stalingrad until 1959, and they produced 11,700 tonnes of it. 
  Soman is a "relative" of sarin, it is Product R-55, and they 
began to produce it in Volgograd, smuggling it out from the time 
the technological flow line was put into operation until the end 
of the 1960's. The dry residue from these efforts is 4,750 
tonnes. Nobody else in the world has this toxic substance and we 
do not yet know how to destroy it safely. 
  Product A-232, which was mentioned in the British press, is 
one of a whole series of "innovations," created under the 
large-scale Soviet Foliant Program during the 1970's-1980's. 
This series began to be created as early as 1973 at the Volsk 
branch of the GSNIIOKhT. After the first "successes," Moscow was 
included with the corresponding scale, programs, and prospects. 
  We now have a whole series of toxic substances of the third 
generation to our credit. 
  Some of them were selected to be poured into ammunition on 
the technological flow line in Volgograd and also for testing at 
the testing ground in Shikhani. 
  In order to understand the danger presented by these 
arsenals, let us do some calculations. Let us say that a fatal 
dose of V-gas for a human being is about a milligram (more 
precise data are a state secret). Our official supply of this 
poison is sufficient to kill the entire population of the earth 
several times. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Toxic substance   |Overall output du-|Turned over for d-|Remainder         | 
|                  |ring the period o-|estruction in 1992|                  | 
|                  |f 1940-1945 (in t-|                  |                  | 
|                  |onnes)            |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|mustard gas       |77,385            |690 (plus 1,010 t-|75,000            | 
|                  |                  |onnes of a mixtur-|                  | 
|                  |                  |e of mustard gas  |                  | 
|                  |                  |and lewisite)     |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|lewisite          |20,601            |6,585             |14,000            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|hydrocyanic acid  |11,104            |0                 |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|phosgene          |8,293             |5                 |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|adamsite          |6,058             |3,200             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|sarin             |--                |11,720            |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|soman             |--                |4,750             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|V-gas             |--                |15,200            |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|The table, unfortunately, does not err on the side of completeness and abu-| 
|ndance. For example, mustard gas was produced before 1940 as well, and the-| 
|y continued to produce it along with lewisite after 1945. With respect to  | 
|sarin, soman, and V-gas it is unknown (not only precisely but even approxi-| 
|mately) how much was produced.                                             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  It must be emphasized that against the background of the 
nuclear missile confrontation there was not the slightest 
strategic need for our generals' chemical "toys." This subject 
deserves a separate study: Immense amounts of money have been 
spent and even more will have to be spent to destroy the poison 
that has been accumulated. Lewisite, adamsite, 
diphenylchlorarsine--a substance containing arsenic. Arsenic, as 
we know, lasts forever and will not disappear of its own accord 
from the places where it was produced or stored. 
  Something else is more important now. The yperite-lewisites 
are a German-American achievement from the beginning of the 
century, sarin and soman are a purely German invention from 
World War II times (one of the versions of Hitler's weapons of 
retribution), gas VX is a postwar Swedish-American creation, and 
CS gas was accepted for use by our army only after U.S. policy 
rejected it. The technical problems involved in producing these 
toxic substances were solved before the beginning of the 1960's 
and it was at that time that they moved from the scientific 
sphere into production. 
  What was our military-chemical science together with 
industry 
doing the rest of the time? Where are the residuals society does 
not know about but which threaten it with many chemical 
Chernobyls? 
  The nation's survival depends upon a complete and honest 
answer to these questions. 
<H5>  The Convict Past </H5>
  Domestic military chemistry has a convict past. For the 
pioneer in the development and production of chemical weapons, 
the GSNIIOKhT, the use of prisoner labor was the norm right up 
until the "Thaw." It began at the end of the 1920's. At that 
time it was still called by its prerevolutionary name, the 
Olginskiy Plant, and it was located on the Highway of the 
Enthusiasts. Then came a series of disguises--Plant No. 1, Plant 
No. 51, GSNII-42, GSNII-403.... 
  The output of mustard gas and phosgene was developed by a 
corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Ye. 
Shpitalskiy. He was arrested in 1929 but his death sentence was 
commuted to a 10-year term. The scientist continued to supervise 
the work, but as a prisoner. Subsequent work in the Institute 
was conducted not only by prisoners but also with the direct 
participation of the NKVD [People's Commissariat of Internal 
Affairs]. One of the renowned industrial developments was called 
"the method of the fourth special division" of the NKVD. 
  Of course, prisoners worked at other military chemistry 
facilities as well. Thus the giant of the First Five-Year Plan, 
the Visherskiy Chemical Plant (VIShKhIMZ), included the 
Bereznikov Soda Plant, which was rebuilt by prisoners--without 
their knowledge--for the production of mustard gas. 
  At that time the price of a human life, even a free one, not 
to mention one in prison, was negligible. Let us take for an 
illustration just one plant--No. 102 in Chapayevsk, where they 
produced shells, mines, and bombs with mustard gas and lewisite, 
and for just one year--1942. 
  During the first quarter 323 people suffered from 
occupational poisoning and injury, in the second quarter--400 
were added, and in the third quarter--another 412 were added to 
these. Nine-tenths of these people worked in specialized shops: 
IV (the manufacture of mustard gas), V (pouring it into 
ammunition), and there was also Shop No. VII, where they 
produced lewisite. 
  The technology for work with strong poisons is back in the 
Stone Age: Toxic substances were poured from tanks into barrels 
through rubber hoses, and using cans and buckets they were 
transferred from the barrels into the ammunition. A work day 
lasted 11 hours and involved wearing a gas mask and specialized 
rubber clothing. The working conditions (a statement from the 
capital commission): dirty in the shops, residuals from the 
poured product not cleaned up, deep potholes in the floor, 
dismantled equipment that had not been moved or decontaminated. 
In Shop No. 5 the station for purifying waste waters did not 
function for months on end and throughout a large area there was 
no ventilation equipment. 
  One time an apparatchik, his assistant, and a "journalist" 
(during those years that is what they called the accounting 
clerks) were doused from head to toe with mustard gas from a 
broken hose. The "journalist" died the next day, the 
assistant--10 days later, and the apparatchik himself also 
barely lived until the Victory. The plant leaders were given a 
reprimand for...losing 700 kg of mustard gas. They did not come 
up with any other method before the end of the war. 
  In 1942 more than 1,000 people were discharged from the 
plant: About 300 were just discharged because of illness and 
approximately the same number fled! 
  Reinforcements arrived at the plant in 1943--about 600 
people 
who had been released from prisons and camps and more than 1,000 
elderly Uzbeks who were not fit to go to the front and spoke 
Russian poorly. Less than 300 of them returned to 
Uzbekistan--the rest were buried in the Chapayevsk city 
cemetery. And more than 500 people fled that same year (out from 
under the wing of Lavrentiy Beriya's department!). 
  The "Thaw" did not break the continuity of the times. 
Thousands of prisoners from the new wave worked on the 
construction of Khimprom in Novocheboksrask at the beginning of 
the 1970's. They continued to work later as well, for example, 
at this plant's twin in a nearby foreign country. The scale of 
the use of forced labor was so great that a term originated--"he 
served time in chemistry" as a synonym for "he served time in 
jail." 
  The high Areopagus of the military-chemical complex landed 
in 
Chapayevsk in the summer of 1989: more than 20 deputy ministers, 
generals, directors, and academicians. They were there to place 
wreaths on graves in the city cemetery and get as far away as 
their legs would carry them from the unfortunate city which had 
been polluted by socialism and forgotten by God and the 
authorities. But the chiefs did not come in repentance--they 
almost declared Chapayevsk to be the most suitable place for 
destroying chemical weapons that were no longer needed. True, 
this decision was not ultimately made.... 
<H5>  War Victims--Burned Out Cities </H5>
  People in military-chemical production burned like straw. 
And 
entire cities where these factories of death were located were 
also unable to keep from burning up. Not a single document of 
modern Russia mentions the fact that scars have been left on the 
body of the earth, even in places where weapons are not 
produced. An immense ring of filth still surrounds each of them: 
bodies of water, underground waters, and soil are polluted. 
Residents suffer from incomprehensible diseases. And there is no 
mention of allotting funds for treating these people, not to 
mention restoring the ecology of these places. 
  The specific addresses and the degree of mutilation of the 
environment are still a well-kept secret. Nonetheless, spies of 
the "probable enemy" have probably progressed much farther than 
we have in recognizing our filthy chemical past. 
  Last year in the United States a paper was published on 
Soviet chemical weapons; it included a considerable number of 
German and Anglo-American discoveries. From this it is possible 
to learn a great deal about the plants of the USSR that produced 
and were preparing to produce chemical weapons during the prewar 
and war years. 
  The current VNIIKhSZR, the brain center for the chemistry of 
toxic substances, was in fact a large hybrid consisting of 
Moscow Plant No. 51 and NII-42 (which grew, in turn, out of the 
central plant laboratory (TsZL) and the special laboratory of 
the Scientific Research Institute imeni V.Ya. Karpov). One can 
also find out a lot about the "numerical" past of many other 
plants that are now leading a quite respectable life as 
flagships of the chemical industry-- Khimprom imeni Kirov from 
Volgograd (Plant No. 91, produced mustard gas), the plant for 
chemical fertilizers from Chapayevsk (Plant No. 102, mustard 
gas, lewisite, phosgene), the soda production association from 
Bereznikov (Plant No. 761, mustard gas), and the Zavolzhskiy 
plant from Kineshma (Plant No. 756, adamsite). A good deal is 
also being reported about plants that were preparing to produce 
chemical weapons but for various reasons did not do so but still 
left the regions contaminated. 
  The spies did not find anything or did not want to share 
their knowledge about Khimprom, which was constructed in 
Chuvashia during the 1970's. Moreover, they very much degraded 
our city's contribution to large-scale chemistry by designating 
in it a plant for chemical weapons--Chernorechensk (Dzerzhinsk) 
combine No. 96/148. Things were complicated and confused. In 
fact in Dzerzhinsk three different giants of aggressive military 
chemistry have been operating since prewar years, and especially 
actively since the beginning of the war. The Chernorechensk 
Chemical Plant imeni Kalinin (now the Korund Production 
Association) produced and filled ammunition with hydrocyanic 
acid, phosgene, and diphosgene. Plant No. 96 (now the 
Kaprolaktam Production Association) produced and loaded lewisite 
and various yprites. And plant No. 148 (the modern Orgsteklo 
Production Association) specialized in ammunition with 
hydrocyanic acid. These plants also made deliveries of toxic 
substances to go--in tanks and barrels. For example, the Kirovo- 
Chepetskiy chemical plant obtained mustard gas for the war from 
Plant No. 96 and all it did was load it into the ammunition. 
  By the 1980's in the main administration for producing 
chemical weapons (it was called the Soyuz Org Sintez All-Union 
Association) there remained perhaps only the Volgograd plant; 
the other active legal entities of war times (Plant Nos. 96, 
102, and 148) were discarded because they were unneeded and 
ended up in other, less wealthy main administrations. 
<H5>  Pin on a Medal </H5>
  Everything that has been said needs to have the names filled 
in, for otherwise the personage of the nomenklatura clan of the 
military- chemical complex will not acquire individual features, 
and the country and its citizens, as they say, must know their 
heroes. 
  The Chuvash newspaper MK in May of this year recalled an 
event from a decade ago when the chemical industry house 
newspaper published a note saying that the general director of 
the Khimprom Chuvash Production Association, L. Shevnitsyn, had 
been awarded the title Hero of Socialist Labor, for which it was 
chewed out by the security deputy. Now one can guess the reasons. 
  The restoration of the personnel iconostasis of the 
military- 
chemical complex is a labor-intensive affair. People in uniform 
are extremely close-lipped. Practically the only sources of 
information are the scanty stories from eyewitnesses and tidbits 
from "champaign toasts" that have sometimes made their way to 
the newspapers when somebody's anniversary was being celebrated. 
Of course, the picture of the personal achievements (bonuses, 
orders) of leading citizens is not very complete. But we must 
try to restore at least that. 
  [Box, p. 8] 
  S.A. Arzhakov. Director of the Dzerzhinsk Institute-State 
Union Scientific Research Institute of Chlororganic Products and 
Acrylates imeni V.A. Kargin (1970's), later--deputy chairman of 
the State Commission of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military and Industrial Questions. Lenin Prize--biological 
(anti-immunological) weapons (1991). 
  R.K. Balchenko. Deputy director of the Volsk branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT. State Prize--binary chemical weapons. 
  V.D. Belyayev began at the end of the 1940's as director of 
the Khimprom All-Union Production Association. The collapse of 
the USSR found him in the position of chief of the Main 
Administration of the Microbiological Industry under the USSR 
Council of Ministers, which included the biological attack 
industry. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960). 
  I.M. Gabov. Deputy chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez. State Prize--chemical ammunition (1970). Order 
of Friendship of Peoples for work on the Foliant Program (1981). 
  S.V. Golubkov. Traveled the path from chief engineer of the 
Khimprom All-Union Production Association to deputy minister of 
the chemical industry of the USSR for special issues. Lenin 
Prize--soman (1972). 
  A.Ye. Gusakov. Colonel, chief of "Dioxin" Administration 33 
of Central Scientific Research Institute of the USSR Ministry of 
Defense (Shikhany in Saratov Oblast. This is the head military- 
chemical testing institute; during its Moscow period, up until 
the 1960's, it was called the Central Scientific Research 
Military- Technical Institute.) Since 1988--director of the 
Moscow Medstatistika Scientific Research Institute (this is an 
institute of the Third Main Administration under the USSR 
Ministry of Public Health; he worked not on statistics but on 
accumulating all the information about chemical weapons, a kind 
of scout for the military chemical system. State Prize--for 
"solving special problems" (1978). 
  K.A. Guskov. Deputy director of the GSNIIOKhT (1963-1988). 
Lenin Prize--V-gas (1974). Order of the Labor Red Banner--aerial 
chemical ammunition (1980). 
  I.B. Yevstafyev. General, academician of the Russian Academy 
of Natural Sciences, since 1992--deputy chief of chemical 
forces. State Prize for "solving special problems" (1978) and 
binary weapons (1991). 
  V.M. Zimin. Director of the Volgograd branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT, director of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association, administration chief of the USSR Ministry of the 
Chemical Industry. Lenin Prize--soman (1972). 
  A.M. Ivanov. Shop chief of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association, deputy director of GIPROSINTEZ (this is an 
institute in Volgograd which planned the production of chemical 
weapons; it had previously been a branch of the Moscow institute 
of the same profile GSPI-3), chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez. Order of Friendship of Peoples for work on the 
Foliant Program (1981), State Prize for "solving special 
problems" (1982). 
  M.I. Kabachnik. Academician of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 
deputy director and laboratory chief of the institute of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences. Stalin Prize--sarin (1946), Lenin 
Prize--V-gas (1974). 
  N.N. Kovalev. Deputy chief of chemistry department of USSR 
Gosplan [State Planning Committee], official associate of the 
State Commission of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military-Industrial Questions. State Prize for work on the 
Foliant Program (1981) and binary weapons (1991). 
  A.D. Kuntsevich. General, academician of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, deputy chief of chemical forces (1983-1992), chairman 
of the Committee on Conventional Problems of Chemical and 
Biological Weapons under the president of the Russian 
Federation. Hero of Socialist Labor for work on Foliant Program 
(1981), Lenin Prize-- binary weapons (1991). 
  B.P. Kuchkov. Chief engineer of the Khimprom All-Union 
Production Association, chief engineer for the administration of 
Stalingrad Sovnarkhoz [council of the national economy]. Lenin 
Prize--sarin and soman (1960). 
  G.S. Leonov. Shop chief of the Khimprom Chemical Production 
Association, deputy chief of the all-Union association 
Soyuzorgsintez. State Prize--binary weapons (1991). 
  L.G. Loskutov. Deputy chief engineer of the Khimprom 
All-Union Production Association, director of the Volgograd 
Branch of the GSNIIOKhT. Order of Labor Red Banner for work on 
the Foliant Program (1981). 
  I.V. Martynov. Corresponding member of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, director of the GSNIIOKhT (1961-1978), institute 
director of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Lenin Prize--soman 
(1972). Hero of Socialist Labor--V-gas (1974). 
  N.N. Melnikov. Corresponding member of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, laboratory chief of the VNIIKhSZR. Order of the Labor 
Red Banner--herbicide weapons (1977). 
  Yu.I. Musiychuk. Director of the St. Petersburg NIIGP (this 
is an institute of the Third Main Administration under the USSR 
Ministry of Public Health, which officially solved problems of 
hygiene and occupational pathology in specialized productions). 
State Prize for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  G.A. Patrushev. Director of the GSNIIOKhT (1980-1984). State 
Prize for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  S.V. Petrov. General, chief of chemical forces (since 1989). 
Lenin Prize--biological (anti-immunological) weapons (1991). 
  V.A. Petrunin. Deputy director of the Volsk Branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT, director of the GSNIIOKhT (since 1983). Lenin Prize-- 
binary weapons (1991). 
  V.K. Pikalov. General, chief of chemical forces (1969-1989). 
State Prize for work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  V.V. Pozdnev. Director of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960), State Prize 
for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  V.R. Rembovskiy. Colonel, deputy chief of 33 Central 
Scientific Research Engineering Institute of the Ministry of 
Defense, chief of the "dioxin" administration. State 
Prize--biological (anti- immunological) weapons (1991). 
  V.M. Romanov. Chief engineer of the Chuvash Production 
Association Khimprom, chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez, deputy minister of the USSR Ministry of the 
Chemical Industry. Lenin Prize--V-gas (1974), Order of Lenin for 
work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  V.A. Romanchuk. Chief engineer and director of GIPROSINTEZ, 
director of State Union Planning Institute-3, chief specialist 
of the State Committee of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military and Industrial Questions. State Prize for "solving 
special problems" (1978). 
  O.I. Stuzhuk. Chief engineer and director of GIPROSINTEZ. 
State Prize for work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  A.V. Fokin. General, academician of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, deputy chief of chemical forces (1969-1973), deputy 
chief scientific secretary of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 
institute director of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Lenin 
Prize--V-gas (1974). 
  L.S. Shevnitsyn. Since the 1970's permanent general director 
of the Khimprom Chuvash Production Association. State Prize for 
"solving special problems" (1978), Hero of Socialist Labor for 
work on the Foliant Program (1981). 
  A.G. Shkuro. Deputy director of the Khimprom Chuvash 
Production Association. State Prize for work on the Foliant 
Program (1981). 
  N.N. Yukhtin. Deputy director of the GSNIIOKhT, director of 
VNIIKhSZR. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960). [end box] 
<H5>  In Lieu of an Epitaph </H5>
  It would be dishonest to the peoples of Russia not to 
name personally those individuals responsible for declassifying 
the dirty chemical page of our history--they are President of 
Russia Boris Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  The seriousness of the problem does not require 
publicistic ardor. Several years ago there was a phrase going 
around that mankind is sitting on a keg filled with nuclear 
weapons. Now the missiles are being destroyed and the threat has 
diminished. But Russia is threatened by another 
disaster--immense arsenals from military chemistry. It is 
frightening to calculate how many toxic Chernobyls are concealed 
there. The truth about the real situation is still being 
concealed. 
  It is embarrassing, of course, to declassify this 
filth, but it is good for us. 
  From the Editors. We understand that people on the 
list were following orders and assignments from the government. 
Today we are not even speaking about their moral responsibility. 
We want them to understand that the chemical death cannot be 
stopped without their direct participation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59904 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> BELARUS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Twenty-Seven SS-25 Strategic Missiles To Be Dismantled in 
Russia </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU2212142593 Paris AFP in English 1359 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU2212142593 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Minsk, Dec 22 (AFP) -- Twenty-seven strategic SS-25 
missiles of the 81 deployed in Belarus have been withdrawn from 
this former Soviet state for dismantling in Russia, the 
Belarussian defense ministry said Wednesday. 
  The 27 missiles, whose withdrawal was completed Wednesday, 
came from the strategic Postavi dvision in the north, the head 
of ministry headquarters, General Nikolai Churkin, told AFP. 
  The 54 other missiles still stationed in Belarus, which are 
based with two other divisions, must be withdrawn before the end 
of 1996, according to bilateral accords between Russia and 
Belarus, both signatories of the 1991 START I strategic 
disarmament treaty. 
  Belarus is one of four former Soviet republics with nuclear 
missiles stationed on its territory, in addition to Russia, 
Kazakhstan and Ukraine. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59905 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> BELARUS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Funds Lacking To Fulfill CFE Commitments </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2812204693 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1837 GMT 28 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2812204693 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sources in the Belarusian government told Interfax 
that the country's military budget would be 692.4 Bn rubles in 
1994. 
  Valery Pavlov, Deputy State Secretary for National Security 
and Crime Fighting, thinks that "the Belarusian army will be 
short of funds for purchases of up-to-date weaponry and 
personnel training even though parliament met all Defense 
Ministry's requirements." 
  Belarus will need nearly $33 Mn, he said, to honor its 
commitments to the treaty on limitation of armed forces in 
Europe. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59906 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   U.S. Congressmen Visit Cosmodrome </H4>
<F P=102> LD0212171593 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 1406 GMT 2 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD0212171593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By KAZTAG correspondent Konstantin Borodinov for TASS] </F>
  [Text] Almaty, December 2 TASS -- A group of U.S. 
congressmen and experts numbering 35 visited Baykonur cosmodrome 
on Thursday to study the possibilities of international 
cooperation under Alpha project. The project envisages the 
creation of a large international orbital complex which will be 
launched and serviced from Baykonur cosmodrome. 
  "The visit by a large delegation like this may signify a 
decisive turn in Baykonur's destiny," said Galym Abilsiitov, 
Kazakhstan's deputy premier and minister of science and new 
technologies. "If the guests get convinced that the cosmodrome 
can operate effectively, new partners can be found, and it can 
become possible to operate the cosmodrome on a commercial basis." 
  Plans for an international space corporation on a basis of 
Baykonur cosmodrome were set out at a news conference by Yuriy 
Koptev, director-general of the Russian Space Agency, and 
Tokhtar Aubakirov, director-general of the Kazakhstan Aerospace 
Agency. The corporation is planned to be formed with the 
participation of Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine and, possibly, 
other countries. 
  Baykonur is living though difficult times. Representatives 
of Russia and Kazakhstan are to discuss pressing problems and 
bring closer the stances of the two countries on the ways of 
practical implementation of intergovernment arrangements. 
  The heads of the space agencies of the two countries 
unanimously believe that after the breakup of a great power, 
Russia and Kazakhstan do not have enough funds to ensure the 
operation of the huge complex. A number of international 
projects are considered. The participation of four partners -- 
the United States, Canada, Japan and the European Space Agency 
uniting 12 countries -- is proposed in one of them. There are 
also plans to lease the cosmodrome. Baykonur is still unmatched 
in the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59907 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Contention With Russia </H4>
<F P=102> LD0312132093 Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 3 Dec 93 
p 3 </F>

<F P=103> LD0312132093 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Kozlov report in the "Kazakhstan" column: "Moscow </F>
and Almaty Will Remain in Baykonur. Those Willing May Join In"] 
  [Text] The press conference by Yuriy Koptev, general 
director of the Russian Space Agency; his Kazakhstani colleague 
Tokhtar Aubakirov; and the republic's Deputy Prime Minister 
Galym Abilsiitov was rather reminiscent of a public showdown, at 
times turning into a squabble over the future fate of the 
Baykonur space launching site. 
  Yet for all the disagreements, "none of us opposes this 
space 
launch site," Galym Abilsiitov said. "Everyone wants to 
preserve it and moreover, develop it further and use it in our 
interests." 
  These interests are in the area of joint defense and in 
implementing a huge civil space program on which Russia is now 
working. 
  Russian Space Agency Director Yuriy Koptev also believes 
that 
Baykonur occupies quite a definite place: it is irreplaceable. 
  "Any talk about leaving this site in the future," Koptev 
noted, "is fraught with very big losses for Russia. I cannot 
say that they cannot be made up, but these losses may affect 
extremely badly all our current plans and all the services 
within the CIS framework that can be rendered with the 
assistance of space facilities." 
  According to the Kazakhstani side, however, at present 
neither Russia nor Kazakhstan have sufficient funds to ensure 
the viability of the immense technical, production, and social 
complex. In the past everything was decided from Moscow fairly 
quickly, using the power of the entire huge country. Now the 
divided countries, which are incapable of fully ensuring the 
operation of the space launching site, have decided to share all 
costs. 
  "In spite of the fact that Kazakhstan does not have its own 
space program or direct state interest in the launching site as 
an object of scientific and technical or production activity," 
the Kazakhstani deputy prime minister specified, "we are 
interested in Baykonur's existence and development if only 
because it is our property. And we have agreed to share the 
costs of maintaining the space launching center." Kazakhstan's 
share in the overall spending constituted 6 percent, and 
Russia's 94 percent. This does not involve space programs but 
merely the maintenance and operation of the complex. 
  Today the complex is being worked past repair, rapidly 
falling into decay. Almaty has expressed its discontent also 
over the CIS Joint Strategic Forces Command's transfer of the 
site to the jurisdiction of the Russian Defense Ministry as of 
the middle of last year, without coordinating with the other CIS 
participants. 
  There is now a 40 percent shortage of commissioned officer 
specialists and a 57 percent shortage of noncommissioned staff. 
Importantly, manpower is the responsibility of Kazakhstan, which 
is already experiencing huge difficulties in raising its own 
army. 
  The best possible option for organizing the operation of the 
launching site, in the Kazakhstani leadership's opinion, would 
be to create on its basis an international space company with 
the participation of primarily Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, and 
possibly other countries. This, as is believed here, could 
attract considerable foreign resources to the project and also 
help demilitarize the complex. 
  "So far, however, this idea has not received support from 
Russia," Kazakhstan's deputy prime minister stated. "But we are 
also looking for other approaches and do not rule out that for 
the sake of salvaging the site it may be put up for public 
sale...." 
  True, Abelsiitov added that this option will undoubtedly be 
coordinated with Russia, but he did not preclude such a scenario. 
  The Russian position was presented by Yuriy Koptev. 
According to him, space activity in the world today is 
maintained for the most part with state support. In talking 
about a space company, therefore, it is necessary to establish 
from the outset who will be supporting it financially. 
  "To hope that within the next five to six years the space 
launching site will find such a form, allowing it to become 
self- sufficient, is unjustified optimism," Koptev said. 
  If no state funds are invested in the business (and at 
present it is possible to talk only about Russian money), what 
can survive is a particular launch pad or a particular line of 
activity in Baykonur, but nothing more. In addition, so far no 
foreigners are forthcoming who would be willing to launch 
rockets from the Kazakhstani site. 
  Furthermore, Koptev believes, at present it will be 
practically impossible to attract quickly the 14,000 civilian 
specialists needed to replace the military space officers. 
Everyone agrees, however, that it is necessary to try to change 
the situation and gradually demilitarize the site. Yet the 
approaches to addressing this problem are fundamentally 
different. Kazakhstan believes that the questions about the 
viability of the launching site and of Leninsk city are 
inseparable, and that Russia must assume responsibility for the 
whole complex. Moscow for its part supposes that it is 
impossible to replace the military specialists with civilians in 
the near future, while operation may be ensured in the form of 
an international space company but within the framework of state 
financing, with some services being provided on a commercial 
basis. It is planned to introduce a transitional period of 
several years to carry through such changes but with a special 
condition, namely to make sure that the complex remains part of 
defense programs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59908 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Lease Arrangement Put Forward </H4>
<F P=102> PM0712133193 Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA in Russian 7 Dec 93 
First Edition p 3 </F>

<F P=103> PM0712133193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Baykonur Under the Hammer?"] </F>
  [Text] At a news conference in Almaty Galym Abilsiitov, 
minister of science and new technologies, reported that 
Kazakhstan does not have its own space program and, 
consequently, the Baykonur Cosmodrome has to be preserved for 
the sake of the Russian space program. 
  He also stated the need to set up without delay an 
international space company involving foreign capital "for the 
sake of saving" the cosmodrome and to open it for the 
implementation of very diverse international commercial projects. 
  "If this option is not adopted, Kazakhstan is prepared to 
consider the question of leasing the Baykonur Cosmodrome and the 
city of Leninsk to Russia on condition that Russia takes over 
all the costs," G. Abilsiitov said. In that case Kazakhstan 
will require reimbursing for the expenditure on Baykonur over 
the past 2.5 years, the minister said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59909 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Soskovets Takes Hard Line </H4>
<F P=102> LD2012173993 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 1656 GMT 20 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2012173993 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Oleg Velichko] </F>
  [Text] Moscow December 20 TASS -- Russia will not give up 
the Baykonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russian Vice-Prime 
Minister Oleg Soskovets said. 
  Speaking at a meeting devoted to Baykonur's life-support in 
Moscow on Monday, Soskovets said that "this object is 
indispensable both for strategic purposes and scientific 
research." 
  Russia and Kazakhstan have signed two agreements determining 
the terms of use and exploitation of Baykonur facilities. Under 
the agreement, the center is considered to be under Russian 
jurisdiction. 
  Vladimir Ivanov, commander of the Russian Aerospace Forces, 
said that Kazakhstan is "seeking to reconsider the status of the 
cosmodrome to make it international." He stressed that despite 
the signed agreements it is necessary to "reconfirm the 
cosmodrome's Russian status." 
  Ivanov also called for signing an additional agreement 
between Russia and Kazakhstan to specify the questions of 
logistical support and joint financing of the cosmodrome. 
  The participants in the meeting called for a "reasonable 
compromise between Russia and Kazakhstan on the exploitation of 
the cosmodrome facilities." They noted that leasing the 
cosmodrome to Russia could be one of the forms of cooperation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59910 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Funding Problems a Factor </H4>
<F P=102> LD2112111993 Moscow Ostankino Television First Channel 
Network in Russian 0900 GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2112111993 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow Ostankino Television First Channel 
Network </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Novosti" newscast] </F>
  [Text] The idea of setting up an international space 
company on the basis of the Baykonur cosmodrome, as proposed by 
Kazakhstan and Ukraine, is unrealistic, according to Yuriy 
Koptev, director of the Russian Federation Space Agency. He 
stressed that a company like this would not be able to function 
without major capital investment from Russia. 
  According to Vladimir Ivanov, commander of the Russian 
Federation military space forces, Baykonur has received this 
year only about 2 billion rubles of the 6 billion rubles that 
Kazakhstan was to allocate to fund the cosmodrome. Russia has 
to pay more than 30 billion rubles to maintain Baykonur. 
According to available information, construction and 
maintenance building work is currently under way at the 
cosmodrome, but the staffing levels in the space units are 
running at only 53 percent. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59911 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94036" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Soskovets Chairs Conference </H4>
<F P=102> PM2312145593 Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 23 Dec 93 p 
1 </F>

<F P=103> PM2312145593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Igor Petrov report under the "From the Government" rubric: </F>
"Baykonur Will Remain Russian, If It Survives at All"] 
  [Text] A routine working conference chaired by First 
Deputy Chairman of the Government Oleg Soskovets was devoted to 
questions of ensuring the Baykonur cosmodrome's viability. 
  The representatives of the military and civilian space 
departments who spoke there wasted many words trying to persuade 
those present -- for which there was not the slightest need -- 
that the Baykonur cosmodrome is a unique scientific and 
technical facility and that Russia needs it to attain its 
strategic goals in space exploration and to improve its rocket 
technology. 
  Expenditure on its upkeep, which has been agreed with the 
Kazakhstani Government, should come this year to 37 billion 
rubles [R]. Kazakhstan's share of this is R5.8 billion, but in 
actual fact the republic has appropriated R1.9 billion. 
Specialists estimate that at least R169.9 billion will be 
required next year to ensure the facility's normal operations. 
Who will bear the cost? Russia, of course, as it has the 
primary interest in the space programs being carried out and in 
using this facility. But what then is Kazakhstan's interest in 
this? Nobody at the conference could provide a comprehensible 
answer to this key question. Nor could they propose a package 
of measures which would offer any social guarantees at all to 
the people working in the harsh conditions at Baykonur today. 
  It is clear that, unless these questions are answered, the 
draft memorandum the Russian side is preparing for discussion by 
the two states' presidents may also become unviable or even 
useless. At least three such documents on the cosmodrome have 
been signed, but in the meantime the boiler houses are shutting 
down, the living quarters are going unheated, ultramodern 
equipment is being spoiled, and, most important, specialists are 
leaving. 
  So will the destruction of this unique space facility come 
to 
an end? There is some hope that it will, but with one small 
proviso: If we finally learn not to impose our conditions on our 
partners but come to an agreement with them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59912 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94037" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Kazakhstan's Negotiating Position </H4>
<F P=102> PM2312135593 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 23 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2312135593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Vinogradov report: "Moscow Agrees To Lease Baykonur </F>
From Kazakhstan"] 
  [Text] Viktor Chernomyrdin's delegation has flown to 
Almaty, where it is to hold talks on the whole range of economic 
relations with Kazakhstan. One of the main issues will be the 
fate of Baykonur. 
  Under the May 1992 agreement signed by Boris Yeltsin and 
Nursultan Nazarbayev, the cosmodrome is a troop formation of the 
Russian military space forces. While it is in joint use, 94 
percent of the cost of maintaining it is borne by Russia, which 
effectively remains its master. All launches of "Proton" 
rockets and commercial launches are carried out from Baykonur, 
as at present they cannot be carried out from Russia's 
"Plesetsk" cosmodrome. To construct a new facility capable of 
replacing Baykonur would take Russia at least seven years, plus 
enormous sums that the Moscow treasury currently does not have. 
  Kazakhstan is unable either to service or to operate 
Baykonur, but nevertheless it would like to gain the status of a 
space power and is presenting new conditions to Russia. It 
established its own aerospace agency and put forward the idea of 
setting up on the basis of Baykonur an international company 
with the involvement of Ukraine and other countries. Moscow 
turned this down and stated that it is prepared to lease 
Baykonur from Kazakhstan. 
  Before leaving for Almaty, Viktor Chernomyrdin received a 
letter from his Kazakhstan counterpart, Sergey Tereshchenko, 
saying that Kazakhstan agrees in principle to this option, but 
is asking for an excessive sum from Russia -- several billion 
dollars a year for the right to use Baykonur. We were told at 
the Russian Space Agency that in this instance Kazakhstan's 
appetites exceed not only Russia's capabilities but all headings 
of the Baykonur budget. And this is despite the fact that the 
space research carried out at Baykonur has never yielded revenue. 
  The problem of Baykonur is closely linked with the problem 
of 
the status of the Russian Army on Kazakhstan's territory. At 
present the Russian servicemen at the cosmodrome, and also at 
other facilities, incidentally, have the status of foreigners. 
There is no treaty on military cooperation between Moscow and 
Almaty. It is quite possible that the leasing of Baykonur would 
set a precedent whereby all other Russian military facilities in 
nearby foreign countries would be regarded as bases for which 
payment should be made. 
  At present Kazakhstan merely keeps an eye on order at 
Baykonur and sees to it that nothing goes missing from this 
large facility. It has introduced customs controls, posted 
military guards, expropriated a number of Russian Army buildings 
and offices, and carried out a careful inventory of all property. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59913 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94039" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Agreement Finalized </H4>
<F P=102> PM2712170993 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 28 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2712170993 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Ardayev report: "Russia To Lease Baykonur From </F>
Kazakhstan"] 
  [Text] Almaty -- The visit to Kazakhstan by a Russian 
Government group headed by Viktor Chernomyrdin, chairman of the 
Council of Ministers, has ended with the signing of a number of 
documents which attest that agreement in principle has been 
reached on such questions as organizing the use of the Baykonur 
space center and military ranges located on Kazakhstan's 
territory as well as cooperation in the sphere of the fuel and 
energy complex. 
  The most important of the documents to be signed is the 
heads 
of governments' memorandum of mutual understanding on questions 
of ensuring the functioning of the Baykonur space center. As 
Russian Vice Premier Aleksandr Shokhin explained in conversation 
with your correspondent, the governments have been able to agree 
on the main principle: Russia will use the space center under 
lease from Kazakhstan. This principle also extends to the 
military test sites located on Kazakh territory. Russian 
specialists and military contingents will be based there and 
equipment will be deployed there. Russian law will apply at the 
leased installations, apparently side by side with Kazakhstani 
law. Chernomyrdin stressed that the principle is reciprocal: 
Kazakhstan may maintain its military installations in Russia on 
the same terms. 
  The actual conditions of the lease -- the scale of payment 
and the term -- have not been decided yet, but Shokhin has noted 
that in his view the optimum lease on Baykonur would run for 99 
years. 
  Answering a question from your IZVESTIYA correspondent, 
Chernomyrdin said that work to ensure the functioning of 
Baykonur could begin "right away" without waiting for the 
signing of the concretizing documents, which is due to take 
place in January. 
  The situation which has developed at the space center as a 
result of the uncertainty over its status has now led to extreme 
consequences. This unique complex, which belongs not only to 
Kazakhstan and Russia but also to all mankind, is in a very 
sorry state. Some of the launch installations have become unfit 
for use [okazalis razmorozhennymi], some of the equipment has 
been put out of commission, while some has simply been stolen. 
  The settlement of the question of ownership is no less 
important for other military sites too. A completely 
paradoxical situation, according to Shokhin, has developed with 
regard to the strategic nuclear weapon basing zones: Ballistic 
missiles which have been declared the property of Kazakhstan 
continue to be serviced by the Russian military! However, such 
a situation with regard to nuclear weapons is not just 
nonsensical, it is downright dangerous. 
  In Shokhin's words, the question of the ownership of the 
uranium component of the nuclear missiles stationed in 
Kazakhstan and subject to dismantling was also discussed. It is 
proposed that Russia will take part in the actual process of 
dismantling. In addition, the reprocessing of the highly 
enriched "military" uranium will also be carried out in Russia 
because only Russia has the necessary technologies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59914 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94040" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Vice President Gore in Almaty 14 December </TI></H3>
<H4>   Hails NPT Decision, Agreement With U.S. </H4>
<F P=102> LD1412205693 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1728 Gmt 14 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1412205693 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature] </F>
  [Text] By an overwhelming majority of 237 votes, the Kazakh 
parliament ratified the nuclear non-proliferation treaty on 
Monday. One deputy was opposed and others abstained. 
  U.S. Vice President Albert Gore, visiting Almaty, had given 
a 
positive reaction to the news saying the treaty would serve to 
promote the cause of peace and economic development in Central 
Asia as a whole. He also spoke of signs of progress in nuclear 
disarmament talks with Ukraine which instilled optimism. 
  The Vice President had also praised the Kazakh-U.S. 
agreement 
on dismantling nuclear weapons of the former Soviet Union 
deployed in Kazakhstan. A bilateral working commission is due 
to sit to work out an appropriate schedule soon. 
  The ratification of the treaty, said Gore, marks an entirely 
new stage of relations between Kazakhstan and the United States. 
He said strategic cooperation was based not only on shared 
positions in respect of nuclear weapons but also in many 
economic agreements designed to help promote the private sector 
in Kazakhstan. 
  Gore announced that the Central Asian Business Fund was due 
to open its office in Almaty whose main task would be to provide 
aid to Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan as countries which embrace more 
consistent economic reforms than others. 
  For his part, President Nursultan Nazarbayev said his 
country 
was "honoring its obligations in respect of nuclear weapons." 
However, he said Kazakhstan had set its own conditions for 
dismantling them. The main one is Kazakhstan wants to hold back 
to [as received] electronic and other equipment for subsequent 
use in the economy before missile-containing silos are destroyed. 
  Gore said the Kazakh leader had accepted President Clinton's 
invitation to visit the U.S. on February 14. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59915 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94041" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Vice President Gore in Almaty 14 December </TI></H3>
<H4>   Gives Press Conference </H4>
<F P=102> LD1412081193 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 0748 GMT 14 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1412081193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Vladimir Akimov and Amangeldy </F>
Akhmedalimov] 
  [Text] Almaty December 14 TASS -- U.S. Vice President 
Albert Gore met journalists here today before flying to Moscow. 
He described the talks he had in Kazakhstan as fruitful and 
mutually useful not only for Kazakh-American relations, but for 
strengthening regional and international security, too. 
  Gore said that the signing of a framework agreement on 
dismantling intercontinental ballistic missiles silo launchers 
in Kazakhstan proved the desire of both sides to develop 
mutually equitable relations. Moreover, an agreement was 
reached on bilateral cooperation in liquidating the consequences 
of accidents and establishing an intergovernmental communication 
line. It is worth noting that the Kazakh parliament ratified 
the nuclear weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear 
state on the day of the Kazakh-American negotiations. 
  An important step was made towards expanding economic 
relations. For instance, the sides have signed a protocol on the 
exchange of ratification instruments of an agreement to 
encourage and mutually protect capital investments. An 
agreement on cooperation in science and technology was ratified 
for the time being. According to Gore, it will be signed during 
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev's visit to the United 
States on February 14, 1994. 
  The sides have discussed the possibility of cooperating in 
the exploitation of the Baykonur cosmodrome, protecting the 
environment in regions adjoining the Aral sea and the former 
Semipalatinsk nuclear testing ground. Gore said that the United 
States was ready to render Kazakhstan concrete assistance in 
organising the regional management of water resources. 
  The sides also had a frank exchange of views on the 
situation 
in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). The views of 
the two sides were very close or identical. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59916 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94042" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Country Joins NPT </TI></H3>
<H4>   Parliament Ratifies Treaty </H4>
<F P=102> LD1312151993 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1421 GMT 13 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1312151993 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kazakhstan's parliament on Monday ratified the 
Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons of July 1, 
1968. Kazakhstan joined the treaty as a non-nuclear state. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59917 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Country Joins NPT </TI></H3>
<H4>   Russia's Congratulations </H4>
<F P=102> LD1412183693 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1519 GMT 14 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1412183693 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature: By diplomatic </F>
correspondents Dmitriy Voskoboinikov, Igor Porshnev, Vitaliy 
Trubetskoy and others] 
  [Text] Russia welcomes Kazakhstan's joining the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty as a denuclearized state, the chief 
Russian negotiator at the talks with Kazakhstan, Gennadiy 
Uranov, told INTERFAX. 
  Almaty ratified the START-I Treaty and the Lisbon Protocol 
back in July last year, but delayed its joining the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty for a long time, he said. "Now this 
problem has been resolved, which laid the foundations for 
stepping up the talks between Russia and Kazakhstan, including 
negotiations on cooperation in the military area," the diplomat 
said. 
  Another senior Foreign Ministry official, who is also 
responsible for Russia's relations with Kazakhstan, told 
INTERFAX that Kazakhstan's joining the Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and the U.S. Vice President Albert Gore's visit to Almaty 
were not coincidental. "The fact that the U.S.A. allocates 
money for nuclear disarmament in Kazakhstan evidently influenced 
the step taken by the Kazakh leadership," he said. 
  He also said that the success scored at the parliamentary 
elections in Russia by Vladimir Zhirinovskiy's Liberal 
Democratic Party "may somewhat complicate relations between 
Russia and Kazakhstan." "Zhirinovsky's territorial and other 
claims on Almaty are known well enough," he concluded. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59918 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94044" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> TAJIKISTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   International Space Research Center Planned </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0301091594 Moscow Mayak Radio Network in Russian 0410 GMT 
3 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0301091594 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow Mayak Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] It is planned to set up an international space 
research center in Tajikistan. Our correspondent Raisa 
Mukhiddinova with the details: 
  Mukhiddinova: The Tajik Government has passed the 
decision to set up an international space research center at the 
Presidium of the Academy of Sciences of Tajikistan. 
Imombabadzhanov [name as heard], candidate of 
physics-mathematical sciences, is appointed to administer it. 
Twenty years ago in the East Pamirs, he set up a small x-ray 
emission station, which in time was turned into one of the 
largest in the world. The scientist said that in the summer of 
1993 the world's scientific public was alarmed with reports that 
the x-ray emission station in the Pamirs was threatened with 
closure. Many famous scientists started writing to the 
government and Academy of Sciences of the republic on the need 
to preserve and restore this installation, so unique in the 
world. 
  To understand their alarm, one must go into the history of 
the question a little. Everyone now knows that when studying 
the world of elementary particles, scientists came up against 
many mysterious and complex phenomena, which were impossible to 
reproduce using the most expensive modern accelerators. But 
interest in the interaction of particles accompanied by super 
high energies increased and it was necessary to find new 
possibilities for studying the processes taking place. The idea 
arose of using a natural accelerator, in particular cosmic rays 
or flows of particles with super high energies, which the 
universe continually sends to earth. These particles are caught 
by various pieces of equipment, but the most economical and 
effective method is fixing them onto a film using an x-ray 
emission camera. Such a camera, the biggest in the world, was 
created in the Pamirs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59919 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94045" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   Announcement Made 20 December </H4>
<F P=102> AU2012173193 Paris AFP in English 1722 GMT 20 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU2012173193 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, Dec 20 (AFP) -- Ukraine is to dismantle almost 
half of the 46 SS-24 nuclear missiles in its nuclear arsenal 
inherited from the former Soviet Union, Deputy Prime Minister 
Valery Shmarov said Monday. 
  He said Ukraine would dismantle 20 of the 46 strategic 
missiles by the end of this month. 
  The decision comes only days after last week's meeting of 
top 
Ukrainian, Russian and U.S. officials. Until now Ukraine has 
refused to give up the weapons without security guarantees from 
the United States. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59920 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94046" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   Deactivation Tied to Trilateral Talks </H4>
<F P=102> LD2012213393 Moscow INTERFAX in English 2015 GMT 20 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2012213393 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] By the middle of December Ukraine had removed from 
operational service 17 nuclear SS-24 missiles and detached the 
warheads from the delivery medium, the Ukrainian Vice Premier 
for the Military-Industrial Complex, Valeriy Shmarov, told 
INTERFAX-Ukraine. 
  We hope that our partners in nuclear arms negotiations will 
appreciate this unilateral step, he said. Shmarov said that the 
deactivation of missiles was a labor-intense process, however, 
Ukraine was well aware of that, when it made the decision. The 
Vice Premier said that in 1994 the rest of the SS-24 missiles 
stationed in Ukraine must be deactivated. 
  Shmarov also said that Russian experts continued to service 
nuclear warheads in Ukraine. The Ukrainian Vice Premier 
dismissed as populist and senseless the Russian government's 
statement to the effect that such servicing had been stopped. 
  In the course of trilateral talks, American, Ukrainian and 
Russian delegates had in Kiev last week progress was achieved in 
resolving the problem of Ukraine's nuclear disarmament, Shmarov 
said. For instance, he said, the question of compensation to 
Ukraine for the tactical nuclear arms removed earlier, became 
specific. For instance, Ukraine said it would agree to accept a 
smaller compensation, if Russia were to write off Ukraine's debt 
to it. 
  The sides achieved understanding on the need to hand over to 
Ukraine enriched uranium in exchange for nuclear warheads. 
Shmarov said that Ukrainian experts had computed the amount. 
"Probably that uranium will be processed and handed over to the 
United States under a Russian-US contract," Shmarov said. 
  The United States Deputy Defence Secretary William Perry is 
reported to have said during the talks that Washington was 
considering an additional 400 million dollars in compensation to 
Ukraine for nuclear disarmament. 
  So far the United States has given Ukraine 175 million 
dollars under the Nunn-Lugar amendment in technical and other 
assistance for removing nuclear missiles from Ukraine. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59921 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94047" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   More on Talks </H4>
<F P=102> LD2012210693 Kiev UNIAN in Ukrainian 1800 GMT 20 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2012210693 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev -- As UNIAN reported, on 16-17 December there 
were trilateral talks between the delegations of Ukraine, 
Russia, and the United States on issues connected with the 
ratification of START I by the Supreme Council of Ukraine. The 
leader of the Ukrainian delegation at the talks, Deputy Prime 
Minister Valeriy Shmarov granted an exclusive interview to a 
UNIAN correspondent. 
  As Shmarov emphasized, the date of the trilateral talks was 
not agreed in advance. A decision on the meeting of the 
delegations of the United States, Russia, and Ukraine was taken 
promptly. The visit to Moscow by U.S. Vice President Albert 
Gore probably gave an impetus to holding the meeting. During 
Albert Gore's meeting with the Russian leadership, the issue of 
nuclear armaments was touched upon. 
  However, as Valeriy Shmarov pointed out, Ukraine was 
precisely insisting on holding trilateral talks, being convinced 
that this would be the most effective form of achieving 
agreement on START I ratification and implementation. 
Therefore, the fact that such consultations did take place and 
that they will be continued in the future can be regarded as the 
first success. The resolution of the Supreme Council of Ukraine 
on the ratification of START I, with the reservations formulated 
by the Ukrainian parliament, was the first and foremost issue 
discussed at the consultations. 
  Ukraine's representatives had an opportunity to clearly 
comment on these reservations. These, as a matter of fact, 
represent that working plan according to which the parliament 
and the government of Ukraine have to work so as to achieve 
"pure" ratification of the treaty. The members of the Ukrainian 
delegation emphasized three main issues concerning which Ukraine 
hopes to find understanding with the partners: Obtaining 
political guarantees from nuclear states; gaining compensation 
for nuclear weapons transferred from Ukraine, tactical weapons 
in particular; and receiving technical and financial assistance 
in the implementation of the disarmament project. 
  Most understanding was reached on the issue of compensation 
for tactical nuclear weapons. For the first time ever a 
proposal was formulated: To solve the issue through Russia 
writing off Ukraine's debts for energy. However, this decision 
was not approved because, in the opinion of the participants in 
the talks, it is necessary to discuss these issues in greater 
detail with experts. 
  As far as strategic weapons are concerned, the energy 
uranium 
required by Ukraine's nuclear power stations was offered as 
compensation. In case this issue is solved in a positive manner 
Ukraine's needs for this raw material would be satisfied for 5 
years. Such a mechanism is acceptable in principle and 
technical coordination has been planned. The issues of 
compensations for the tactical and strategic nuclear weapons 
were discussed as one package. 
  Today it is still early to mention any specific sum because 
no final calculations have been made and they have not been 
coordinated with experts. Ukraine's representatives believe 
that these could amount to hundreds of millions of dollars 
because, according to average world prices, for example, the 
price of one kilogram of highly enriched uranium is $15,000. 
  According to Valeriy Shmarov, the U.S. and Russian sides are 
concerned most of all about the issue of Ukraine's pace in 
fulfilling the provisions of START I, in particular, 
deactivation of the latest SS-24 missiles. Ukraine takes a 
clear stand: One can immediately talk about the types [as 
received] after the reservations formulated by the Supreme 
Council are fulfilled. 
  Already today Ukraine is making specific steps toward 
nuclear 
arms reduction: The deactivation of SS-24 missiles is under way 
-- 17 such missiles have been withdrawn from combat duty and put 
under control, and by the end of the year their number will 
reach 20. As a matter of fact, two regiments will be disarmed. 
This is evidence of Ukraine's course toward a non-nuclear 
status. It is ready to further continue this work but it hopes 
for adequate moves on the part of the partners, the United 
States and Russia. In particular, Valeriy Shmarov remarked that 
the pace of elimination of nuclear weapons in Ukraine depends 
very much on financial assistance. At present it is 
insufficient. The aid is mainly rendered in the form of 
consultations, and delivery of computer or space communications 
systems. The following problems, however, remain unsolved: 
What is to be used to transport the dismantled warheads, where 
is the fuel to be taken, and where is the money to come from? 
  The Ukrainian side does not shrink from the opinion that 
$2.5 
billion should be spent on complete nuclear disarmament, 
including the social protection of servicemen, restoration of 
order on the territories, etc. Today, due to the economic 
crisis, it is difficult for Ukraine to shoulder such a burden 
and at the same time to abide by the fixed terms. However, the 
members of the Ukrainian delegation emphasized that despite the 
economic difficulties the START I treaty will be unconditionally 
fulfilled. If Ukraine raises the issue of financial aid, then 
it only has in mind speeding up the pace of nuclear weapons 
elimination. Ukraine will further carry out voluntary 
disarmament under conditions of universal support. 
  According to the deputy prime minister, the current 
consultations failed to formulate the issue on political 
guarantees in a clear-cut manner. However, he expressed 
satisfaction with the relatively high level of representation of 
the delegations which took part in the negotiations and also the 
high level of competence of the experts who arrived with the 
U.S. and Russian delegations. As Valeriy Shmarov indicated, he 
hopes that by such a composition it will be possible to draft a 
document that can be submitted to the top leaders of the states 
for signing. 
  The participants in the meeting agreed to continue their 
work 
in one month's time. However, the Ukrainian representatives are 
today already preparing information based on the materials of 
the consultations for Ukraine President Leonid Kravchuk, because 
at the meeting of the CIS heads of state in Ashgabat the 
Ukrainian side intends to raise materials from the trilateral 
talks for a dialogue between the Russian and Ukrainian 
presidents, although the discussion of this issue was not 
planned in advance. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59922 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94048" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   Deputy Foreign Minister on Deactivtation </H4>
<F P=102> LD2112185393 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1438 GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2112185393 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The program of an early deactivation of nuclear 
weapons deployed in Ukraine covers all types of missiles, 
including SS-24s, Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tarasyuk said in 
Kiev on Tuesday. 
  Asked why Kiev decided to deactivate the weapons, he said 
there was no reason to try to keep on combat duty a missile 
which Ukraine could not and was not going to use anyway. 
  Tarasyuk said different options were being discussed by 
negotiators from Russia, Ukraine, and the U.S. on how to 
compensate for the transfer of nuclear weapons to Russia. 
However, he declined to comment on a reaction from Russia and 
the United States to Kiev's proposal to reduce its debt to 
Moscow at the cost of tactical nuclear weapons. 
  Tarasyuk does not rule that Moscow and Washington have 
agreed 
to talk with Ukraine following the process of deactivating its 
nuclear weapons. But he gave no evidence to back his theory. 
  The minister stressed that the Ukrainian government would do 
its utmost to lift the strings attached by the Supreme Soviet 
while ratifying the Start-1 agreement. 
  Tarasyuk denied allegations of Ukrainian weapons exports to 
countries falling under the U.N. arms embargo such as Libya, 
Iraq, South Africa, and the former Yugoslavia. However, he said 
there were a number of incidents of weapons transfers to such 
countries and areas of conflict by go-between companies. The 
minister admitted to mistakes made in the transfer of dual 
purpose technologies. However, he said Kiev had at one time 
intervened to prevent the transfer of chemical fuel for missiles 
to Libya. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59923 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94049" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   Foreign Ministry Briefing Reported </H4>
<F P=102> LD2112210793 Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service in Ukrainian 
1700 GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2112210793 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Announcer: We have already reported 
that a briefing for Ukrainian and foreign journalists was held 
at the Ukrainian Foreign Affairs Ministry on 21 December. This 
briefing was attended by my colleague, esteemed Andriy Chyrva. 
  Chyrva: [passage omitted: introductory remarks] 
You may be aware by now of the situation where some of the mass 
media, in particular REUTERS and the Voice of America, reported 
yesterday that Ukraine had taken 17 SS-24 intercontinental 
ballistic missiles off combat alert. This issue, naturally 
being of great interest to journalists, they wanted to hear the 
confirmation of that fact from Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister 
Borys Tarasyuk, who took part in the briefing. 
  I would like to say that this issue is quite complex and I 
would like to be precise and quote precisely what Borys Tarasyuk 
said. 
  Announcer: Please do. 
  Chyrva: He said that the early deactivation 
program did not only cover the SS-19 missile systems. This was 
due to the complexity of these installations, consisting of not 
only missiles, but nuclear warheads subject to guaranteed 
maintenance terms of their own. Thus, what it concerns is not 
separate types of missile systems, but exactly those where the 
term of guaranteed maintenance is running out, that are being 
taken off combat alert or are subject to the early deactivation 
program. This, as it were, is what Mr. Tarasyuk officially 
stated. 
  Announcer: So this is the first report that 
somewhat contravenes the one carried, in particular, by the 
REUTERS agency. It adds quite essentially to the accuracy [of 
what is at issue] too, in my view. That is to say, what 
concerns is that only those ballistic missiles are at issue that 
have already become lifeless, as it were, or not combat ready. 
Is that so? 
  Chyrva: Yes, of course. Tarasyuk said that work 
was under way in Ukraine to carry out the so-called deactivation 
of missile systems. In essence, it is to remove the warheads 
and store them in Ukraine at a considerable distance from the 
missile sites. This is what, in my view, the issue is. 
  The second important issue, raised by Borys Tarasyuk, was 
that of the participation of the Ukrainian delegation at the 
consultative meeting with representatives of Cocom [Coordinating 
Committee for Multilateral Export Controls] member countries. 
[passage omitted: Chyrva reporting on Tarasyuk's account of 
government measures to control the export of strategic materials] 
  Chyrva: Another interesting issue: Mr. Tarasyuk 
produced quite a large folder or file containing materials on 
the list of commodities and technologies prohibited from being 
transferred or traded to Ukraine by Cocom member countries. You 
know that this issue was very sensitive for us at the time of 
the Cold War and there were restrictions -- and very extensively 
so too -- that were in the way of our trade with the West, and 
that between the West and ourselves. That is why this whole 
issue now -- and Mr. Tarasyuk spoke about it -- should be raised 
and somehow agreed so that our relations in trade and economic 
relations with the West could, after all, develop properly and 
so that we could trade, including trade in high technologies and 
dual-purpose technologies. [passage omitted: announcer 
reiterating the above] 
  Chyrva: What I would also like to mention in 
conclusion is that (?the last) question asked, that of course 
concerns and interests everybody, was on arms trade, i.e. 
whether Ukraine trades in weapons. 
  Announcer: Which weapons? 
  Chyrva: I mean conventional weapons, I do not mean 
nuclear weapons but conventional weapons. So Mr. Tarasyuk said 
that on the issue of arms trade Ukraine proceeded from existing 
principles, and was governed by those bans on trade with those 
countries in respect of which there were relevant United Nations 
Security Council sanctions. We all know, and our foreign 
listeners may know, that these are such countries as the 
Republic of Yugoslavia, Libya, the Republic of South Africa, and 
Iraq. These are those countries where we [word indistinct]. As 
for that, I have already said that it is strictly governed by 
existing principles. As for where and whom arms [are being 
sold], it was not (?discussed). [passage omitted: announcer 
contemplating on Ukraine's stance on arms trade] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59924 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94050" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   Kravchuk Confirms 17 Missiles Taken Off Combat Alert </H4>
<F P=102> LD2212112893 Kiev UNIAN in Ukrainian 0839 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2212112893 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev [no dateline as received] -- Requested to 
comment on Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy Shmarov's statement in 
connection with missile systems being taken off combat alert, 
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk said on 21 November [date as 
received] that, indeed, 17 SS-24 missile systems had been taken 
off combat alert in Ukraine. This does not constitute a 
violation of the law, he explained, since the latter does not 
deal with missiles being taken off combat alert, but only with 
them being withdrawn from Ukrainian territory. "It is better to 
take missiles off combat alert. Then they will not be used by 
anyone because the nuclear button is in Russia and no mention of 
that fact is made by those talking now about law violation." 
  The issue of compensation and security guarantees, in the 
president's words, will be provided for in a trilateral 
agreement between Russia, Ukraine, and the United States. "This 
agreement will put none of the states in an awkward position," 
said Kravchuk. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59925 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94051" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   No Comment from Defense Ministry </H4>
<F P=102> AU2312124393 Kiev HOLOS UKRAYINY in Ukrainian 22 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> AU2312124393 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev HOLOS UKRAYINY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "A Serious Step"] </F>
  [Text] An extensive range of issues associated with the 
ratification of START-1 and the reservations that are listed in 
the Ukrainian Parliament's decree on this problem were discussed 
in Kiev last week. The delegations of the United States headed 
by S. Talbott, ambassador-at-large and special adviser to the 
secretary on the newly independent states, and of Russia headed 
by Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs G. Mamedov took part in 
the negotiations. The Ukrainian delegation was headed by Vice 
Prime Minister V. Shmarov. 
  As reported by the Ukrainian Presidential and Cabinet of 
Ministers Press Service, the sides agreed that questions of 
Ukraine's security should be jointly resolved with Russia and 
the United States on questions of the elimination of missiles. 
As reported by the UNIAN press agency, V. Shmarov said that 
particularly good understanding was reached with regard to 
compensation for both tactical nuclear weapons transferred to 
Russia and strategic missiles. The vice prime minister also 
stated that Ukraine had already taken 17 of the most up-to-date 
SS-24 missiles off combat alert. V. Shmarov considers this to 
be a serious step attesting to the fact that our state is 
striving to pursue a nuclear-free policy. 
  The Press Center of Ukraine's Ministry of Defense has not 
confirmed V. Shmarov's information that the deactivating the 
SS-24 missiles has begun. The UNIAN correspondent was told that 
the Ministry of Defense is not authorized to comment upon such 
statements. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59926 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94052" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   SEGODNYA Commentary </H4>
<F P=102> MK2212101093 Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian 22 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> MK2212101093 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Pavel Felgengauer report in the "Disarmament" column: </F>
"Ukraine Has Gone Ahead With Abolishing Its Nuclear Potential. 
Has Russian and U.S. Pressure Yielded Results?"] 
  [Text] Recently Ukraine has speeded up the dismantling of 
the nuclear missile potential it has inherited. On 20 December 
Valeriy Shmarov, Ukrainian vice premier in charge of the 
military industrial complex, announced that 17 nuclear SS-24 
missiles (in all there are 46 SS-24's in Ukraine) have been 
taken off alert. Combat nuclear units (more than 100) have been 
taken down from missiles, yet they still remain in silos. 
Before the end of the year Ukraine has promised to dismantle 
warheads from yet another three SS-24 missiles. And in 1994, 
according to Valeriy Shmarov, the remaining SS-24 missiles 
located on Ukraine's territory are to be taken off alert status. 
This, in spite of the fact that back on 11 August Grishchenko, 
head of the Ukrainian Foreign Affairs Ministry's Arms Control 
and Disarmament Department, announced that, in Kiev's opinion, 
the Ukrainian SS-24's do not come under the START I Treaty and 
therefore may legally be kept. 
  The Russian Defense Ministry confirmed that 17 warheads have 
indeed been taken down from SS-24 missiles. In addition, 
according to the Russian Defense Ministry, nuclear units have 
been dismantled from 41 Ukrainian SS-19 missiles (more than 200 
units) while part of the SS-19 missiles have already been taken 
out of their silos for subsequent destruction. Therefore 
approximately one-third of the Ukrainian nuclear missile 
capability has been taken off alert. Clearly the joint 
Russian-U.S. diplomatic and economic pressure has finally 
resulted in appreciable shifts in Kiev's position. A U.S. State 
Department spokesman in Washington welcomed Ukraine's latest 
moves as "a step in the right direction." 
  True, full elimination of all nuclear missile disagreements 
between Moscow and Kiev is still a long way off. Valeriy 
Shmarov said that Russian specialists continue to service the 
nuclear charges located on Ukraine's territory, and described 
the Russian Government statement that such servicing has been 
stopped as "populist and uncalled for." Nonetheless, Colonel 
General Yevgeniy Maslin, chief of the 12th Main Directorate of 
the Russian Defense Ministry (earlier a highly classified branch 
of the Soviet Army whose specialists deal with all matters of 
storage, use, and transportation of nuclear units and are 
generally responsible for all nuclear charges adopted for 
service), assured SEGODNYA's correspondent that "there are no 
Russian military servicemen from the 12th Directorate in 
Ukraine." However, the 43rd Missile Army deployed in Ukraine 
includes former specialists of the 12th Main Directorate who 
have "stayed" in Ukraine together with the army and sworn the 
Ukrainian military oath, and can not now be considered Russian 
servicemen. 
  Furthermore, only three defective SS-24 missile warheads 
have 
been delivered to Russian territory and transferred to 
specialists of the Atomic Energy Ministry (former Sredmash). 
The other decomissioned missile nuclear units are so far in 
Ukraine. As before, the 43rd Army's combat unit storage 
facilities remain overloaded in excess of all norms (six to 
eight times, according to the 12th Main Directorate). 
  The question about the form and size of compensation to 
Ukraine for nuclear disarmament also remains open. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59927 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94053" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Dismantles SS-24 Nuclear Missiles </TI></H3>
<H4>   IZVESTIYA Quotes Kravchuk </H4>
<F P=102> PM2312123193 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 23 Dec 93 First 
Edition p 2 </F>

<F P=103> PM2312123193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mariya Starozhitskaya of UNIAN: "Ukrainian </F>
President Holds Review of Political Forces"] 
  [Excerpt] Kiev -- Leonid Kravchuk's meeting with the 
leaders of practically all the political parties registered by 
the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice (31 at present) was held, as 
was emphasized repeatedly, on an initiative from below. [passage 
omitted] 
  At the request of journalists Leonid Kravchuk commented on 
the standing down of 17 SS-24 missile complexes. "This does not 
violate the law," he said. "The law stipulates removal from 
Ukrainian territory; this way the missiles are in the silos but 
the warheads have been dismantled. Why should they be on 
standby when the nuclear button is actually in Russia? It is 
better to stand them down: This way they will not be used by 
anyone." 
  Compensation and security guarantees will be stipulated in a 
trilateral agreement between Ukraine, Russia, and the United 
States. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59928 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94054" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Greater Yalta Proclaimed `Nuclear-Free Zone' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU2912131493 Kiev HOLOS UKRAYINY in Ukrainian 25 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> AU2912131493 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev HOLOS UKRAYINY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Greater Yalta Has Been Proclaimed a </F>
Nuclear-Free Zone"] 
  [Text] The 20th session of the Yalta Town Council adopted 
a statement "On Proclaiming the Territory of Greater Yalta a 
Nuclear-Free Zone." The Yalta Town Council takes upon itself an 
obligation not to allow the installation, deployment, 
maintenance, or storage of nuclear weapons or other radioactive 
materials on its territory. The transit or transportation of 
nuclear components, including the arrival of ships with nuclear 
weapons on board to the port, is forbidden. It was decided to 
establish efficient control over adherence to the nuclear-free 
status. The statement was sent to Ukraine's Supreme Council, to 
the Crimean Supreme Council, and to the committee of the 
International Secretariat "The Movement of Local Authorities in 
Nuclear-Free Zones" (Manchester, Great Britain). The deputies 
turned to local organs of power of the Black Sea Region with a 
proposal to support their statement. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59929 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94055" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   UN Envoy Criticizes U.S., Russian Pressure on Nuclear Issue </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0401212994 Kiev Ukrayinske Telebachennya Network in 
Ukrainian 1900 GMT 4 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0401212994 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Telebachennya Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [No video available] </F>
  [Text] Viktor Batyuk, our state's permanent representative 
at the United Natopms, took part in a briefing at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs today. He noted in particular that Ukraine's 
delegation has done great work explaining Ukraine's foreign 
policy. Unfortunately, however, it is nevertheless impossible to 
surpass the activity of one delegation and the furious pressure 
on the part of the mass media and government structures of the 
United States and Russia, which are distorting our stance 
regarding nuclear weapons, said Viktor Batyuk. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59930 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94056" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officials Inspect Nuclear Facilities </TI></H3>
<H4>   Visit Warhead Storage Sites </H4>
<F P=102> LD1612211293 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 2035 GMT 16 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1612211293 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By UKRINFORM correspondent for TASS] </F>
  [Text] Kiev December 16 TASS -- The press release 
circulated here on Thursday [16 December] described as not 
conforming to reality the reports by some mass media about 
critical condition of nuclear facilities on Ukrainian territory. 
The press release was issued following an inspection tour of 
units and facilities of the strategic missile forces by 
Ukrainian Defence Minister Vitaliy Radetskyy accompanied by 
officials responsible for the maintenance of nuclear facilities. 
On a commission from the Ukrainian president, they visited 
depots for temporary storage of nuclear warheads removed from 
missiles to assess their condition. 
  "There actually are certain maintenance problems," said 
Vladimir Mityuk, commander of the 43th Army of the strategic 
missile forces, who took part in the trip. "And this is quite 
explicable. But there are no grounds to lay it on thick. The 
situation on nuclear facilities is fully under control, and we 
have all necessary means and resources for this. Any attempts 
at drawing an analogy to Chernobyl or anything of the kind is 
absolutely inadmissible," he stressed. 
  According to Valeriy Vasilyev, commander of Ukraine's 
strategic air forces, the nuclear ammunition is presently 
"preserved reliably." Although the air forces also face certain 
problems, the situation is still far from critical. Such 
assertions do not conform to reality, he noted. 
  The press release quotes Radetskyy as saying a package of 
documents has been prepared for discussion at the proposed 
meeting with the Russian defence minister. The main thing, he 
believes, is the mutual desire of the two sides "to find a 
constructive solution to all existing problems." 
  The press release assesses the present state of Ukrainian 
nuclear facilities as satisfactory. Additional measures are 
being taken "to maintain nuclear warheads in proper conditions 
and to provide strategic troops with all necessary things." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59931 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94057" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officials Inspect Nuclear Facilities </TI></H3>
<H4>   Claim Missile Sites Pose No Danger </H4>
<F P=102> LD1712171593 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1439 GMT 17 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1712171593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ukraine's Defense Minister Vitaliy Radetskyy has 
completed an inspection of strategic units and missile sites. 
  "The state of missile installations is satisfactory. We are 
doing all we can and more to protect and safely store nuclear 
warheads and provide strategic forces with everything they need." 
  He reports in a statement, released by the republic's 
Defense 
Ministry, that he visited a depot for nuclear warheads, removed 
from missiles, and says that the purpose of his mission was to 
impartially assess the state of nuclear sites. 
  He notes that he checked all nuclear sites at the 
president's 
request and in line with a special program. 
  "We have enough problems to resolve on the threshold of 
negotiations with Russia on these issues." He revealed plans 
for early talks with his Russian counterpart Pavel Grachev to 
discuss a whole set of documents. "What's most important for 
Ukraine and Russia is eagerness to work hard toward nuclear 
disarmament," Radetskyy stressed, and warned against dramatizing 
the situation, as some journalists and politicians do. 
  Meanwhile, the Commander of Ukraine's 43 Strategic Missile 
Troops Army Vladimir Migtyuk has admitted that "technical 
maintenance problems really exist." However, in his words, 
"there is no reason to lay it on thick." "Nuclear facilities 
are fully under control, he assured, we have all means for 
that." He dismissed as far- fetched attempts to draw a parallel 
to Chernobyl or anything else. 
  The Ukrainian Air-Force Commander Valeriy Vasilyev has 
announced that the nuclear warheads on board strategic aircraft 
"are reliably protected." He refuted allegations that their 
condition was appalling. 
  Colonel Valeriy Izmalkov, a member of the Parliamentary 
Commission on Defence and Security Affairs dismissed as 
"absolutely baseless" some foreign assertions that Ukraine will 
declassify the operative missile management codes in the coming 
months. 
  In his words, these codes are not possible to declassify. 
Only U.S. and Russian Headquarters could re-target missiles 
after making essential calculations. "Ukraine is not ready for 
that," Izmalkov remarked. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59932 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94058" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Senior Official Proposes Sequence of START I Implementation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  WS2212142493 Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network in 
Ukrainian 1100 GMT 22 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> WS2212142493 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The formula that Russia is imposing on us, 
according to which we would join the START treaty before it 
comes into force, is unacceptable -- not to mention that it has 
a tinge of political pressure; this was declared today by 
Oleksandr Shevtsov, executive director of the National Strategic 
Research Institute, in an interview to HOLOS YKRAYINY. In this 
context, the U.S. Senate resolution on the ratification of START 
I is more comprehensive and prescient. However, given the 
present situation of Ukraine, Oleksandr Shevtsov emphasized, it 
would be the most realistic thing if the nonproliferation treaty 
implementation had the following sequence: Meeting conditions 
that are included in the treaty so that START I obtains 
validity, exchanging ratification instruments, and then 
commencing the treaty's practical implementation, which would 
result in the complete removal of nuclear weapons from our 
territory. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59933 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94059" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Responds To Missile Code-Breaking Attempt Charges </TI></H3>
<H4>   Ministry Denies Attempt </H4>
<F P=102> LD1012160393 Kiev UNIAR in Ukrainian 2310 GMT 9 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1012160393 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 9 December -- In its bulletin of 8 December 
1993, carrying a report entitled "Ukraine Satisfied With 
Retargeting Missiles," the private English-speaking news agency 
Intelnews quotes the director of the press center of the 
Ukrainian Defense Ministry, Ihor Melnychenko, as saying that "a 
group of scientists is working on breaking the codes of 
Ukrainian missiles. If we get these codes, we shall then be 
able to retarget the missiles." 
  The press service of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry has 
officially denied this report and stated that no such data has 
been provided for the Intelnews agency by representatives of the 
Ukrainian Defense Ministry. Ukraine exercises administrative 
control over nuclear weapons and is taking steps to prevent the 
use of them. 
  The Defense Ministry press service's report points out that 
the establishment of the press service does not have such a post 
as the director and that the service does not employ a member of 
staff with such a name as Melnychenko. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59934 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94060" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kiev Responds To Missile Code-Breaking Attempt Charges </TI></H3>
<H4>   WASHINGTON POST Report Refuted </H4>
<F P=102> WS1712145193 Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network in 
Ukrainian 1100 GMT 17 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> WS1712145193 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Colonel Valeriy Izmalkov, member of the legislative 
commission for defense and state security, described as 
absolutely ungrounded reports published by THE WASHINGTON POST 
that Ukraine will soon decipher the operational codes of nuclear 
missiles stationed on its territory. The newspaper cited U.S. 
and Russian analysts. Valeriy Izmalkov stated that the nuclear 
missile operational codes have a protection system that makes it 
practically impossible to decipher. He underlined that the 
missiles are launched based on space photographs and not 
geographical maps. So retargeting the missiles would require 
extremely complex calculations -- something that only U.S. and 
Russian general staffs are capable of doing. Ukraine is not 
prepared for this. The deputy called the allegations about 
Ukraine deciphering nuclear codes a small link in a big chain of 
provocations against Ukraine. In this connection, Izmalkov also 
mentioned energetic actions by Russian Foreign Minister Kozyrev 
in Brussels, who resorted to aggressive pressure against Ukraine 
and encouraged other states to do the same. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59935 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94061" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Japan Reportedly To Assist Financing of Nuclear Disarmament </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD1712122493 Kiev UNIAN in Ukrainian 0845 GMT 17 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1712122493 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev [no date as receivedd] -- A UNIAN 
correspondent was informed at the Japanese Embassy in Ukraine 
that a working meeting of employees of the Foreign Ministries of 
Japan and Ukraine took place on 16 December about Japan's 
assistance in eliminating Ukrainian nuclear weapons. According 
to information of the embassy's secretary, Japan will finance 
nuclear disarmament of Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia 
irrespective of the assessments of the state's government or the 
manner of ratification of the START I Treaty by Ukraine. The 
total sum, which Japan is currently planning to spend on these 
four states comes to $100 million. But a final decision 
regarding Ukraine's share has not been adopted yet. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59936 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94062" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ukraine Courts U.S. in Wake of START Ratification </TI></H3>
<H4>   Observer on U.S. Attitude </H4>
<F P=102> WS1512110593 Kiev RADA in Ukrainian 9 Dec 93 pp 1,2 </F>
<F P=103> WS1512110593 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev RADA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oleksandr Dubyna: "Will American Sisyphus Disarm </F>
Us?"] 
  [Text] In a LOS ANGELES TIMES article dated November 23 
1993, a high official representing the United States 
administration commented on the U.S.-Ukrainian negotiations on 
nuclear disarmament in the following way: "Our negotiations with 
Ukraine remind me of the tale about Sisyphus. When you think 
that you have managed to push the stone up the hill you suddenly 
realize that the stone is again lying at the foot of this hill." 
  Why does the American Sisyphus want to do this ungrateful 
work? It is not difficult to guess. Ukrainian missiles are 
targeted at the United States and can smash it in seconds. 
Given the unstable political situation that can go out of 
control at any time, the U.S. strategists do not exclude the 
possibility that a fervent Cossack can press a missile button 
just to frighten those Americans overseas. 
  Currently, Ukraine does not lay any claims to the United 
States: This state has not yet done anything good or bad to it. 
Next, if we even wanted to press this missile button we would 
be unable to do so because Russia controls 176 missiles and 
nuclear warheads stationed on the Ukrainian territory. No 
doubt, this situation disturbs Washington because the United 
States cannot guarantee that Russian chauvinists and 
nationalists dreaming of world domination will not come to power 
tomorrow. Americans cannot but notice the transformation of the 
Russian Government after the latest October events. Since 
then, the Russian Government has adopted a range of "strong" 
decrees including the Russian military doctrine and Russian 
Foreign Intelligence Doctrine "Prospects for NATO Development 
and Russia's Interests." 
  Russian President Boris Yeltsin continues writing letters to 
Western leaders while Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev is enraged 
with Ukraine because it has ratified the START-I Treaty. 
  I would like to emphasize that the issue of Russian 
democratic chauvinism is not yet on the agenda, because the 
political situation is unstable. I would like to recall that 
the internal strengthening of Russia has always led to its 
foreign expansion. One more thing: Enormous Russian potential 
had always enabled it to quickly recover from various natural 
calamities. This happened in the 17th century, when Russia was 
almost enslaved by Poland in the Smolensk War (1633-1634). 
However, in some 20 years, Russia began waging military 
operations against Ukraine. One hundred years later, after 
Russia was defeated in the shameful Crimean war in 1853-1856, it 
strengthened its positions in the Balkans after a successful war 
with Turkey in 1877-1878. Again, after a disastrous civil war 
in 1918-1921, Russia began making claims on the international 
community. 
  Washington knows history all too well and ponders on the 
possibility of the revival of Russian international influence. 
If Ukraine does not overcome its critical financial situation 
by the time Russia regains its power, our state will lose its 
independence. If this happens, Ukrainian nuclear missiles will 
become Russian property; however, they will be directed at the 
United States. This explains why Washington Sisyphuses are 
aiming at the destruction of Ukrainian missiles as soon as 
possible. 
  Moscow supports Washington Sisyphuses in conducting their 
negotiations with Ukraine because, first, Russia could 
appropriate Ukrainian strategic nuclear arms, and, second, 
Russian strategists are anxious that the Ukrainian party could 
retarget its missiles from the United States at Russia. It was 
not accidental that when Ukraine slowed down the process of 
disarmament in spring, the Russian mass media launched a wild 
campaign claiming that Ukraine could acquire control over 
nuclear missiles. Does this mean that Russia thinks that a 
nonnuclear state could be easily subordinated? I want to 
underline that if things go this way, the United States will be 
unable to guarantee our security. By the way, they are not 
going to do it at all. 
  U.S. State Secretary Warren Christopher put it quite clearly 
when he visited Kiev in October. His joint press conference 
with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Zlenko went like this: 
  [Christopher] At first, you should disarm, then you will get 
money. 
  [Zlenko] At first, you give us money, next, we begin 
disarming. 
  We require an enormous sum of money -- some $2.8-5 billion. 
Will the American Sisyphus grant us this money? I doubt it. 
That means that Ukraine will continue to preserve nuclear arms 
on its territory. It is senseless asking Russia to pay us 
compensation. 
  As for Washington, I think that it will at last come to the 
conclusion that nuclear disarmament requires joint efforts. It 
is absurd to do this work alone. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59937 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94063" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ukraine Courts U.S. in Wake of START Ratification </TI></H3>
<H4>   Ambassador Speaks in Washington </H4>
<F P=102> AU1512145493 Kiev URYADOVYY KURYER in Ukrainian 14 Dec 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1512145493 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev URYADOVYY KURYER </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by the Press Service of the Ukrainian Embassy in the </F>
United States and UKRINFORM: "News Conference of the Ukrainian 
Ambassador in the United States"] 
  [Text] Ukraine's Ambassador Extraordinary and 
Plenipotentiary in the United States Oleh Bilorus spoke at a 
news conference in Washington on issues of nuclear disarmament 
following the ratification of START-1 by the Ukrainian 
Parliament. 
  Even with the reservations made by Ukraine's Supreme 
Council, 
said Oleh Bilorus, the parliament's decree on the ratification 
of START-1 opened up new possibilities for the practical 
implementation of Ukraine's international obligations on the 
destruction of nuclear weapons on its territory. 
  At the same time, Oleh Bilorus stressed the special position 
occupied by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk, who insists on 
a new discussion and ratification by a future new parliament of 
START-1 complete with the Lisbon Protocol on Nuclear 
Nonproliferation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59938 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94064" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ukraine Courts U.S. in Wake of START Ratification </TI></H3>
<H4>   Kravchuk Meets With U.S. Envoy </H4>
<F P=102> LD1512194793 Kiev UNIAN in Ukrainian 1440 GMT 15 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1512194793 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, [no date as received] -- Leonid Kravchuk, 
president of Ukraine, met William Miller, ambassador 
extraordinary and plenipotentiary of the United States to 
Ukraine, at his request in the evening of 14 December. 
According to official information, aspects of bilateral 
relations were discussed, and so was further economic 
cooperation regarding implementation of the instructions of the 
Supreme Council of Ukraine on ratification of the START I Treaty. 
  To a question from an UNIAN correspondent, Viktor Stelmakh, 
press secretary of the president of Ukraine, replied, that "the 
meeting was of an essentially confidential nature and not a 
single agreement was signed." The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine 
refused a request to comment on the results of this 
conversation, referring to a lack of authority on the part of 
the embassy's leadership. 
  Anton Buteyko, head of the service of the president of 
Ukraine on international issues, who was present at the talks, 
explained that the meeting had been brought about by the 
telephone conversation between Leonid Kravchuk and [U.S. 
President] Bill Clinton regarding ratification of the START I 
Treaty. William Miller and Leonid Kravchuk discussed the course 
of implementation of accords on the matter of nuclear 
disarmament and ways of improving economic cooperation and 
exchanged opinions on a wide range of issues. The U.S. 
ambassador reported on America's attitude to the ratification of 
the START I Treaty. 
  The diplomatic circles of the world are noting the equivocal 
reaction of the American leadership to Ukraine's attitude to 
nuclear disarmament. In particular, commenting on the talks of 
U.S. Vice-President Albert Gore in Kyrgyzstan, U.S. information 
agencies are stressing that Kazakhstan and Belarus recently 
ratified the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Western 
commentators are venturing the opinion that [a visit] to Kiev is 
not envisaged among the planned visits of the U.S. President and 
Vice-President for the near future namely because Ukraine's 
stance is different from the Belarusian and Kazakh stance. They 
have a calmer attitude to this matter at the Ukraine Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. One of the employees of the foreign policy 
department commented, "This is normal diplomatic practice, 
acceptable in all states. Remember if you will the postponement 
of Boris Yeltsin's visit to Japan or the visits of the 
presidents of Romania and Bulgaria to Ukraine." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59939 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94065" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kravchuk Confirms `Nuclear-Free' Pledge to Gore </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU1812165593 Budapest MTI in English 1639 GMT 18 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU1812165593 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, December 18 (MTI) -- Ukrainian President 
Leonid Kravchuk, who arrived in Hungary to attend Prime Minister 
Jozsef Antall's funeral today, held talks with U.S. Vice 
President Al Gore in Budapest. 
  Kravchuk told MTI that the negotiations had focused on 
bilateral ties. The politicians outlined their position on the 
START-1 Treaty and the elimination of nuclear weapons. 
  Kravchuk stressed that they held identical views on the main 
issues. Ukraine confirmed its commitment to become a 
nuclear-free state. This would solve a lot of problems for both 
Ukraine and the whole world, he said. 
  The Ukrainian president stressed the need for a trilateral 
agreement to be concluded between Ukraine, Russia and the United 
States. If this agreement guarantees political, economic, 
scientific and technical cooperation, it will be as important as 
the previous bilateral agreements were, namely it will 
contribute to the destruction of nuclear weapons, the president 
said. 
  Kravchuk and Gore agreed that Ukraine's economic crisis 
could 
be eased through bilateral and multilateral cooperation. 
  In conclusion, the Ukrainian president said he was satisfied 
with the negotiations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59940 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94066" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kravchuk Dissatisfied With Parliament's START-I Decision </TI></H3>
<H4>   Wants a `Return to the Issue' </H4>
<F P=102> LD0212220593 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1934 GMT 2 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD0212220593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk has stated 
he was unsatisfied with the parliament's decision on the 
ratification of the START I treaty. In November, the Ukrainian 
Supreme Soviet ratified the treaty with numerous reservations. 
  "Taking into account our capabilities, positions and 
obligations, we must return to the issue and make an adequate 
decision," he stressed. "I cannot see why we cannot join the 
nuclear nonproliferation treaty." "We cannot be a state 
everyone would point at with his finger," he added. 
  Speaking at a scientific and research institute in Kiev 
today, Kravchuk pointed out that if the world community gave up 
its practice of applying pressure upon Ukraine on nuclear 
disarmament, the issue might be solved even faster. "Experience 
shows us that threats and sanctions are apparently not the best 
way to solve such complex issues," he pointed out. 
  The president supposed Kiev will manage to agree on the 
technical maintenance of its nuclear missiles with Moscow next 
year. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59941 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94067" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kravchuk Dissatisfied With Parliament's START-I Decision </TI></H3>
<H4>   Will Resubmit START I Treaty to Supreme Council </H4>
<F P=102> LD0212192893 Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 1848 
GMT 2 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD0212192893 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By UKRINFORM correspondent Mikhail Melnik for TASS] </F>
  [Text] Kiev, 2 Dec -- "We do not have the right to halt the 
disarmament process if we wish to be regarded as a civilized 
state. Therefore, I intend to submit the START I Treaty again 
with my comments for examination by the Supreme Council," 
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk told journalists today 
during his tour round a number of welfare facilities in the 
capital. 
  He also said that Ukraine would oppose Russia's being 
granted 
a peace-making mission in the republics of the former Soviet 
Union. The president of Ukraine stressed: "Each state should put 
its own house in order." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59942 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94068" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Ministry Officials Rebut Kozyrev Remarks </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0912230493 Kiev UNIAN in Ukrainian 2010 GMT 9 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD0912230493 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, [no date as received] -- Kostyantyn 
Hryshchenko, head of the directorate for control over armament 
and disarmament of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, 
and Ihor Kharchenko, head of the directorate for political 
analysis and prediction, held a meeting with journalists on 9 
December, which was devoted to the consequences of ratification 
of START I. According to information from Kharchenko, Andrey 
Kozyrev, [Russian] minister of foreign affairs, "resorted to 
conscious distortion of several specific facts" at a recent 
briefing at the Russian Foreign Ministry. In particular, he 
maintained that Russia had supposedly virtually received 
agreement to conduct peacemaking actions on the territory of the 
former USSR, although really only the necessity of carrying out 
peacemaking actions in general was stressed at the CSCE session 
in Rome. It does not correspond to reality that CSCE ministers 
supposedly unanimously condemned aggressive nationalism, and 
also that one had supposedly managed to isolate Ukraine from the 
world because of its stance regarding nuclear disarmament, [no 
closing quotation marks as received] -- noted Kostyantyn 
Hryshchenko. According to information from the Ukrainian 
diplomats, Russia itself in fact ended up in isolation after it 
was to blame for disrupting the signing of a package of 
documents in the sphere of defense planning, which suited all of 
the delegations apart from the Russian one. The Ukrainian 
diplomatic corps links the latest statements by the Russian 
foreign minister with the clear line of Russia's government, 
which was previously concealed and was made out to be the 
opinion of parliament. A UNIAN correspondent has learned that 
Borys Tarasyuk, deputy minister of foreign affairs, made 
observations on 8 December regarding the Kozyrev's position, 
when Tarasyuk stressed that it is Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin's idea to divide the Black Sea Fleet. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59943 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94069" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ambassador to Austria on START I Ratification </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0712222793 Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service in Ukrainian 
2000 GMT 7 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD0712222793 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Radio Ukraine World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A news conference on the subject "A nuclear Ukraine 
and European security" took place at Ukraine's embassy in the 
Republic of Austria. It was conducted by Yuriy Kostenko, the 
ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of Ukraine in 
Austria. Addressing foreign journalists, he noted that 
ratification by the Supreme Council of Ukraine of the START I 
Treaty and the Lisbon Protocol, opens realistic possibilities 
for Ukraine progressing along the path to nuclear disarmament. 
The international community, stressed the ambassador, should 
understand and realistically assess the huge difficulties of a 
political, economic, technical, and ecological nature, which are 
arising before the young independent state in the process of 
elimination of the powerful nuclear potential inherited from the 
former Soviet Union. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59944 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94070" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Wants State Control of Missiles After Russian Poll </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU1412145093 Paris AFP in English 1434 GMT 14 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU1412145093 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Paola Messana] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kiev, Dec 14 (AFP) -- Ukraine said it might ask 
Russia to hand over the codes for the nuclear weapons stationed 
on its territory following the success by ultra-nationalist 
leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy in parliamentary polls Sunday, a 
senior parliamentary official said Tuesday [14 December]. 
  Igor Dirkatck, an influential member of the Parliamentary 
Defence Committee, told AFP that Ukraine "must seek to obtain 
the codes enabling it to control the nuclear missiles stationed 
on its territory to meet the threat to its security represented 
by Zhirinovskiy." 
  "Zhirinovskiy and the Communist Party want to restore the 
Soviet empire and bring Russia back to its pre-1917 frontiers," 
he charged. 
  Ukraine possesses 130 strategic SS-19 multiple-warhead 
missiles, mostly obsolete according to experts, along with 46 
modern SS-24 missiles. 
  Though declaring its long-term intention to become a 
non-nuclear state, ratifying the START-I treaty on nuclear 
disarmament signed in July 1991 by the United States and the 
Soviet Union, it has so far refused to give up the SS-24s. 
  Ukrainian leaders have said previously that they could 
obtain 
the nuclear codes "but had no wish to." [passage omitted] 
  Earlier, parliamentary foreign affairs spokesman Dmitri 
Pavlichko said that Sunday's vote showed Russia was "far from 
being a democracy" and that Ukraine was right in hesitating to 
give up its nuclear arsenal. 
  "I hope that after these elections the (international) 
community will better understand Ukraine's positions with regard 
to disarmanent." The Russians have "shown their 
irresponsibility," he commented. 
  And Ukrainian Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tarasyuk said he 
was concerned over the vote by sailors of the Black Sea fleet 
who voted 19 percent in favour of Zhirinovskiy's party compared 
with 11.5 percent for Russia's Choice, the party headed by 
Deputy Prime Minister Yegor Gaydar and which strongly backs 
President Boris Yeltsin and his reform program. 
  "That must push us on to resolving the question of sharing 
out this fleet between Ukraine and Russia," he said. "The 
forces who voted for Zhirinovskiy are on our territory." 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59945 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94071" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Inspection Group Views Military Equipment Destruction </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0912224293 Kiev UNIAR in Ukrainian 1620 GMT 9 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD0912224293 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev UNIAR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kharkov, 9 Dec -- A U.S. military inspection group 
headed by Colonel Gallagher is in Ukraine. The American 
inspectors visited the Kharkov armored vehicle repair plant, 
where they observed the process of destruction of military 
equipment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59946 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94072" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> WEST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Arms Control Efforts </TI></H3>
<H4>   Foreign Minister Launches Initiative </H4>
<F P=102> LD1512131293 Berlin DDP in German 1124 GMT 15 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1512131293 </F>
<F P=104>  Berlin DDP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DDP) -- Germany's Foreign Minister Klaus 
Kinkel has launched a German initiative aimed at combating the 
threatened proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. A 
10-point paper published today by the Foreign Ministry in Bonn 
calls on all those states which have not yet signed the nuclear 
nonproliferation treaty or conventions on biological and 
chemical weapons to do so without delay. In addition, the 
treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons should be 
extended indefinitely from 1995. 
  The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe should 
be augmented to become a model for the regional nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons which could also serve as a model for other 
regions. In addition, the German initiative envisages 
international cooperation in the area of export controls. The 
Foreign Ministry also urges greater support, including financial 
aid, for disarmament programs in the CIS. 
  Plutonium coming into circulation as a consequence of 
disarmament should in the future be monitored by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The United Nations 
should compile a nuclear weapons register to create a better 
overview of the number of nuclear weapons in existence. The 
German Government also reaffirmed its call for a worldwide and 
comprehensive agreement against nuclear testing. 
  The Foreign Ministry paper also points out that in a basic 
resolution the UN Security Council described the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction as a threat to international 
security and peace. This gives the Security Council scope to 
impose the appropriate coercive measures. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59947 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94073" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> WEST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Arms Control Efforts </TI></H3>
<H4>   Ukraine Reports on Proposal </H4>
<F P=102> WS1612132193 Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network in 
Ukrainian 1100 GMT 16 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> WS1612132193 </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan can count 
on assistance of the German Government in the sphere of 
disarmament. This can be concluded from a program presented by 
German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel in Bonn. He proposed that 
the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, whose validity ends in 
1995, become unlimited and that all nuclear states join it. 
Klaus Kinkel said that his government was ready to extend 
various forms of aid, including financial, to the four CIS 
countries. It should be mentioned that Ukraine has recently 
made an important step in this direction by ratifying START I 
and the Lisbon Protocol. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59948 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94074" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> WEST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Arms Control Efforts </TI></H3>
<H4>   Bonn Provides Chemical Weapons Monitoring Equipment </H4>
<F P=102> LD2312224793 Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 1517 
GMT 23 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2312224793 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ITAR-TASS World Service </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Aleksey Korinenko] </F>
  [Text] Berlin, 23 Dec -- A mobile laboratory, necessary for 
carrying out effective environmental monitoring measures during 
the destruction of chemical weapons, was today handed over to 
representatives of Russia's Defense Ministry. It will be 
deployed in Saratov Oblast as early as the beginning of January 
1994. 
  The total cost of the equipment being handed over is 
reckoned 
to be 130 million marks. With its assistence, it is possible to 
detect even an insignificant quantity of chemical substances by 
means of conducting physical and chemical analyses. In other 
words, the laboratory raises the safety level significantly in 
the course of destroying poisonous chemical substances. 
Furthermore, the German side is providing courses to train 
Russian specialists in the latest methods of monitoring the 
environment in sites where chemical weapons are being destroyed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59949 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslims Fire Chlorine-Charged Missiles on Croat Villages </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0312000493 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
2300 GMT 2 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD0312000493 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Muslim Army fired chlorine-charged missiles and 
other toxic shells on Grbavica and Ponjave in the Vitez 
municipality this afternoon, HBNA [Herzeg-Bosna News Agency] 
reports. 
  A number of people requested medical help after being 
affected by giddiness, suffocation, and vomiting, the same 
source says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59950 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Presents Data on Compliance With CFE </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU1412082293 Prague CTK in English 1618 GMT 13 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU1412082293 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague, Dec 13 (CTK) -- A total of 492 tanks, 499 
armored cars, 621 guns, and 25 combat aircraft have been 
destroyed during the first stage of the implementation of the 
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty, the Defense Ministry 
Press Office told CTK today. 
  This list includes the relative part of equipment (100 
tanks, 
52 armored cars, 131 guns, and 4 combat aircraft) destroyed 
prior to December 31, 1992, in the former Federal (Czechoslovak) 
Army. 
  According to the timetable of the former Czechoslovak Army, 
the decrease in equipment and arms was divided into three 
periods: (I) July 17, 1992 to November 13, 1993, (II) November 
14, 1993, to November 13, 1994, and (III) November 14, 1994, to 
November 13, 1995. By the latter date, the stipulated levels 
are to be achieved. 
  In addition to the decrease in equipment and arms, the Czech 
Army has conducted this year eight inspections of superfluous 
equipment and arms in Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Germany, the 
Netherlands, Great Britain, and U.S. Army facilities in Germany. 
  Altogether 13 inspections, focused on the proper 
technological implementation of the destruction of superfluous 
military equipment and technology as well as on checking the 
quantity of the destroyed arms, were conducted by Czech Army 
officials in Hungary, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Italy, 
Romania, and Greece. 
  At the same time, eight inspections of specified places and 
67 inspections supervising the liquidation of superfluous arms 
were carried out in the Czech Republic. Inspection teams from 
Canada, Hungary, Portugal, Romania, and Great Britain were 
involved in them. 
  The Czech Army's superfluous arms and technology is stored 
in 
Holysov, west Bohemia, Jihlava, south Moravia, Felbabka, central 
Bohemia, Libava, north Moravia, Jaromer, east Bohemia and 
Terezin, central Bohemia. 
  The CFE, signed in Paris in 1990, has stipulated a maximum 
level of 957 tanks, 1,367 armored cars, 767 guns, 230 combat 
aircraft, and 50 combat helicopters for the Czech Republic. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59951 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tanks Destroyed To Comply With International Accord </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AU2112133093 Budapest MTI in English 1210 GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> AU2112133093 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 21 Dec (MTI) -- The first stage of 
destroying conventional weapons under a European agreement ended 
at Godollo today in the presence of an international military 
observer group. 
  Deputy State Secretary of Defence Zoltan Pecze told the 
press 
that the 34 signatories to the 1991 European agreement on the 
elimination of conventional arms agreed to destroy part of their 
armaments by 1994 so as to reduce the danger of war, prevent the 
senseless arms race, and build mutual confidence. 
  The agreement obliges Hungary to destroy 510 tanks, 65 
armoured vehicles, and 207 artillery pieces. Curuss Rt, a 
Godollo-based company commissioned to carry out the task, has so 
far destroyed 139 tanks, 89 armoured vehicles and 56 artillery 
pieces. Cut up with oxy-acetylene torches, sections are sold as 
scrap to metal dealers. 
  The foreign delegation composed of U.S., British, Spanish, 
and Belgian officers supervised the cutting up of 14 tanks. 
  Some countries are obliged to destroy fighter planes and 
helicopters, too. This obligation, though, does not apply to 
Hungary whose stock of this category of military equipment 
remains below internationally agreed limits. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59952 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST/SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> ALGERIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Intention To Join Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2112154593 Algiers Radio Algiers Network in Arabic 1200 
GMT 21 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> LD2112154593 </F>
<F P=104>  Algiers Radio Algiers Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Algeria has announced today its intention to join 
the international non-proliferation treaty. This announcement 
came on the occasion of the inauguration of El-Salam nuclear 
reactor at Ain Oussera. More details with Ahmed Khida: 
  Khida: First, we stress that Foreign Affairs 
Minister Salah Dembri officially declared today in three 
languages Algeria's intention to join the international nuclear 
non-proliferation treaty. He was third to speak at the 
inauguration ceremony of the diplomatic missions--which were all 
invited, and most of whom attended--and before international and 
national journalists. 
  Dembri: Therefore, I officially announce 
today--in the name of the highest authorities in the 
country--our intention to join the nuclear non-proliferation 
treaty. 
  Khida: Therefore, after the El-Nour nuclear 
reactor in Algiers, with its weak one MW capacity, another 
nuclear reactor was officially inaugurated in Ain Oussera, 
Djelfa Province. It is called the El-Salam reactor and has a 
capacity of 15 thermal MW. The inauguration coincided with the 
35th anniversary of establishing Algerian-Chinese relations in 
1958. This reactor was the product of Chinese companies. The 
representatives stressed ongoing Algerian- Chinese cooperation 
and revealed that IAEA experts had visited the Ain Oussera 
nuclear reactor many times during the stages of its 
construction, and they had become convinced that this 
achievement was for purely peaceful purposes of research. 
  For his part, Algeria's Foreign Minister Dembri said that 
the 
El- Salam reactor had (?accepted) at the Algerian Government's 
request to meet the guarantees of the IAEA. 
  National Education Minister Ahmed Jebbar, who was the first 
to speak, stressed that the construction of the El-Salam nuclear 
reactor was a logical culmination of the considerable efforts 
exerted over 20 years in training, science, and technology. 
  Therefore, this new nuclear reactor is aimed at nuclear 
research, which has become a major component of all systems. 
The research to be carried out by this new reactor concerns the 
fields of medicine, X-ray treatment, and research development in 
the fields of agriculture and industry. 
  Finally, we record the absence of the general director of 
the 
IAEA, Mr. [Hans] Blix, who on this occasion sent a message to 
the Algerian Government in which he stressed his belief that 
this new achievement constitutes an important landmark in the 
development of nuclear research and control technology. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59953 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST/SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> EGYPT </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mideast Countries Urged To Get Rid of Nuclear Weapons </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  NC1812143393 Cairo Arab Republic of Egypt Radio Network in 
Arabic 1240 GMT 18 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> NC1812143393 </F>
<F P=104>  Cairo Arab Republic of Egypt Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ahmad al-Qasir: "The World Community </F>
Unanimously Endorsed Egypt's Call To Free the Middle East of 
Nuclear Weapons"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The world community showed its 
appreciation for Egypt's role and continuous efforts to 
safeguard world peace when the UN General Assembly unanimously 
backed Egypt's draft resolution to free the Middle East of 
nuclear weapons. The resolution called on all countries 
concerned to join the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and to 
place their nuclear weapons under the supervision of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. 
  What makes this important step for consolidating world peace 
in this sensitive part of the world more significant is that the 
approval of Egypt's proposal to free the Middle East of nuclear 
weapons was coupled with another resolution, which Egypt voted 
for, on Israel's nuclear weapons. The resolution called 
directly on Israel to renounce the possession of nuclear weapons 
and join the nonproliferation treaty. 
  Egypt's call, which was backed by the UN General Assembly, 
was not born accidentally or imposed by certain circumstances. 
It stemmed from the Egyptian leadership's firm belief that 
world peace is indivisible and that it is high time to end the 
state of armed struggle in the Middle East so that the people 
may give more attention to economic and social development to 
create a better tomorrow for future generations. [passage 
omitted] 
  The UN General Assembly's resolution calling for freeing the 
Middle East of nuclear weapons is a practical way to help 
promote the ongoing peace efforts exerted by the international 
community. It will prevent those countries that possess nuclear 
weapons from threatening their neighbors and imposing their will 
on them. It will also prevent other countries from attempting 
to obtain these destructive weapons in a bid to ward off the 
nuclear threat against them. In addition, it will help put the 
brakes on all types of arms races by the region's countries and 
eliminate all potential hazards that may result from radiation 
in the densely populated Middle East region. More importantly, 
the resolution paves the way for the disputing parties to regain 
confidence in each other, which would ultimately help them meet 
half way to achieve a just peace that guarantees the legitimate 
rights of all the region's countries. 
  Egypt's call to free the Middle East of nuclear weapons is a 
new addition to the extensive efforts that President Mubarak has 
been exerting for years to promote peace between the Arabs and 
Israel at the international level. At the same time, it affirms 
Egypt's deep belief in the strategy of peace as the only way for 
reaching an understanding among the region's countries and 
highlights the need for all countries in the region not to 
violate it, regardless of the excuses they use as a facade. 
Through the United Nations, Egypt has opened the door for all 
regional countries to prove their goodwill and seriousness in 
their quest for peace and to get rid of nuclear weapons. When 
will the regional countries that possess nuclear weapons respond 
to the world community's peaceful call? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59954 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NEAR EAST/SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rao Comments on Chemical Weapons Convention </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK2412125493 Delhi All India Radio Network in English 1230 
GMT 24 Dec 93 </F>

<F P=103> BK2412125493 </F>
<F P=104>  Delhi All India Radio Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The prime minister has said that the chemical 
weapons convention is a great step in the direction of 
disarmament and the most important pillar of any disarmament 
process is verification. Chairing the Consultative Committee 
meeting of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers in New 
Delhi, Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao said the Chemical Weapons 
Convention is nondiscriminatory in its approach. This is the 
reason for which the verification methods adopted in the 
convention are compared favorably with similar efforts in the 
direction of disarmament. Mr. Narasima Rao emphasized that 
India is not making any chemical weapons and it has nothing to 
hide. He said India plans to train its chemical industry in a 
such a way that they are able to protect their commercial 
secrets while undergoing the inspection process. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59955 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kravchuk Assesses Yeltsin Remarks on Nuclear Weapons </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2012191893 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1806 GMT 20 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD2012191893 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: Prepared by </F>
Andrey Pershin, Andrey Petrovskiy, and Vladimir Shishlin, edited 
by Boris Grishchenko] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Nuclear Posture and Pledges Friendship With Moscow </H5>
  Ukraine's President Kravchuk believes that the Russian 
President Yeltsin's remarks that "Ukraine fools the whole world 
on nuclear arms" have not affected and will not affect "the 
process of signing bilateral accords." 
  IF Note: Commenting on Kiev's nuclear stand at the recent 
meeting with U.S. Vice President Gore in Moscow, Yeltsin 
declared: "Ukraine is fooling us all. It is fooling the U.S., 
Russia, Europe, it is fooling the whole world, and we are so 
weak that we cannot do anything about it." 
  "There are obvious processes--he told journalists in 
Kiev--that no one can stop--neither Yeltsin, nor Kravchuk nor 
Zhirinovskiy. Any attempt to stop them is doomed to failure." 
  In the meantime, he remarked "I did not hear the president's 
voice." "What you sometimes write or say--he told 
journalists--is still not the reason for me to make any 
statements." 
  However, he admitted that Yeltsin "might have said so in a 
special situation, among certain persons." "I do not believe 
that the president meant precisely that by his remark, he 
declared. Nor can I believe that Boris Nikolayevich regards our 
state as deceptive." "Ukraine's relations with Russia have 
always been friendly and will remain such," Kravchuk stressed. 
  At the same time, he suggested that "it might have simply 
been a slip of the tongue or he might have said so in duress." 
In the current complex political situation, it is hard to 
restrain oneself from poignant statements, he remarked. 
  In his words, Ukraine has never given any pretext for such 
accusations. 
  U.S., Ukrainian, and Russian delegates discussed nuclear 
disarmament and relations between their countries at tripartite 
consultations last weekend. According the Ukrainian Foreign 
Ministry, the sides discussed the possibility of paying 
compensation to Ukraine for the uranium that fills the nuclear 
weapons withdrawn from the republic. 
  As the Foreign Ministry's Spokesman Yuriy Sergeev has told 
INTERFAX, the U.S. is beginning to act as a mediator in 
Ukrainian-Russian negotiations on the problem of nuclear arms 
deployed in Ukraine. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59956 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defmin Grachev: Ukraine Virtually Nuclear Power </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD0501180394 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1348 GMT 5 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0501180394 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev has said that 
Ukraine was, to all intents and purposes, a nuclear state since 
its parliament had virtually not ratified the strategic arms 
reduction treaty (START I). 
  In late 1993 the Ukrainian parliament ratified the Start I 
treaty, but with reservations which changed its essence. 
  Meeting in Moscow Wednesday well-known political leaders, 
U.S. Senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar, the Russian Minister 
said that presence of nuclear arms on the territory of Ukraine 
would be discussed at the Moscow summit January 12 between 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin and his U.S. counterpart Bill 
Clinton. 
  Grachev believes taking part in the summit will be Ukrainian 
leader Leonid Kravchuk who will give a certain impetus to the 
possible solution. 
  Nuclear weapons, believes the Minister, cannot be a subject 
of bargaining. This is dangerous, said Grachev. 
  He said he has a hot line with U.S. Defense Secretary Les 
Aspin [as received]. 
  Grachev has said on Wednesday, at 1600 he intends to discuss 
with his U.S. counterpart acute security problems. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59957 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tripartite Efforts on Nuclear Issue By U.S., Ukraine, Russia </TI></H3>
<H4>   U.S. Aid Offer Reported </H4>
<F P=102> LD1412221193 Moscow INTERFAX in English 1939 GMT 14 Dec 93 </F>
<F P=103> LD1412221193 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow INTERFAX </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The United States has agreed to offer Ukraine 
economic aid worth $155 Mn, according to a report issued by the 
American Embassy in Ukraine on Tuesday. According to the 
document, the money is meant for denationalizing small business, 
supporting health protection, law enforcement and greater 
reliability of the operation of nuclear reactors at power 
stations. Part of the credit is meant for purchases of farm 
produce. The embassy claims Ukraine can get the aid immediately 
after the U.S.A. signs appropriate agreements. It also reported 
that the U.S.A. is ready to offer $175 Mn for ratifying the 
START-I Treaty before Ukraine joins the nuclear 
Non-proliferation Treaty. The size of the aid will depend on 
the scale and speed of the dismantling of nuclear weapons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59958 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptac001___94038" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Arms Control 

<DATE1>  18 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CENTRAL EURASIA </F>
<F P=101> KAZAKHSTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Lease Baykonur Cosmodrone From Kazakhstan 
Following Lengthy Negotiations </TI></H3>
<H4>   Quid Pro Quos </H4>
<F P=102> PM2712201593 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 28 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> PM2712201593 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Anatoliy Ladin and Oleg Falichev: "Russian </F>
`Nuclear Umbrella' Under the Kazakh Sun?"] 
  [Text] The talks between the delegations of the Russian 
Federation and the Republic of Kazakhstan in Almaty ended on 25 
December. A considerable part of those talks was devoted to 
military problems. 
  On the basis of the results of the meeting the heads of 
governments signed among other things the memorandum "On Mutual 
Understanding on Questions of Ensuring the Functioning of the 
Baykonur Space Center." Commenting on the documents presented 
for signing, Viktor Chernomyrdin, chairman of the Council of 
Ministers-Government of the Russian Federation, noted that they 
now make it possible to carry out all work at the space center 
normally and determine the procedure for the shipment across the 
border of the goods necessary for work to be conducted at 
Baykonur. The Russian military contingent is remaining here and 
its daily life and activity will be governed by Russian laws. 
  Viktor Stepanovich also added that the heads of the Russian 
and Kazakhstan governments have been instructed by those states' 
presidents to prepare documents on military and 
military-technical cooperation in January 1994. 
  What does the memorandum say? It is important that it speaks 
not only about the space center but also about the test ranges 
sited on the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan and about 
military cooperation. It is envisaged that Russia will use the 
military installations under lease from the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. In this regard the operation of the Baykonur space 
center and the test ranges will be ensured by the Russian 
Government or authorized organs of state administration. The 
Russian military formations supporting these installations are 
stationed on Kazakhstan's territory temporarily. Their status 
will be determined by a separate agreement. 
  During the talks process the heads of the Russian and 
Kazakhstan governments expressed mutual satisfaction at the fact 
that the Republic of Kazakhstan has affiliated to the nuclear 
weapons nonproliferation treaty as a state not possessing 
nuclear weapons. The Russian side has expressed a readiness to 
offer guarantees of safety to Kazakhstan as a nonnuclear weapon 
state together with other depositories of the nuclear weapons 
nonproliferation treaty and at the same time to give military 
assistance if necessary to repulse external aggression and to 
counter other encroachments on the security and territorial 
integrity of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
  The sides recognized the need to begin holding bilateral 
talks on the implementation of the START I treaty and the 
package of Lisbon accords as well as the need to agree a 
timetable in the very near future for the withdrawal of all the 
nuclear warheads in the Republic of Kazakhstan to Russian 
territory. 
  At the talks the sides also examined questions of scrapping 
the strategic offensive weapons stationed in Kazakhstan and to 
reimburse the republic the equivalent value of the fissionable 
materials and components of the nuclear weapons and so forth. 
  As we can see, they relate to the most acute and vital 
problems affecting the life and service of Russian servicemen in 
this republic. The fact that the ice has finally been broken 
here is perhaps the most important outcome of these talks. 
After all, people in uniform, for all their discipline and 
composure, must have clear prospects and guarantees of social 
and legal protection. Here, you would think, there is still 
broad scope for the work of the politicians and lawyers: In 
addition to Baykonur and the ranges there are other Russian 
military units stationed in Kazakhstan. For example, it has 
part of the missile early warning system. Status and the 
conditions for continued presence abroad must be defined for 
these units, too. Meanwhile, unfortunately, all they can do is 
wait and hope. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59959 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> BOLIVIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Leader of Coca Farmers Opposes U.S. `Zero Option' Proposal </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY2912140893 La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 17 Dec 93 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> PY2912140893 </F>
<F P=104>  La Paz PRESENCIA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cochabamba, 16 Dec -- Coca farmers from the tropical 
region of Cochabamba Department have ``energetically'' rejected 
the U.S. proposal called ``zero option,'' which calls for the 
total eradication of coca plantations. 
  William Condori, finance secretary for the Special 
Federation 
of Tropical Region Peasant Workers [FETCTC], told PRESENCIA: 
``We absolutely and energetically reject this proposal, and 
will not allow its implementation and the eradication of our 
coca plantations.'' 
  He explained that the ``zero option'' the ``gringos'' are 
proposing calls not only for the eradication of the so-called 
excess coca plantations, but also plantations intended for the 
``traditional'' use of the leaf. In other words, ``they want 
the to eliminate coca completely, so that not a single plant is 
left.'' 
  According to Condori, the U.S. proposal allows 18 months for 
the total eradication of excess coca plantations and 48 months, 
or four years, ``to put an end to the coca myth.'' He added: 
``To put an end to the coca myth is to end our culture, and 
that is out of the question; (the North Americans) will have to 
finish us off first.'' 
  The peasant leader explained that this new ``offense'' 
directed at coca farmers has been fully analyzed, and it has 
been decided that it is just ``another approach'' aimed at 
provoking the peasants, fostering violence, and militarizing 
coca-producing areas in order to eradicate coca plantations by 
force. ``There is just no other way,'' he said. 
  Condori recalled that in the past the North Americans had 
devised a ``low-intensity war'' which failed, adding that ``this 
onslaught will fail as well, because eradicating coca 
plantations means leaving thousands of Bolivian families without 
sustenance.'' 
  He emphasized that the peasants are not against drug 
enforcement. ``Drug trafficking is a different issue. The 
repression is aimed at coca farmers, not against the drug 
traffickers, and less still against the big fish who walk in and 
out of the U.S. Embassy. The target of the repression are the 
Bolivian peasants who cultivate coca,'' Condori emphasized. 
  He pointed out that coca farmers have declared U.S. 
Ambassador Richard C. Bowers ``persona non grata,'' and 
reaffirmed that the settlers in Chapare are organized to oppose 
``not only the zero option, but any other kind of repression 
that will take away our sustenance.'' 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59960 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> BOLIVIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   FELCN Arrests `Number One' Trafficker Gandarillas Soriano </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY2912124293 La Paz HOY in Spanish 17 Dec 93 section 2 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> PY2912124293 </F>
<F P=104>  La Paz HOY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Cruz, 16 Dec -- The Special Antinarcotics 
Force (FELCN) has confirmed the arrest of Rene Gandarillas 
Soriano, who is currently considered to be the number one drug 
trafficker in Bolivia, although FELCN Commander Lieutenant 
Colonel Gonzalo Butron stated that Gandarillas Soriano is just 
``one of the many fugitive drug traffickers.'' 
  It was learned that Gandarillas Soriano had been pursued for 
several months by the antinarcotics organizations, until he was 
located while having dinner with friends in the El Jacuu steak 
house. 
  The drug trafficker was sent to La Paz, but was returned to 
this city to face trial under the precepts of Law No. 1008. 
  According to antinarcotics authorities Gandarillas Soriano 
is 
linked to the case for which Juan Carlos Velez is being tried, 
and presumably has links with Nando Gutierrez Mansilla, who is 
currently jailed in Chonchocoro. 
  FELCN sources indicated that Gandarillas Soriano is a much 
more important trafficker than Logio Yoyo Nunez Vaca and 
Hernando Nando Gutierrez, who were arrested in the ``Without 
End'' and ``Gigantic White'' operations respectively. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59961 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> BOLIVIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister of Government on Colombian Cartel Connections </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY2912181193 La Paz HOY in Spanish 16 Dec 93 pp 6,7 </F>
<F P=103> PY2912181193 </F>
<F P=104>  La Paz HOY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Minister of Government German Quiroga has stated 
that drug trafficking has been getting worse because the 
traffickers use high technology and have effective means of 
communications, which make it difficult to catch any of them 
during interdiction operations. 
  He added, ``Nevertheless, our Special Antinarcotics Force 
(FELCN) is a source of pride for our country, because it has 
shown enough results to prove that it is the best of the 
continent despite its technological limitations.'' 
  Quiroga explained that there are some signs that the Cali 
cartel and other Colombian cartels are branching into Bolivia 
because of the pressure they are under in their own country. 
  ``Because of the severe pressure they are under in Colombia, 
the cartels are moving into certain areas of the Chapare region. 
Bolivian intelligence services are evaluating this situation,'' 
the minister said. 
  Quiroga added that the two large drug rings discovered in 
Bolivia this year, namely the Gutierrez affair in Santa Cruz and 
the Ferreira family in Cochabamba, indicate that there are 
connections with Colombian drug cartels. 
  ``We hope that these people do not actually come down here, 
and if it does happen we will try to stop them,'' Quiroga added. 
  According to Minister Quiroga the Chapare region in 
Cochabamba is divided into five areas which are full of coca 
plantations, way above the amount allowed for supplying the 
traditional use of coca leaves. In view of this Bolivia has 
made it clear to Edward Casey, U.S. assistant secretary of state 
for South American affairs, that it proposes to implement a 
policy of eradication taking into account the economic aspect of 
the issue. 
  ``Unless we are able to find an economic solution to the 
resulting loss of income for the coca farmers there is very 
little we can do to move forward. Therefore, an aggressive 
policy of industrialization must be devised to foster crop 
substitution in the region,'' Quiroga said. 
  He reiterated that approximately 90 percent of Chapare coca 
plantations are used to supply drug traffickers. 
  Minister Quiroga stated that alternative development 
projects 
have made significant headway because otherwise coca cultivation 
would have experienced an impressive growth. 
  ``Initial steps have been taken, and within the framework of 
the reorganization of the executive branch and of the rules and 
regulations on the duties of each ministry, the Alternative 
Development Fund has been restructured, establishing a board 
which has representatives from Chapare and Yungas,'' he added. 
  The idea is to work together with this fund in order to 
implement eradication policies together with alternative 
development projects, an approach which is different from 
interdiction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59962 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> COLOMBIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll Surveys Attitudes Toward Escobar's Death </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WD0134A Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 5 Dec 93 p 
3A </F>

<F P=103> 94WD0134A </F>
<F P=104>  Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] On the very day that the Search Bloc shot down Pablo 
Escobar, EL TIEMPO and the firm Yankelovich Innova de Colombia 
asked Colombians for their opinions on the final episode of this 
17-year history. The poll revealed that the majority would have 
preferred the voluntary surrender of the most wanted drug 
trafficker in the world. 
  Whereas 76.7 percent of those polled responded affirmatively 
to the question, ``Would you have preferred Pablo Escobar's 
voluntary surrender?'', only 14.2 percent replied that they 
would not. 
  Of the four cities surveyed (Bogota, Medellin, Cali, and 
Barranquilla), the latter had the most responses favoring 
surrender, with 82.5 percent affirmative answers. It was 
followed by Medellin, with 80 percent; Cali, with 79.7 percent; 
and Bogota, with 73.1 percent. 
  In Medellin and Cali, 11.4 and 8.7 percent, respectively, 
answered that they would not have preferred Pablo Escobar's 
voluntary surrender. 
  Nevertheless, the majority of those queried described the 
drug trafficker's death as a positive event. This claim was made 
by 48.3 percent, compared with 12.4 percent who considered it 
negative. It was immaterial to 30.3 percent of those polled. 
  In Medellin, however, Pablo Escobar's death was immaterial 
to 
the majority of persons (40.9 percent); whereas 33 percent 
regarded the event as positive, and 13.9 percent viewed it as 
negative. 
  In Cali, on the other hand, 48.1 percent replied that it was 
positive; 30.4 percent said that it was immaterial to them; and 
13.9 percent described it as negative. 
  As for the possible consequences of Pablo Escobar's death 
for 
the law and order situation and drug trafficking activity, those 
polled thought that there would be very few repercussions. 
  According to the results, 34.4 percent did not believe that 
the law and order situation would be affected, and over half 
expected drug trafficking activity to remain the same. 
  These are the optimists: 29.1 percent thought that the law 
and order situation would improve, and 29.3 expected the drug 
traffic to decline. 
  And these are the negativists: 11.5 percent claimed that 
drug 
trafficking activity would increase, and 23.5 percent expected 
the law and order situation to worsen. 
  Bogota residents, however, were more positive compared with 
those of Cali, Barranquilla, and Medellin because there were 
more in the nation's capital who thought that the law and order 
situation would improve than who expected it to worsen. 
  In Cali, on the other hand, a larger number of those queried 
claimed that the law and order situation would remain the same, 
representing 40.5 percent of the responses, while 25.3 percent 
expected it to worsen. Only 12.7 percent replied that it would 
improve. 
  In Medellin, 32.2 percent responded that the law and order 
situation would remain the same; 30.4 percent expected it to 
improve; and 20.9 percent thought that it would worsen. 
  With regard to drug trafficking activity, in Cali, for 
example, 58.2 percent of those polled replied that it would 
remain unchanged, whereas 26.6 percent claimed that it would 
decline, and only 8.9 percent expected it to increase. 
  In Medellin, 47.8 percent believed that drug trafficking 
activity would remain the same; 25.2 percent expected it to 
decline; and only 12.2 percent maintained that it would rise. 
  In the breakdown by sex, more women than men would have 
preferred Pablo Escobar's voluntary surrender. Similarly, more 
women than men expected the drug trafficking activity to remain 
the same. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Poll on Death of Pablo Escobar (in percent)                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|As an event, it is....                                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Positive                              |48.3                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Immaterial                            |30.3                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Negative                              |12.4                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Don't know/no answer                  |8.9                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Law and order situation                                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Not affected                          |34.4                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Will improve                          |29.1                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Will worsen                           |23.5                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Don't know/no answer                  |13                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Drug traffic                                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Will remain the same                  |52                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Will decline                          |29.3                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Will increase                         |11.5                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Don't know/no answer                  |7.2                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Would you have preferred voluntary surrender?                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yes                                   |76.7                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|No                                    |14.2                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Immaterial                            |6.0                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Don't know/no answer                  |3.1                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Source: EL TIEMPO - Yankelovich                                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  Poll Profile </H5>
  On 2 and 3 December (the same day and the one following the 
death of Pablo Escobar), EL TIEMPO and the firm Yankelovich 
Innova de Colombia began taking the public opinion poll. 
  The four questions were asked, by telephone, of a sample of 
500 persons in four cities: Bogota, Medellin, Cali, and 
Barranquilla. 
  The distribution was as follows: Bogota, 250 polled (50 
percent); Medellin, 113 polled (23 percent); Cali, 83 polled (17 
percent); and Barranquilla, 54 polled (10 percent). 
  A certain number of surveys were made in each city, based on 
the socioeconomic distribution of the Colombian population: 25 
percent representing the upper stratum; 60 percent, the middle 
stratum; and 25 percent, the lower stratum [as published]. 
  Of those polled, 41.4 percent were of the male sex, and 58.6 
percent, female. The majority had completed their studies for a 
high school diploma, or had a higher level education. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59963 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> COLOMBIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cali Cartel Leaders Evade Army-Police Search </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PA2912044493 Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 27 
Dec 93 pp 1, 6 </F>

<F P=103> PA2912044493 </F>
<F P=104>  Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brothers Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, 
accused of heading drug trafficking operations from Valle del 
Cauca Department, last weekend evaded a siege by combined Army 
and police units in the area of Juanchito, outside of Cali. 
  At least 150 Public Force members took over the area after 
receiving intelligence reports on the whereabouts of Cali Cartel 
members. According to the intelligence reports, the Rodriguez 
Orejuela brothers are reportedly attending the Cali Fair 
festivities, so the raids may yield results at any time. 
  However, the operation carried out last Saturday at the 
roadside taverns [estaderos] in Juanchito was foiled apparently 
because the lieutenants of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers 
managed to inform them of the military activity. The two main 
leaders of the Cali Drug Cartel were close to being captured 
this weekend during the beginning of festivities marking the 
36th Cali Fair. 
  The foiled special operation by state security agencies was 
carried out based on intelligence reports that detected the 
presence of Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela where the 
Cali festivities were being held. Approximately 15 soldiers 
placed several barricades on Saturday in the town of Juanchito, 
outside of Cali, after determining that the Cartel leaders were 
to attend the festival. After a seven-hour wait, the Public 
Force units did not achieve favorable results. 
  This report was aired yesterday by the NTC newscast, also 
adding that the Army suspects Cartel informants warned their 
leaders about the implementation of the operation to bust them. 
  Official spokesmen neither confirmed nor denied the 
information. They only said that the activities registered at 
the roadside taverns in Juanchito is customary during the 
festivities to avoid disturbances. That is why security forces 
are constantly patrolling the rest of the city. However, it was 
reported the operations to find Cali Cartel members continue and 
security forces may act in Valle del Cauca territory at any time 
following intelligence reports. This is how the Medellin Cartel 
was dismantled, the sources asserted. 
  The Cali Cartel controls over 70 percent of the cocaine that 
is sent to the United States, according to the U.S. DEA. Its 
main rival, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, capo of the destroyed 
Medellin Cartel, died on 2 December in a shoot out with the 
Search Bloc, when his haven in the Medellin suburbs was raided. 
  The authorities' operation during the Cali Fair could cause 
new inconveniences in implementing the policy of submission to 
justice announced one week ago by the Prosecutor General's 
Office, after holding several contacts with the attorneys that 
represent drug trafficking capos in Valle del Cauca. 
  The leaders of the drug trafficking organization in 
Cali--including brothers Miguel and Fabio Urdinola Grajales and 
Jose Santacruz Londono--are negotiating with the government the 
possible mass surrender of their members next year. However, 
the disproportionate demands made by these people prompted 
authorities to intensify their search. 
  Members of the Search Bloc--which ended its operations in 
Medellin following the death of Pablo Escobar--could reinforce 
these operations against Cali Cartel members in the next few 
days. Therefore, it is expected the search will intensify this 
week. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59964 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Strategies To Counter Drug Addiction in Northern Border 
States Discussed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016E Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 5 Dec 93 p 13-A </F>
<F P=103> 94WB0016E </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Owing primarily to the damaging influence of U.S. 
visitors and of Mexican emigrants returning to their places of 
origin, during the past five years a considerable rise has been 
observed in drug consumption. It involves mainly the so-called 
hard drugs (cocaine, morphine, heroin, etc.), consumed by the 
young population in the country's northern border zone. This 
disclosure was made by those in charge of programs of preventive 
action against drug addiction in Chihuahua, Baja California, 
Tamaulipas, and Sonora States. 
  In the context of the National Meeting on Strategies To 
Prevent Addiction, organized by the National Sports Commission's 
Social Crime Prevention Board, the speakers agreed in making the 
foregoing assertion. At the same time, they revealed that, in 
the border towns of their respective states, the drug addiction 
problem has worsened for the reasons mentioned, and also because 
of economic and social factors inducing the youth, in 
particular, from all sectors of society, to consume toxic 
substances. 
  Jose Luis Acevedo Lopez, representative of the Health 
Secretariat Agency in Baja California, for his part, stressed 
that, during the past two years, 96,000 persons between ages 14 
and 40 have been arrested on various charges involving 
addiction. He noted that, in the town of Mexicali alone, 50 
percent of that group were addicted to alcohol, a quarter 
consumed marijuana, and the rest were proven to have consumed 
hard substances. 
  The representative of the ``Buddies'' Civil Association of 
Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, and Piedad Huerta Armeros, in turn, 
disclosed that the rate of drug consumption in these northern 
zones of the country has risen. She attributed this to the fact 
that ``we are a transit area'' for large volumes of different 
types of drugs shipped to the United States. Some are left in 
the border towns and, since many people in the local areas are 
involved in drug distribution and sales, the youth, 
particularly, are encouraged to begin consuming those substances. 
  During the work sessions on addiction prevention and 
rehabilitation of addicts, held during the course of the meeting 
to exchange views on the problems in each of the regions, Ramon 
Murillo Ochoa, from the Tamaulipas agency of the Office of the 
Attorney General of the Republic, declared that it was 
discovered that the increase often originates in the consumption 
of socially accepted toxic substances, such as alcohol and 
tobacco. Hence, he emphasized, the high rate of consumption of 
the latter should be considered equally important, because they 
are the vehicle leading to others more harmful to consumers and 
to the society in general. 
  On this topic, the assistant director for institutional 
liaison of the National Council Against Addiction, Luis F. 
Cardenas, reported that the organization to which he belongs, 
through its state and municipal councils, is taking special 
action in the so-called ``high risk zones'' to reduce the menace 
of addiction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59965 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   100 `Narco' Runways Found in Juarez-Ojinaga </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016A Mexico City EXCELSIOR STATES SECTION in Spanish 5 
Dec 93 pp 1, 4 </F>

<F P=103> 94WB0016A </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR STATES SECTION </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondent Manuel Cabrera] </F>
  [Text] Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, 4 December--During an air 
operation, the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic 
[PGR] detected 100 clandestine landing strips in the 
Juarez-Ojinaga region (an area adjoining the border), used by 
South American aircraft to refuel and to smuggle cocaine into 
the United States. This announcement was made today by the 
Federal Judicial Police regional commander, Javier Norona 
Guerrero. 
  The operations, associated with a program to curb the 
international drug traffic, were concentrated on the border 
between Mexico and the neighboring country to the north. There 
the forces, promptly backed by helicopters and ground units, 
began destroying the runways. 
  The Federal Judicial Police first commander, Jose Maria 
Barragan, explained that the counternarcotics operations have 
been supported with over 135 flight hours logged during the past 
15 days. He remarked that the air units have flown over both the 
Rio Grande shores in Valle de Juarez and extremely dense 
sections of the Tarahumara sierra. These areas have been used by 
the drug cartels for refueling their planes and moving drugs to 
the United States. 
  Norona Guerrero, in turn, noted that backing has been 
requested from the Communications and Transport Secretariat, for 
the purpose of identifying the specific runways that have 
permission to operate. 
  In the future, to prevent the drug traffickers' aircraft 
from 
evading the blockade, which they could do by flying at low 
altitudes, several PGR planes will engage in constant patrolling. 
  The commander also announced that reinforcements of 
machinery 
would be requested, so as to totally destroy the airstrips. 
However, he indicated: ``This work will be strenuous, because of 
the rugged terrain selected by the `narcos' for constructing 
this type of access.'' 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59966 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Conferees View Current Drug Trafficking Situation </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016B Mexico City EXCELSIOR STATES SECTION in Spanish 5 
Dec 93 pp 1, 3 </F>

<F P=103> 94WB0016B </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR STATES SECTION </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eduardo Chimely] </F>
  [Excerpts] Guadalajara, Jalisco, 4 December--The profits of 
the drug trafficking groups operating in Mexico have increased, 
because in 1991 they represented $500 billion, and the 1993 
figure is $800 billion: equivalent to eight times the nation's 
foreign debt. This disclosure was made today at the Colloquium 
on the Drug Traffic, Security, and Human Rights. 
  Those participating in the event agreed that now that the 
Colombian drug trafficker, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, is dead there 
will be many others to take his place. 
  The director of strategic studies at the National Institute 
To Combat Drugs, Efren Ortiz Villasenor, commented, ``Much 
attention is being paid to the effects of the drug traffic, and 
not so much to its causes; however, we must make use of 
prevention.'' 
  He declared: ``Education is the most important factor 
enabling people to develop a critical capacity, because 
conducting campaigns with moralistic or censuring focuses brings 
no results.'' 
  He stressed, ``It is no longer a matter of merely fighting 
drug consumption and trafficking. Rather, it entails a more 
ambitious effort: determining how to achieve a rational control 
over them. 
  ``The drug traffic, attacking the nation's fundamental 
values, should be viewed as a national security problem, and all 
the necessary resources should be activated to prevent it.'' 
[passage omitted] 
  Alejandro Reyes Posada, a researcher from the Institute of 
Political Studies and International Relations at the National 
University of Colombia, claimed that the illegal status of drugs 
``has created an artificial market with large profits. The more 
their trafficking and production are repressed, the greater the 
increase in the drug dealers' profits.'' 
  He emphasized that the illegal status of the latter's 
activity induces them to protect their interests by using 
violence and corrupting civil servants. 
  He also noted: ``The most dangerous threat to any country's 
security insofar as the Mafias are concerned is that they become 
associated with big capital, because of the lucrative nature of 
the drug trafficking business and its great capacity for 
violence. As a result, movements of a fascist type appear.'' 
  He indicated, ``The genuine weapon of societies in their 
battle against those groups is the reinforcement of the state, 
the law, and justice, as well as of democracy and civilian 
society. 
  ``Involving university students in the discussion and 
understanding of the problem is part of an effort to organize 
and strengthen societies, so as to prevent the Mafias engaged in 
this illicit business from absorbing and destroying them.'' 
  The rector of the University of Guadalajara, Raul Padilla 
Lopez, observed: ``In our time, the drug traffic has become a 
serious public security problem. It is impossible to disregard 
the frequent occasions on which the battle against it has led to 
violations of individual guarantees and human rights.'' 
  He added that a global problem such as the one described 
demands solutions of an equal magnitude, which do not exempt 
nations from a clear commitment to combat it within their 
borders. It also requires ``an extensive, pluralistic dialogue 
with society.'' 
  The state attorney, Leobardo Larios Guzman, who opened the 
meeting representing Governor Carlos Rivera Aceves, claimed that 
fighting the drug traffic is not an exclusive function of the 
government system, because the whole society, through its 
various sectors, is also committed to it, particularly in the 
area of prevention. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59967 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Police Destroy 39 Marijuana and Poppy Plantations in 4 States </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016C Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 5 Dec 93 pp 45-A, 
47-A </F>

<F P=103> 94WB0016C </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz] </F>
  [Text] While making various reconnaissance and inspection 
flights seeking crops in Sinaloa, Sonora, Jalisco, and Guerrero 
States, the Federal Judicial Police destroyed 39 marijuana and 
poppy plantations located on over 94,000 square meters in sierra 
regions of those states. According to estimates, if those crops 
had been harvested, they would have accounted for the production 
of at least 20 tons of drugs. 
  Based on reports sent to the Federal Judicial Police General 
Directorate, headed by Commander Adrian Carrera Fuentes, Sinaloa 
State reported the manual destruction and incineration of 20 
cannabis indica plantations detected in the townships of Imala, 
Jesus Maria, and Batequis, and in the vicinity of the Sanaluna 
Reservoir, all part of the municipality of Culiacan. 
  Southeast of Imala, the Federal Judicial Police destroyed, 
by 
reducing to ashes, approximately 31,000 marijuana plants 
discovered on an expanse of 7,600 square meters. In the same 
township, five more crops were burned, and an average total of 
64,000 canamo bushes was detected on 16,000 square meters. 
  Moreover, near the Sanaluna Reservoir in Culiacan, agents 
assigned to the campaign against drug production located 2,000 
square meters planted with marijuana, destroying 8,000 of the 
drug bushes. In the township of Bateque, an additional 7,200 
plants of the same drug were uprooted and incinerated by federal 
agents. In Jesus Maria and Imala, the destruction of 484 and 
1,120 square meters, respectively, planted with marijuana, was 
reported. In the first instance, 1,936 plants were found; and in 
the second, 4,840. 
  The agency in Sonora State, for its part, announced that, 5 
km from the settlement of Buenaventura, two more marijuana crops 
were destroyed and incinerated on an area of 475 square meters. 
Approximately 18,000 drug bushes were detected on that farm. 
Furthermore, southeast of the Adolfo Ruiz Cortines Reservoir, 
the Federal Judicial Police destroyed nearly 69,000 cannabis 
indica bushes, found on an expanse of 16,900 square meters. 
  In Jalisco, as well, on the farm known as El Agostadero in 
the municipality of Cabo Corrientes, 21,600 drug plants were 
destroyed and burned, after their discovery on 5,400 square 
meters of land. Implements for harvesting marijuana, a 
12-caliber shotgun, and over one kg of seed of that drug were 
also found there. 
  Finally, Federal Judicial Police forces assigned to Guerrero 
State reported that, in the municipality of Zumpango de Neri, on 
a site known as Las Lagunitas, nearly four hectares were found 
planted with poppies. They discovered 387,000 plants on the 
site, as well as 150 kg of mineral fertilizer, and hose for 
irrigation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59968 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   PJF Seizes Over Two Tons of Marijuana in 4 States </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016D Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 5 Dec 93 pp 45-A, 
47-A </F>

<F P=103> 94WB0016D </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz] </F>
  [Excerpt] During the past few hours, dried and packed 
marijuana weighing over two tons was seized by Federal Judicial 
Police [PJF] agents in Sonora, Tamaulipas, Michoacan, and 
Sinaloa. A part of the shipment was detected on a tank truck, 
and another on the deck of a boat. These confiscations prompted 
the capture of at least five presumed drug traffickers. 
  In Hermosillo, Sonora, PJF agents seized a shipment 
consisting of a ton and 560 kg of cannabis indica on a tank 
truck presumably abandoned on the corner of 30th and 40th 
Streets. Based on the investigations, it was determined that the 
vehicle, with Federal Public Service plates 910-UD, owned by the 
Trans-Gas Company, had been left on the aforementioned site for 
three days, possibly awaiting the arrival of someone to retrieve 
it. 
  For the tank's inspection, part of the fuel that it 
contained 
had to be extracted first, so as to search the inside. There, 
166 packages of the drug, distributed in sacks, cardboard boxes, 
and plastic bags, were discovered. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59969 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Coahuila Cartel' Chief, Accomplices Captured </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WB0016F Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 3 Dec 93 p 1-A-2 </F>
<F P=103> 94WB0016F </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City EXCELSIOR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Federico Ortiz Medina] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday, Jose Alfonso Villalobos Moreno, ``capo'' 
of the ``Coahuila cartel,'' was captured with several of his 
accomplices after a confrontation with agents of the Federal 
Judicial, Federal State, and Federal Highways and Ports Police. 
He was captured at his farm in Buenaventura, in the municipality 
of Matamoros, Coahuila. There, one of the many outstanding 
arrest warrants against the notorious drug trafficker and chief 
of the ``Los Villalobos'' ring was executed. 
  Thus, the criminal organization was dismantled, with four of 
its members apparently killed in the shootout; while two others 
were arrested, and one police officer was wounded. 
  The report from the Federal Highway Police regional 
commander, Rodolfo de Leon Barranco, described the incidents at 
the drug trafficker's farm when police from various forces 
arrived to execute one of the numerous warrants for the arrest 
of the ``mafioso,'' perpetrator of various crimes in the 
country's principal northern states. The police chief confirmed 
the participation of members of the Coahuila Federal Highway and 
Ports Police detachment in the operation for the capture of 
Villalobos. 
  The police chief claimed that a confrontation occurred on 
that site, in which four criminals, members of the ring and 
guards of Jose Alfonso Villalobos Moreno, were killed. Two 
others were captured, and a police officer was wounded. He 
remarked that the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic 
had coordinated the operation for Villalobos's capture, because 
it is in charge of the investigation of the ``Los Villalobos'' 
ring. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59970 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> PERU </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Destroys Coca Plantations, Maceration Pits </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY2812205293 Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 10 Dec 93 p A24 </F>
<F P=103> PY2812205293 </F>
<F P=104>  Lima EL COMERCIO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bagua, 9 Dec -- During the past few days the Army 
has destroyed 500 hectares of coca plantations and 28 maceration 
pits in the provinces of Condorcanqui and Bagua (Amazonas 
Department). 
  Brigadier General Carlos Grigoletto Cortijo, commander of 
the 
5th Jungle Infantry Division, said that this operation was 
supported by the authorities and campesino communities in the 
area. 
  He added that more than 20 people were arrested and that so 
far 28 maceration pits built close to the plantations have been 
destroyed in the provinces of Bagua and Condorcanqui. He 
indicated that an important volume of precursors for the 
production of drugs was also seized. 
  Grigoletto Cortijo stated that 500 hectares of coca 
plantations were destroyed in the Santa Maria de Nieva area. 
Local residents have reported that there are more coca 
plantations further up the Nieva River. This region can be 
reached by motor boats and other types of transportation. 
  He indicated that the strong pressure against traffickers in 
the Central Huallaga area has caused many of them to move to El 
Muyo, Miramar, Salinas, Montenegro, Chiriaco, and Santa Maria de 
Nieva in the provinces of Bagua and Condorcanqu, where they have 
planted coca and constructed maceration pits. 
  Grigoletto Cortijo said there are many native communities in 
those areas and the chiefs of these communities are persuaded to 
support the planting of coca. ``The large sums of money paid by 
the traffickers convinces many of the chiefs to support the 
planting of coca in their territories.'' 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59971 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> LATIN AMERICA </F>
<F P=101> PERU </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jan-Oct Police Antidrug Operations Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY2812221293 Lima EL PERUANO in Spanish 12 Dec 93 p A5 </F>
<F P=103> PY2812221293 </F>
<F P=104>  Lima EL PERUANO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Peruvian National Police, through the National 
Antinarcotics Directorate (Dirandro), have seized more than 8 
tonnes of basic cocaine paste and cocaine hydrochloride and 
arrested more than 4,000 persons for the illegal trafficking of 
drugs during operations at the national level between January 
and October 1993. 
  Dirandro has also seized valuable chemicals, war materiel, 
laboratories, houses, and communications equipment. 
  To October 1993 the Dirandro has carried out 3,358 
operations 
and arrested 4,353 persons. 
  Dirandro agents who are active in the daily fight against 
trafficking say the breaking up of drug organizations throughout 
the country is the result of intelligence operations. 
  Dirandro considers the Huallaga area to be important because 
it is one of the main regions where cocaine is produced. 
  Dirandro agents say that the various police departments in 
the area cooperate closely in the capture of traffickers and use 
special intelligence equipment. 
  Dirandro agents also operate in the Maranon, Tambo, Ene, 
Tambopata, and Aguaytia coca basins. 
  Operations have been intensified to locate the production 
centers that harm the country in Caballococha and in the Amazon 
Trapezium. 
  Peruvian Air Force planes control the airspace, 
complementing 
the land and river actions carried out by the other 
organizations. 
  Dirandro is acting against the retail sale of drugs and the 
control of chemicals in urban areas. In accordance with Decree 
No. 25023, the police organizations implement the rules and 
regulations regarding chemicals and drugs and determine the 
control operations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59972 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CHINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Society for Prevention, Treatment of Drug Abuse 
Established </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2912041893 Beijing GUANGMING RIBAO in Chinese 14 Dec 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK2912041893 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUANGMING RIBAO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By corrrespondent Chen Guangman (7115 0342 2581): ``Public </F>
Health Minister on Drug Abuse in Our Country''] 
  [Text] Beijing, 13 Dec -- In recent years, there have been 
frequent incidences of the abuse of imported and expensive 
drugs, steroids, painkillers, tranquilizers, and antibiotics in 
our country, according to a convention today inaugurating the 
Chinese Society for the Prevention and Treatment of Drug Abuse. 
Therefore, it is a matter of great urgency to begin the 
prevention and treatment of drug abuse in our country. 
  According to the convention, drug abuse is a social problem 
that endangers public health and is one which faces the 
international community. The WHO lists drug abuse as the abuse 
of anesthetics, medicines for psychiatric treatment, tobacco, 
alcohol, and dissolvable organic substances. In our country, 
there is close government and nongovernment attention to the 
abuse of alcohol and tobacco and their hazards. But problems 
such as the abuse of non- anesthetic drugs and treatment with 
addictive pain-killers have not yet received wide attention. A 
poll of 1,822 households in the Beijing urban area in 1988 found 
that the drug- dependency rate originating from the abuse of 
prescribed medicines was 0.309 percent of those polled, half the 
drugs they depended upon were, on the whole, fever medications. 
Another special poll of 4,139 medical workers in 10 city and 
district hospitals in Beijing toward the end of 1989 reported 
that of the 96 drug dependents, 76, that is 79.2 percent, were 
on sleeping pills and sedatives. Investigations by the 
departments concerned show that middle-aged and young people 
account for the majority of the 250,000 drug addicts in our 
country, concentrations of whom extend from the Yunnan borders 
to Guizhou, Sichuan, Gansu, Shaanxi, and Guangxi, involving some 
700 counties in 17 provinces, cities, and autonomous regions. 
Statistics from the Public Health Ministry's AIDS Monitoring 
Center show that by November 1993, 60 percent of the nation's 
HIV carriers became infected by injecting heroin intravenously. 
  Public Health Minister Chen Minzhang said in his address 
that 
anesthetics and psychiatric medicines are indispensable in 
medical work and, properly administered, ease pain and protect 
health. But, if they are abused or illegally manufactured and 
sold, they become poisonous drugs and cause harm. He therefore 
stressed that in preventing and treating drug abuse, we must 
learn from countries around the world about their successes in 
combating drugs. It is hoped that the newly founded Chinese 
Society for the Prevention and Treatment of Drug Abuse will, 
under the centralized leadership of governments at all levels, 
launch mass prevention and treatment; mobilize circles in 
society to campaign widely and educate people against drug 
abuse, targeting the effort above all at adolescents and youths; 
work in coordination with the government departments concerned 
to prevent drug abuse; and work for the health of our country's 
people. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59973 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST ASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Narcotics Roundup for 27 Dec-2 Jan </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK0301082194 </F>
<F P=103> BK0301082194 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on narcotics developments in South Asia, Southeast Asia, 
and the Pacific monitored by Bangkok Bureau between 27 December 
1993 and 2 January 1994. Source information is given in 
parentheses after each item. 
<H5>  Pakistan </H5>
<H5>  Nigerian Arrested on Heroin Charges at Karachi Airport </H5>
  The Customs Drug Enforcement Cell arrested Nigerian national 
Saliu Lasisi at Karachi's Quaid-e-Azam International Airport on 
25 December. The suspect was aboard an Ethiopian Airlines 
flight bound for Lagos via Addis Ababa. Officers found 4.2 kg 
of heroin powder concealed in cavities inside of 30 wooden 
hangers in his luggage. (Islamabad THE NATION in English 27 Dec 
93 p 12) 
<H5>  Peshawar Customs Seizes 8.25 Kg of Heroin </H5>
  Acting on a tip about a drug shipment, Peshawar Customs 
established a checkpoint near Hayatabad Chowk. When a vehicle 
attempted to avoid the checkpoint, the officers gave chase. The 
driver later abandoned the vehicle. Officers found 8.250 kg of 
heroin. (Peshawar THE FRONTIER POST in English 31 Dec 93 p 3) 
<H5>  Burma </H5>
<H5>  Officials Seize 10.319 Kg of Opium From Passenger Bus </H5>
  Officials from Defense Services Intelligence and the special 
antidrug squad stopped and searched a passenger bus at Lashio 
checkpoint on 10 November. They seized 10.319 kg of raw opium 
from two passengers. (Rangoon THE NEW LIGHT OF BURMA in English 
19 Nov 93 p 7) 
<H5>  Indonesia </H5>
<H5>  Police Seize 120 Kg of Marijuana, Arrest Two </H5>
  Police antinarcotics officers from Medan Precinct uncovered 
a 
drug syndicate on 30 December, seizing 12 bales of marijuana 
weighing 120 kg. Officers arrested a 43-year-old woman 
identified as S. BR. P., and a 35-year-old identified as Wah. 
They were caught while negotiating over the price of the 
marijuana, a police spokesman said. (Jakarta ANTARA in English 
1321 GMT 31 Dec 93) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59974 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST ASIA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Narcotics Roundup for 20-26 Dec </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK2812050293 </F>
<F P=103> BK2812050293 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on narcotics developments in South Asia, Southeast Asia, 
and the Pacific monitored by Bangkok Bureau between 20 and 26 
December 1993. Source information is given in parentheses after 
each item. 
<H5>  Pakistan </H5>
<H5>  Attock Police Seize 24 Kg of Heroin, Arrest Two </H5>
  Acting on an informer's tip that a large quantity of 
narcotics was going to be smuggled from the Northwest Frontier 
Province to Punjab, Attock police stepped up surveillance at one 
of their checkpoints. After stopping a car, they discovered 24 
kg of high- quality heroin hidden in secret compartments. The 
car's occupants, Haroon and Hashim Seyyed, were arrested. 
Haroon said he worked for Razi Khan, a smuggler from Jamrud, 
and his partner Khan Faqir Khan of Lahore. Haroon said he 
received 7,000 rupees per trip, and that his companion received 
2,000 rupees. He was told that if he was arrested, his 
household and legal expenses would be paid. He confessed to 
smuggling narcotics twice before to a gas station situated 
between Pathoki and Diyanala Khurd. (Rawalpindi JANG in Urdu 21 
Dec 93 pp 8, 6) 
<H5>  Burma </H5>
<H5>  Defense Intelligence Unit Seizes Phensedyl in Haka </H5>
  On 25 November, members of the Defense Services Intelligence 
Unit seized 70 bottles of phensedyl weighing 7.5 liters from a 
couple during a surprise check in front of a People's Police 
Force station in Haka. (Rangoon THE NEW LIGHT OF BURMA in 
English 9 Dec 93 p 7) 
<H5>  Authorities Seize 3.9 Kg of Opium in Mogaung Township </H5>
  On 1 December, members of the Defense Services Intelligence 
Unit, the special antidrug squad, and the People's Police Force 
searched Maung Nyo, 22, as he was riding a bicycle in Zaygon 
Ward, Mogaung Township. They discovered three packets of opium 
weighing 3.919 kg. (Rangoon THE NEW LIGHT OF BURMA in English 11 
Dec 93 p 7) 
<H5>  Bus Passenger Arrested With 3.4 Kg of Opium </H5>
  Acting on a tip, members of the Taunggyi special antidrug 
squad searched a passenger bus coming from Loikaw, Phekon, and 
Pinlaung at the Tigit police station on 19 November. A woman 
was arrested for possessing 3.429 kg of opium. (Rangoon THE NEW 
LIGHT OF BURMA in English 11 Dec 93 p 7) 
<H5>  Three Suspects Arrested on Heroin Charges </H5>
  Acting on a tip, members of the Defense Services 
Intelligence 
Unit searched Cho Naing, 31, in Taunggyi on 10 December. They 
seized 0.088 kg of heroin. The authorities also arrested Tun 
Min, 15, with 1.184 kg of heroin in two plastic containers in 
his knapsack. Based on their confessions, the authorities 
arrested Hla Han, 31, and seized 47 packets of heroin weighing 
0.062 kg. (Rangoon THE NEW LIGHT OF BURMA in English 14 Dec 93 p 
7) 
<H5>  Opium Fields Destroyed in Pinlaung Township </H5>
  Members of the Defense Services regional regiment, the 
People's Police Force, and the Defense Services Intelligence 
Unit -- along with ethnic Pa-O people from Special Region No. 6 
and local people -- destroyed 25 opium fields covering 387.15 
acres on the slopes and gullies between Minshu and Htadovlle 
Twnship in early December. (Rangoon THE NEW LIGHT OF BURMA in 
English 15 Dec 93 p 7) 
<H5>  Indonesia </H5>
<H5>  Nepalese Arrested With 3.56 Kg of Heroin </H5>
  Police seized 3.56 kg of heroin from a 23-year-old Nepalese 
man identified as R.M. on 13 December. The man arrived at 
Sukarno-Hatta International Airport from Thailand on Garuda 
Indonesian Airlines Flight GA 862. Customs officers found the 
heroin in the bottom of his traveling bag, covered with clothes. 
(Jakarta THE JAKARTA POST in English 16 Dec 93 p 3) 
<H5>  Laos </H5>
<H5>  Customs Officials Burn Seized Marijuana </H5>
  On 11 December, Customs authorities burned 57 kg of 
marijuana 
at the Lakhonpheng District Customs office in Saravane Province. 
The marijuana had been seized from a passenger bus on 6 
November. (Vientiane Vitthayou Hengsat Radio Network in Lao 0000 
GMT 22 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Philippines </H5>
<H5>  Narcotics Command Arrests Two Suspected Drug Dealers </H5>
  Narcotics Command agents have arrested Chinese native Oscar 
Chua, 49, and Winston Lo, alias Winston Go, a Chinese national 
from San Fernando, Pampanga. The two are suspected of being 
``big-time drug dealers'' and are believed to be among Manila's 
major methamphetamine hydrochloride distributors. (Manila THE 
MANILA CHRONICLE in English 16 Dec 93 p 3) 
<H5>  Navy Confiscates 100 Kg of Shabu in Navotas </H5>
  The Navy has turned over 100 kg of shabu (methamphetamine 
hydrochloride) to the National Bureau of Investigation. The 
drugs had been transferred from ship to ship until they ended up 
on a fishing boat in Navotas, where they were confiscated from 
members of the 1st Coast Guard District. (Quezon City GMA-7 
Radio-Television Arts Network in Tagalog 0930 GMT 24 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Singapore </H5>
<H5>  Indian National Charged With Cannabis Smuggling </H5>
  On 23 December, Indian national Utthirapathy Sundar Rajan, 
40, was charged in the subordinate court with importing nearly 
1.8 kg of cannabis. He was arrested on 21 December at Changi 
Airport. Under the law, anyone convicted of importing more than 
500 grams of cannabis faces the death penalty. (Singapore 
Singapore Broadcasting Corporation in English 1100 GMT 23 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Thailand </H5>
<H5>  Three Arrested in Bangkok With 90 Kg of Heroin </H5>
  Acting on a tip, police arrested Chimaporn Kaewsawang, 41; 
Rangsita Kaewsawang, 45; and Ketkaew Saisima, 30 in Lard Prao, 
Bangkok on 23 December. The three were allegedly trying to 
smuggle 90 kg of heroin out of the country. (Bangkok BANGKOK 
POST in English 24 Dec 93 p 8) 
<H5>  Canadian Tourist Arrested With 640 Grams of Heroin </H5>
  Canadian tourist John Eya, 39, was arrested at Bangkok's Don 
Muang Airport on 24 December as he was about to leave for New 
York via Singapore. Authorities seized 640 grams of heroin. 
(Hong Kong AFP in English 0446 GMT 25 Dec 93) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59975 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST ASIA </F>
<F P=101> THAILAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   American Citizen Arrested at Airport, 1.4 Kg of Heroin Seized </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BK0301062994 Hong Kong AFP in English 0920 GMT 2 Jan 94 </F>
<F P=103> BK0301062994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bangkok, Jan 2 (AFP) -- An American man was arrested 
at Bangkok's international airport Sunday on charges of 
possessing and trafficking in heroin, an anti-narcotics official 
said. 
  Gregory Shaun Cooks, 33, of Austin, Texas, was arrested as 
he 
was about leave for Taiwan. The official said 1.4 kilograms (3.1 
pounds) of heroin were seized. 
  Convicted drug traffickers face the death penalty in 
Thailand 
but the sentence is usually commuted to a lengthy prison term. 
  About two-thirds of the 1,200 foreigners in Thai jails have 
been jailed for drug offences. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59976 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jptdd001__l94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TDD-94-001-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Narcotics 

<DATE1>  3 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> EAST ASIA </F>
<F P=101> THAILAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Suspected Drug Lord's Business Ventures in Chiang Mai 
Examined </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WD0124A Bangkok THAN SETTHAKIT in Thai 31 Oct 93-3 Nov 93 
pp 17, 23 </F>

<F P=103> 94WD0124A </F>
<F P=104>  Bangkok THAN SETTHAKIT </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] On 29 October, an investment 
project got underway in Chiang Mai--the largest investment 
project ever started. 
  This land development project that has caused such a stir is 
called the Little Duck Chiang Mai Square project. It will be 
built on 300 rai of land along the superhighway not far from the 
railroad station. Approximately 10 billion baht will be 
invested. It has 12 major components, including a 
30,000-square-meter department store, a 700-room hotel, an 
amusement center, a water park, an amusement park, a marketing 
center, and a commodities market. It will take five years to 
complete. It would be difficult to find another investor who 
could match its size in terms of the land alone. [passage 
omitted] 
  The company behind the Little Duck Chiang Mai Square project 
is the Little Duck Group. And when you talk about this group, 
you think of ``Sia [Godfather] P. Pet,'' or Thanong 
Siriprichaphong. This man is well known is many circles, 
including business and political circles. He is also well known 
for getting what he wants and for taking risks. There is an aura 
of great mystery surrounding him. 
  The company's name is Little Duck, but Sia P. Pet [duck] 
does 
not resemble a ``little duck.'' He has built his reputation in 
various ways, and it is difficult to see and understand things. 
To say that he is a ``wild animal'' or that he is ``without 
form'' isn't correct. There really isn't very much information 
about him. It's said that he ``waits'' in dark corners. Most of 
the things said about him are just rumors about his business 
background and how he spends his free time. Sia P. Pet rarely 
gives interviews and he refuses to talk about himself. The best 
a reporter can hope for is one or two answers to his questions. 
  He was born in Si Chiang Mai District, Nong Khai Province, 
on 
24 February 1952. He earned a liberal arts degree from the 
University of Honolulu. He came from a middle-class family. 
After he completed secondary school, his family moved to Nakhon 
Phanom Province and began exporting and importing forest 
products and scrap iron from Laos. He got rich by selling 
various items to American military bases during the period when 
there were large numbers of American soldiers in Nakhon Phanom. 
He is married to Pratsarai Siriprichaphong, the former president 
of the Nakhon Phanom provincial council. 
  Superficially, it appears that the only businesses operated 
by the Little Duck Group are the three Little Duck hotels in 
Pathaya and Chiang Rai. The Little Duck Pathaya Hotel, which 
changed its name from Pathaya Resort Hotel, is home to one of 
the best-known discos in Pathaya, the Sea Sand Club Resort, 
opposite Nong Nut Park. And there are two Little Duck hotels in 
Chiang Rai. But actually, there are 21 companies in this group. 
The most recent addition to the group is the Little Duck Land 
Development Company, the owner of the huge project in Chiang 
Mai. This is a sign that the Little Duck Group is taking the 
offensive in land development activities. 
  At the end of 1992, the Little Duck Group owned 19 
companies. 
One that people have probably heard about and will remember is 
the Little Duck Travel Agency Ltd., which was granted the right 
to advertise on Television Channel 9, Communications Authority 
of Thailand, during the period that Police Captain Chaloem 
Yubamrung served as minister attached to the Office of the Prime 
Minister. Later on, problems arose, charges were filed, and the 
company lost the case in court. 
  In 1986, [the group] purchased the Rin Hotel from Saengduan 
na Nakhon. Over the course of several years, administration was 
improved and the hotel was then sold to the Khwoyuha Group of 
Winnu Khuwanon. Before the Pathaya Resort Hotel become the 
Little Duck Pathaya Hotel, there were reports that it too had 
been sold. And there have frequently been rumors that the Little 
Duck Chiang Rai hotels were going to be sold. People have 
criticized Sia P. Pet for ``building hotels and then selling 
them if he can make a good profit.'' And after the hotel 
business in Chiang Rai went into a slump and prices were 
slashed, there were rumors that he had offered to sell his 
hotels to Chatri Sophanaphanit for 800 million baht. But Sia P. 
Pet is still the owner. When the Welcome Plaza and Welcome Chom 
Thian Beach hotels of his brother, Rungruang Siriprichaphong are 
included, the hotels owned by the Little Duck Group have a total 
of 1,800 rooms. 
  The main asset now held by the Little Duck Group is land. It 
is estimated that Sia P. Pet owns at least 2,000 rai. Most of it 
is in excellent locations just waiting to be developed. These 
sites are located in major cities such as Chiang Mai, Chiang 
Rai, Pathaya, Phuket, Samui, Nakhon Phanom, and Bangkok. In Doi 
Hang Village in Chiang Rai, he owns more than 500 rai. When THAN 
SETTHAKIT asked P. Pet how much land he owns, he said, ``I can't 
reveal that.'' But what he did tell THAN SETTHAKIT was that in 
the future, his group plans to focus mainly on land development 
because the economy is improving. Besides the large project in 
Chiang Mai, other projects that will get underway next year 
include the construction of a large open-air market and bus 
station in Nakhon Phanom, which will cost 300-400 million baht. 
There is also the Doi Hang Village land development project in 
Chiang Rai, which calls for the construction of semi-resort 
guest houses where visitors can enjoy nature and the atmosphere. 
Another project is to build a hotel in Phuket. When asked how 
many projects the group has planned, Sia P. Pet smiled and, as 
usual, said, ``I don't want to discuss that.'' 
  ``At present, I spend most of my time on politics, 
particularly visiting people. As for business activities, I am 
already set. I can move ahead on my own. I have a team and a 
board of directors that monitors things.'' 
  Besides the Little Duck of Sia P. Pet, which is moving 
forward at great speed, Rungruang Siriprichaphong is preparing 
to move ahead, too. Rungruang owns more than 400 rai of land in 
good locations in Pathaya, Siracha, Laem Chabang, and Ao Udom. 
The market price of this land is about 8-10 million baht per 
rai. Rungruang said that he is preparing to develop it and build 
several housing development projects. He has much experience in 
this in both Pathaya and Bangkok. The Sin Thani housing 
development, the first project, will probably be completed by 
the beginning of 1994. 
  Rungruang thinks that the economic situation is quite 
favorable. Next year, the economy will certainly pick up. 
Interest rates have now declined. ``When an opportunity arises, 
we have to invest in order to improve our cash flow. Having 
property only is not good. You have to convert some of the 
property into cash.'' 
  Probably only a few people know that Rungruang made great 
inroads in Bangkok when he invested jointly with the Imperial 
Group in the Imperial World Lat Phrao project. Rungruang is both 
a shareholder and the deputy managing director of the company. 
This is because the 30 rai on which the project was built 
belongs to him. But Rungruang modestly said that he doesn't own 
very many shares. His relations with the Imperial group have led 
to talks about having the Imperial group open a branch in Chiang 
Mai in the Little Duck Chiang Mai Square project. 
  Turning back to Sia P. Pet and his political activities, Sia 
P. Pet, or Peter as he is called in English, has been involved 
in politics for a long time. He first won a seat in parliament 
as a member of the Social Action Party in 1983 and was a 
``disciple'' of ``Achan Mom.'' [Khukrit Pramot] But in 1986 he 
changed parties to be with ``Loem Daothiam'' [Chaloem Yubamrung] 
and ran against General Mana Rattanakoset, the former leader of 
the People's Party. Sia P. Pet was defeated then. The third 
time, in the 1988 election, he moved and relied on the prestige 
of ``Kamnan Po,'' that is, Somchai Khunplum, a well-known figure 
in the eastern region. He ran in Chonburi but was defeated 
again. At the beginning of 1992 he ran in Nakhon Phanom. This 
time, he joined forces with General Mana and ran as a member of 
the People's Party. He again failed. In the second election of 
1992, Sia P. Pet finally managed to win as a member of the Thai 
Nation Party. That time, General Mana did not run. 
  Sia P. Pet faces another major political battle now that 
General Chawalit Yongchaiyut, the leader of the New Aspiration 
Party, has moved his base from Nonthaburi and plans to run in 
Nakhon Phanom in the same zone as Sia P. Pet. Many people 
predict that in the next election, he will lose for the fourth 
time. But Sia P. Pet has said that he will do his best. He has 
no plans to leave politics. He is very worried but this is 
pressuring him to work every harder. ``I am not afraid. I will 
fight hard. Whether I win or lose is up to the people.'' 
  On the political front, Sia P. Pet faces a very tough 
challenge. But on the business front, Sia P. Pet, or the Little 
Duck Group, does not risk defeat. Instead, this is a time when 
the group is beginning to spread its wings and soar. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
