
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31674 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_i_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Two Civilians Wounded in Muslim Attack on Teslic </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Two Civilians Wounded in Muslim Attack on Teslic </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406104394 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1003 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406104394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Doboj, 14 Jun (TANJUG) -- Muslim forces have been 
active on all battlefields in the Doboj area, the information 
service of the republic of Srpska army's 1st Krajina Corps said 
today. Muslims fired several artillery shells on Teslic from 
the direction of Tesanj. Two civilians were injured in the 
attack and material damage was caused. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31675 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_i_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  21 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tuzla Defended by Civilian Volunteers </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tuzla Defended by Civilian Volunteers </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0303B Trieste REPUBLIKA in Slovene 21 May 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0303B </F>
<F P=104>  Trieste REPUBLIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Partisan Townspeople Are Fighting </F>
Against the Regular Serbian Army"] 
  [Text] Tuzla--They are professors, students, workers, and 
farmers. They are all dressed in the same uniforms, their shirts 
are usually "civilian," and they wear handknit 
sweaters--probably made by their mothers or wives. Those Muslim 
fighters want to return to their families as soon as possible. 
Although they rarely talk about revenge, they reject any 
negotiations that would take away their land and houses. The 
commander of the Blue Helmets in Sarajevo, Andre Soubirou, 
recently described the Muslim fighters as "an army of 
townspeople, partisans," who are fighting against "Serbian 
professional soldiers." "It is the armed populace, as Tito 
envisioned and wanted it," stated a certain military member of 
the UN Protection Forces. 
  Thirty-two-year-old Kemal Hodzic was a driver before the 
outbreak of the war, and now he commands a company on Mount 
Kocar, which lies southeast of Tuzla, where the Muslim units 
carried out a lightning offensive. He is from Bratunac, a 
village approximately 30 kilometers away, which was "cleansed" 
by the Serbs in May 1992. His mother and father were murdered by 
the Serbs, and his wife and 10-year-old daughter fled to Tuzla. 
Soldier Rafa Dzufic is fighting on the first front line near 
Tuzla, in the vicinity of the strategic corridor near Brcko. The 
ruins of his house are only about 200 meters away; he returned 
from Austria "to defend his family and relatives." 
Twenty-nine-year-old Nadja Otici from Brcko can only observe the 
fields and roofs of his birthplace from a distance. He does not 
hide his feelings. The front line is at the end of a valley, and 
for more than a year he has not had any news about his family. 
Hakia Hodzik, likewise 29 years old, was an officer in the 
former Yugoslav Army. Now he commands the First Muslim Brigade 
on Mount Podrina, and he also conducted an offensive near 
Kladanj. Like all the others, he is also a volunteer, who fled 
from the valley along the Drina together with his fellow 
townsmen before the Serbian ethnic cleansing. One of his 
soldiers acknowledges: "We will fight to the last man. We want 
our land back. We will stop only when the bank of the Drina is 
ours again." The Drina marks the border between Bosnia and 
Serbia, and all the Muslims have been driven out of the villages 
that lie along the river. The area is now in Serbian hands, and 
the self-styled republic of Srpska is not prepared to give it 
back. 
  "We will not accept any diplomatic solution that will 
dictate 
to us that we have to give up our land," Kemal says. He 
resolutely adds: "We will remain armed and we will fight." His 
fellow fighters also agree with him; they reject the 
politicians' attempts to persuade them to accept a "realistic" 
solution. The commanders of the units in this area complain that 
they do not have modern weaponry, with which they could have 
saved many of their fighters' lives. They can only attack the 
armored Serbian units with obsolete antitank shells. Farmers 
usually bring them food and ammunition with teams of horses. 
  "Every four days we get a loaf of white bread, and otherwise 
we only eat black bread," said a gaunt soldier who is no more 
than 20 years old. He interrupted his studies during the Bosnian 
war, but he hopes that he will someday become a machinery 
engineer. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31676 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_i_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Views of Bosnian Serbs Opposing Karadzic </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Views of Bosnian Serbs Opposing Karadzic </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0294B Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 23 May 94 pp 12-14 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0294B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Mirko Pejanovic, member of </F>
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, and Miro Lazovic, chairman of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Assembly, by Svetlana Vasovic-Mekina; place 
and date not given: "City-Dwellers and Mountain-Dwellers"] 
  [Text] What the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina is now 
launching are campaigns in an attempt to defend an integral 
Bosnia-Herzegovina by cutting off the corridor, which would 
force Karadzic to sit down at the negotiating table. 
  Dr. Mirko Pejanovic, a member of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Miro Lazovic, president of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Assembly, as representatives of the Serbs in 
the Bosnia-Herzegovina Government, recently returned, via 
Ljubljana, from an official visit to Moscow where they met with 
Vitaliy Churkin and top-ranking representatives of the Russian 
Orthodox Church. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] Whom do you actually represent? 
  [Pejanovic] After the first multiparty elections in Bosnia, 
the victorious parties arrogated the right (and the SDS [Serbian 
Democratic Party] institutionalized this in particular) to 
represent all of their own nation. This is a dangerous formula 
of "representation," both for the nation and for democracy, 
because a nation can never be represented by just one political 
party if we want to have a multiparty system. As far as the 
Serbian Civic Council is concerned, it was formed by an assembly 
of citizens of Serb nationality who live in free territory, 
territory under the control of the government and Army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We stand for those citizens. Accordingly, 
through the Serbian Civic Council we do not represent, but 
rather stand for, those citizens in Bosnia-Herzegovina (around 
200,000 of them) who both before and during the war were and 
remained in favor of coexistence with Muslims and Croats, in 
favor of an integral Bosnia-Herzegovina and equality of the 
nations. I am chairman of the Serbian Civic Council and a member 
of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, while Lazovic is the 
president of parliament and a member of the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
War Presidency. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] Is it not paradoxical that on the one hand 
you, as representatives of civic parties, oppose blocs of 
expressly nationalistic parties while on the other hand you 
stand for Serbs? 
  [Pejanovic] In our case, by organizing citizens of Serb 
nationality an association of citizens was created, which is not 
a party organization. 
  [Lazovic] It is not our ambition to replace the SDS as a 
national party. Over the course of the peace process that has 
been going on for two years now, it has been necessary to oppose 
Karadzic's and Milosevic's policy so that the world will finally 
realize that they cannot speak on behalf of all Serbs. We 
continue to stand for the civic option and believe that 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as a civic state is the best solution for all 
its citizens, including the Serbs. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] As representatives of a portion of Bosnian 
Serbs, what do you think of the policy of other Bosnian Serbs 
being represented by Radovan Karadzic? 
  [Lazovic] The idea that he represents all Bosnian Serbs has 
been taking shape for a long time, as if there is not a single 
Serb opposed to his political option. If that were the case, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina would have been partitioned long ago. 
  [Pejanovic] One of the reasons for our public actions is to 
remove the collective burden that Karadzic's and Milosevic's 
policy has placed on the shoulders of the Serb nation. We 
believe that the Belgrade regime and the exponent of that regime 
in Pale bear the blame for what has happened in the territory of 
the former Yugoslavia, and that the Serb nation on the whole did 
not want war, at least not the percentage of it claimed by 
Karadzic, so that this was the best way for Serbs themselves, 
within their own nation, to oppose the expansionist, 
greater-state policy of Slobodan Milosevic. On the other hand, 
we want to show the world community that an enormous percentage 
of the Serbs living on free territory do not support Karadzic's 
policy, and that an enormous number of Bosnian Serbs have fled 
territory controlled by Karadzic and his exponents, not wanting 
to take part in a war against their state and neighbors. Indeed, 
the figures put Karadzic against a wall--right now 40 to 45 
percent of the Serbs who lived in the territory that he controls 
are unavailable to him. And even of that 45 percent, an enormous 
number does not support his policy, but since a regime of 
coercion and totalitarianism is in control there, it appears 
that all those Serbs are in favor of his policy. It is not known 
that an enormous number of them have fled, roaming Europe with 
Bosnian Croats and Muslims, and that is why it is high time to 
expose this false image of him and us that has been created in 
the world. They want to resolve everything through force, 
through war; true, they are a factor that must be considered in 
the course of the negotiations, although they can represent only 
one faction within the Serb nation, the chetnik faction. An 
enormous number of Serbs are for the civic option, the peace 
option, not for war. We want these Serbs to be heard. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] All the same, it appears that the world 
media are bashful about devoting attention to you, since you 
ruin the image that has been created about all Serbs in public 
opinion. Indeed, it seems that thus far it has not been in the 
interest of the Bosnia-Herzegovina authorities to show the 
world, at the height of the war and shelling of Sarajevo, that 
there are in fact other kinds of Serbs? 
  [Pejanovic] Unfortunately, the world media are already 
accustomed to gauging everything according to national leaders, 
regardless of what they do. 
  I think the very worst about politicians who pursue policy 
through war. We are among the people and public employees who 
would prefer a thousand times over to talk, not for a single 
second to wage war.... It is true that the entire European world 
has accepted the formula that there are three nations, three 
parties, and three leaders in Bosnia, and that only what they 
say is important to Europe, so that multiparty life has also 
been ignored within the Bosnia-Herzegovina Government. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] What are the prospects for negotiations 
with 
representatives of the same nation, with Karadzic? 
  [Pejanovic] What is one to think of people who base their 
policy on God-given, inherited strength? Karadzic gained 
strength in the form of the JNA [Yugoslav People's Army], aimed 
at waging war in the name of Greater Serbian interests. And what 
is one to think of a policy that uses force to drive people from 
their age-old homes en masse? What is one to think about a 
policy that murders people? About a policy that thrives on 
hatred toward people who belong to another nation or another 
religion, even though they have lived in this region for 
centuries in mutual tolerance? Karadzic was not born in Bosnia, 
he simply completed his schooling and studies in Bosnia. And now 
he is fighting, with force, for the idea of the impossibility of 
ethnic mixing in Bosnia-Herzegovina. He is destroying 
coexistence by force. That is the Greater Serbian policy that he 
brought with him from his native Montenegro. It is a policy that 
separates Serbs from the neighbors with whom they have lived 
together for centuries, that separates them into national pens, 
into ethnically pure areas. What does it mean today, at the end 
of the 20th century, to carry out a policy of ethnic cleansing, 
genocide, a criminal policy? 
  [Lazovic] I have participated in all the negotiations in 
Geneva and Washington. Despite all the efforts to keep 
everything on a diplomatic and sober level, there were often 
occasions where we had to react emotionally to their incoherent 
proposals. For example, their proposal that everything must be 
divided, meaning that there must be separate roads for Muslims, 
Croats, and Serbs. The original solution was an 
intersection--the Serbs take the overpass and the Muslims take 
the underpass: They presented such absurdities to us in all 
earnest, with maps and drawings.... To our question about how 
the citizens of Sarajevo would get to Zenica, Karadzic said, 
literally: "Dig a tunnel under Kobilja Glava!" which is one of 
the mountains above Sarajevo. That is very indicative of those 
who are deciding the fate of the Serb nation in an extremely 
frivolous and irresponsible way. Milosevic's and Karadzic's 
policy have forced the Serb nation into a moral, material, and 
spiritual calamity that the Serb nation never deserved, because 
never before has it borne the stamp of the aggressor, it has 
always been the victim. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] Does it not seem, ultimately, that this 
policy of Karadzic and Milosevic has in fact been successful; 
the world accepts them as parties in the negotiating process? 
  [Pejanovic] We differ from others in that we believe that 
people must now secure international guarantees that they can 
return to their own homes, and that the question of a 
territorial partition of Bosnia-Herzegovina according to ethnic 
criteria is criminal. For us, it is not possible to resolve the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina war drama through military force, but only 
through political negotiations aimed at stopping the war and all 
military operations, as well as enemy propaganda, and at making 
the Serb side accept a formula according to which 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is a unified state in which the equality of 
all three nations would be institutionalized through federal 
institutions. If that is not accepted, the war will simply 
continue. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] How can the war be stopped if now, for 
example, the Bosnia-Herzegovina Government's troops are engaging 
Karadzic's army and attacking Brcko? 
  [Lazovic] The position of the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina is 
legal, in pursuit of our political goals. On the one hand, we 
want to defend Bosnia-Herzegovina and block the full 
reconstitution of any future Serb ethnic state and its 
connection to Krajina in Croatia, while on the other hand there 
is the project to realize a Greater Serbia, which would undercut 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as a sovereign and independent state. We 
advocate a modern, civic republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina in its 
territorial borders and believe that that would be most suitable 
to Bosnian Serbs as well. What the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina is 
now launching are campaigns in an attempt to defend an integral 
Bosnia-Herzegovina by cutting off the corridor, which would 
force Karadzic to sit down at the negotiating table.... 
  [Pejanovic] Let us look at the facts--who took the offensive 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina? If it had been the Army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, then we might have controlled 70 or 80 
percent of the territory; Karadzic's army would not hold 70 
percent of the territory if it had not taken the offensive. 
Today they are circulating the theory that they are forced to 
continue fighting because they are facing an offensive by the 
Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina, which they call the Muslim army, 
which is a profanity. Concretely speaking, the Brcko front 
serves the purposes of the propaganda war, in a desire to 
project a continuation of the war. The Army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina has spent the whole time in a position of 
defense and resistance, and in that way it has managed to defend 
some places and regain some of them. The policy of the legal 
institutions of Bosnia-Herzegovina is to break off military 
operations and engage in negotiations and the search for 
political solutions. Our government did everything it could to 
find a political solution with so-called Herceg-Bosna, i.e., the 
Croat national corpus, in the form of the Washington agreement. 
That was not a wonderful solution, holding forth milk and honey, 
but at least military operations were halted through this 
constitution of peace. The same thing is sought from the 
so-called Karadzic side. Instead of that, he offers us an 
offensive against Gorazde. We have stopped Gorazde, and now 
Brcko is being opened up as a propaganda ploy. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] You said that it is a profanity to call the 
troops of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Government a Muslim army. 
Besides Kladanj, can you cite any other example where Serbs are 
fighting on your army's side? 
  [Lazovic] The Tuzla region is an example of a joint 
government in power, where people of different nationalities are 
trying to jointly defend themselves against the greater-state 
appetites of Karadzic's army. For two years, Serbs in Sarajevo 
have experienced together with Muslims and Croats all the 
horrors of the biggest concentration camp maintained by 
Karadzic's Serbs from the surrounding mountains. 
  [Pejanovic] The Serb victims of shells in Sarajevo alone are 
enough to condemn Karadzic as a war criminal. In terms of 
inhabitants, Sarajevo was the biggest Serb city after Belgrade. 
And it still is today: Inside it there are still between 60,000 
and 70,000 people of Serb nationality. Why is that hushed up in 
Belgrade, and who will bear responsibility for that?! According 
to some analyses, more Muslims than Serbs have left Sarajevo. 
The Serbs are the ones who have remained in Sarajevo in all the 
structures of life to work and continue fighting, to defy 
Greater Serbian aggression. By working in joint institutions of 
government, we have allowed the Serbs to preserve their 
political and human honor, both in Sarajevo and in Tuzla and the 
entire territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Lazovic] During the first months of the war, two shells 
that 
fell in front of the building where I live and where children 
were playing killed seven children. Of the seven, five were Serb 
children. Were these children traitors? The theory that the 
Serbs who have remained in Bosnian cities are traitors is the 
fruit of chetnik ideology. In this context, we are traitors: I 
am personally a traitor to a chetnik ideology, and I will never 
support a Greater Serbian policy. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] Are you not afraid that the Bosnian 
Government will use you publicly as honorable Serbs and that you 
could be misused in its political activity? 
  [Pejanovic] No, because we have always acted in the interest 
of peace and coexistence in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Permit me to 
turn the question around: What would have happened to the other 
Serbs if Mr. Lazovic, I, and many other Serbs had not 
participated in institutions of power and shared responsibility 
with others for the fate of the state? What would have happened 
to Serbs in cities and villages all over Bosnia, where even 
today they live peacefully with their neighbors, if we had not 
defended our Bosnia? What would have happened, in the end, if we 
had not opposed the extremists within Bosnian politics, if we 
had not contributed to seeing to it that Cacina, Jukina, and 
other paramilitary units were transformed and that control over 
security was assumed by a professional Bosnia-Herzegovina army 
and a well-organized police? 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] You participated in the Washington 
negotiations, but the Serbs are not included in the current 
constitution for a new Bosnian federation? 
  [Lazovic] That is understandable. It is not possible to be 
constitutive twice--once within Bosnia-Herzegovina as a whole 
(Karadzic's Serbs--author's note) and then again, separately, 
within the current federation. The Washington agreement is open 
to everyone. If Karadzic accepts the negotiations, then the 
Serbs too will gain the same status within an integral 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as all the other nations. If not, then Serbs 
in Bosnia, thanks to Karadzic's policy, will in fact become a 
minority. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] What then? 
  [Lazovic] In that case, we are left with the possibility of 
fighting for adequate national, but most of all civil and human 
rights for Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina without the status of a 
constitutive nation. 
  [Vasovic-Mekina] What sort of guarantees did Churkin give 
you 
in Moscow? 
  [Pejanovic] We were pleasantly surprised when he confirmed 
that the entire world is united in the effort to preserve the 
integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Churkin literally told us, let 
the war stop for one year, even with temporary maps, and that 
will be enough for the drunkards of war and the extremists to 
leave their positions.... We presented to Churkin our views, the 
views of all Serbs who do not agree with Karadzic's policy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31677 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK President on Upcoming Talks With Croatia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK President on Upcoming Talks With Croatia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306150194 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1332 GMT 13 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1306150194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Knin, 13 Jun (TANJUG) -- The fact that the Croatian 
delegation [to negotiations with the Krajina Serbs] accepted 
Plitvice as a venue for talks on economic cooperation with the 
Krajina delegation is a kind of recognition of the republic of 
Serb Krajina [RSK], said RSK President Milan Martic at a news 
conference in Knin today. 
  He said that the protocol for the talks was agreed with 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces]. Krajina official bodies will 
provide security at the talks. The official Krajina insignia 
will be displayed in Plitvice except in the conference hall. 
  A single Croatian journalist will be allowed to attend the 
talks. This is based on the principle of reciprocity since one 
Krajina reporter was present at the recent talks in the Russian 
Embassy in Zagreb. 
  Asked about the implementation of the Zagreb agreement by 
the 
Republic of Croatia, Martic said that he discussed this with 
Butrus-Ghali's special envoy, Yasushi Akashi, and with 
UNPROFOR's head of civil affairs in Sector South, Enrico 
Aguillar. Martic said he was given guarantees that Croatia will 
implement the provisions of the [Zagreb] agreement before the 
Plitvice round of talks. 
  President Martic also commented on the latest statements by 
Croatian officials about the reintegration of Krajina into 
Croatia and their threats about a new war. We are closely 
following the situation and we are ready to respond to a 
possible Croatian reaction, Martic said, adding that he received 
guarantees in Geneva that such behavior by Croatia will be 
rigorously sanctioned by international factors. 
  The talks in Plitvice will primarily deal with economic 
issues based on the principle of reciprocity. Certain 
humanitarian issues should also be discussed, such as pensions 
blocked by the Republic of Croatia immediately after the 
outbreak of the war. In the long term there can be no permanent 
cooperation with Croatia without annulment of UN Security 
Council resolution 820 which left the Serb nation in the RSK in 
a specific kind of isolation, Martic said, adding that there can 
be no political and economic cooperation without the equality of 
the partners. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31678 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Territorial Dispute With Slovenia Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Territorial Dispute With Slovenia Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306105394 Rijeka NOVI LIST in Serbo-Croatian 7 Jun 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306105394 </F>
<F P=104>  Rijeka NOVI LIST </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by David M. Fistrovic: "The Croats Are Building on </F>
Their Land!"] 
  [Text] Today, the Croatian metropolis and the first among 
the Croats will receive the President of the Republic of 
Slovenia Milan Kucan. The Slovene is coming for the sake of 
bilateral relations and most probably also to discuss 
Croat-Slovene border-dispute, nuclear power plant, Ljubljanska 
Banka, and a series of other unsolved problems burdening 
relations between the two young countries. He stated for 
Slovene Television he was meeting the Croatian president to 
personally protest about the border crossing in Istria, the one 
in Secovlje. The Croats are allegedly building the border 
crossing on disputed territory that belongs to Slovenia, and the 
Slovenes have already filed a protest about it and threatened to 
strain relations and spread the malice in the media (the Slovene 
foreign minister had managed to halt the construction of that 
border crossing once but not for good). The Slovene president 
will most probably bring up the question of some allegedly 
Slovene villages on the left bank of the Dragonja (Skodelin, 
Buzin) which did not participate in the last elections in 
Slovenia and which raised an incredible amount of dust in 
Slovensko Primorje. The inhabitants of those villages were not 
on the election lists and a part of the Slovene press considered 
this to be a betrayal of national interests. Croatian Istria, 
keenly interested in the controversial border crossing and the 
said villages, calmly stood by watching the euphoria on the 
other side of the Dragonja, expecting Kucan's visit to Croatia, 
hoping that the Croatian president would tell him how the 
Istrians feel. 
  On what grounds and with how much right will Kucan cite some 
facts from Istria directly to his host? It is more likely that 
the Slovene will spend more time talking about his (i.e. 
Slovene) delusions than about actual rights at the delta of the 
Dragonja and villages like Skodelin and Buzin. Those villages 
and the Dragonja River are undoubtedly on Croatian territory. 
The Istrians have known that from time immemorial and it was 
also recently proved by Ljubo Boban, who has been researching 
the history and the circumstances of the Croat-Slovene border in 
Istria after World War II. 
  What, then, do those new documents say about the land on 
which Croatia is building one of its most beautiful entrances to 
Istria and about villages that did not go to latest elections in 
Slovenia? 
  Some 20 documents that Boban presented to the Croatian State 
Commission for Borders give Mr. Tudjman the right to reject all 
the territorial demands of his guest and ask several very 
unpleasant questions (about returning land registers which are 
presently in Piran, moving the Dragonja River, or about the 
arrogation of the river's delta). The Croat can tell his 
Slovene counterpart with a clear conscience that, by requesting 
that Croatia stop working on the border crossing in the 
Plovanija-Skrile (Secovlje in Slovenian) sector, Slovenia is 
making direct territorial pretensions toward Croatian territory. 
And he would be telling the truth. 
<H5>  Skudelin and Buzin -- Belong to Croatia </H5>
  President Tudjman should first study the map from 1945 that 
his guest will refer to and on the basis of which he claims the 
disputed area of the Dragonja, saying that Croatia is building a 
border crossing on the plot of land that belongs to the 
cadastral municipality of Piran III. The map is a supplement of 
publication "Cadastre National d'Istrie" [National Land Registry 
of Istria] that was made in Susak in 1945 to be used at the 
Paris peace conference. The publication contains all relevant 
information about the population, the land registry and 
administrative division in Istria of 1945. The controversial 
map (drawn by the Adriatic Institute of the Yugoslav Academy of 
Arts and Sciences) clearly shows that, in 1945, the land 
registry borders of the municipalities of Piran (today in 
Slovenia) and Kastel (today in Croatia) overlapped with the 
administrative and political border. Already on pages 525-526 
of the document the map is attached to, one can see that the map 
does not correspond to the actual situation. Those pages show 
that the administrative and political division at the estuary of 
the Dragonja was different after all: the villages of Buzin, 
Kaneda, Skudelin, and Veli Malin were registered as belonging to 
the municipality of Kastel, the district of Buje. 
  President Tudjman should present some other documents from 
that period to Kucan, for example the "Administrative and 
Territorial Division of the District of Buje in 1945," which 
says that the villages of Skudelin, Veli Malin, Kaneda, and 
Buzin -- on Victory Day on 9 May 1945 -- belonged to the 
territory of the Kastel People's Committee. From 
"Administrative and Territorial Division of the District of Buje 
of 15 March, 1946," it is obvious that the villages of Skudelin 
and Buzin belonged to the Local People's Committee Kaldanija, 
the district of Buje. Furthermore, Kucan should also see 
"Submission of the District of Buje" of 1946, which says that 
"the district of Buje stretches between the rivers Mirna and 
Dragonja and that its eastern border are the villages of 
Kucibreg and Zavrsje." The document proves that Skudelin, Veli 
Malin, Kaneda, and Buzin belong to the territory of the People's 
Committee of Kastel. 
<H5>  Never in Slovenia </H5>
  In the year 1947, when the peace agreement with Italy was 
signed and the territory of Free Territory of Trieste (STT) was 
established, as well as the so called Istrian District composed 
of two sub-districts Buje and Kopar, the controversial building 
site also belonged to Croatia. The decision about the 
establishment of the Istrian District clearly mentions Skudelin 
and Buzin. The "Administrative and Territorial Division of the 
District of Buje" for 1947 puts the villages of Molini Scrile 
(Molini, Skrile), Scodelin (Skudelin), and Canedo (Kaneda) under 
the People's Committee of Kaldanija; the same document for 1948 
again mentions Skudelin (Scodelin) and Buzin (Busin) as parts of 
the People's Committee of Kastel. The "Background for the 
Regional Index of the Istrian County of 21 April, 1949" shows 
that Buzin and Skudelin fall within the territory of the 
People's Committee of Kastel. Those villages also belong to 
Croatia in accordance with the decision by the Istrian Regional 
People's Committee of 12 April, 1952. The decision assigns them 
to the district of Buje and to the cadastral municipality of 
Kastel I. 
  Even when the order by Yugoslav Army Military Administration 
of 1952 abolished the Istrian County and when, on 7 October, 
1954, the area of what used to be known as the STT Zone A was 
assigned to the civilian administration of the FNRJ [Federal 
National Republic of Yugoslavia], those villages were in 
Croatian municipality of Buje. Areas south of the present course 
of the Dragonja (the so called cadastral municipality of Piran 
III) were transferred to Croatia. This territory became and 
integral part of it and it was so noted in all municipal, 
republic, and former federal regulations. As we can see from 
all those documents, the territory has never been a part of 
Slovenia, it has never belonged to the administrative and 
political unit of Piran, nor to the district of Kopar, and 
therefore not to Slovenia either. 
<H5>  Groundless Claims </H5>
  If, in conclusion, we wonder what the dispute is about -- as 
does Ljubo Boban -- on what grounds does Slovenia claim the area 
of the so called cadastral municipality of Piran III, it must be 
said that those claims are groundless. Croat-Slovene 
demarcation in that area, from the outset, was not made 
according to land registry criteria, but on an ethnic basis, 
always in relation to the Dragonja River. In the world it is 
normal that such border be also "covered" in the land registry. 
There is nothing unclear about that. 
  Furthermore, President Tudjman could ask his eminent visitor 
when Slovenia intends to return court (land registry) books for 
the area of the cadastral municipality Piran III? Land registry 
documentation for that municipality was semi-officially given to 
the Land Regristy of the Municipality of Buje in 1963, but not 
the court land registry. It was kept by the court in Piran and 
those who are not well-versed in the matter use it as an 
argument claiming that area as Slovene. And when his guest 
starts telling him to his face everything regarding the 
Plovanija border crossing and accuses him of sabotaging the 
agreement on borders in Istria, President Tudjman will, 
hopefully, have the courage to say: "But Mr. Kucan, those 
problems have not been solved because of Slovene institutions' 
blackmail with documentation." 
  That documentation, according to Boban, must be 
unconditionally and immediately returned to Croatia. 
  Moreover, President Tudjman should ask his guest the 
following question: where is the Dragonja River? For decades 
this Croatian river has been moved from its bed by Slovenia, 
which pushes it deeper and deeper into Croatia and then refers 
to it as the border. The Croats could substantiate that by 
Italian military maps which clearly show that the bed of the 
Dragonja was once to the north of the St. Odorika channel in 
which the Dragonja flows into the sea. Mr. Tudjman could also 
show Mr. Kucan the map published by the Statistic Office of the 
Regional People's Committee for Slovensko Primorje and Trieste 
in 1947. That map also shows the Dragonja in its northern bed. 
<H5>  Planned Moving of the Dragonja </H5>
  From the landing of the allied forces in Normandy until the 
present, the course of the Dragonja has always belonged to the 
municipality of Buje, i.e. to the area that was included in 
Croatia after 1945. Therefore, the area should not and must not 
be a matter of agreement, especially as it was an integral part 
of Croatia at the time it declared its independence in 1991. 
The history of the area to the north of the St. Odorika channel 
and the earlier bed of the Dragonja shows that its ownership has 
become a matter of dispute only recently. In February 1944, 
according to the agreement between Croat and Slovene partisans, 
the Dragonja River was marked as a borderline of administrative 
and territorial demarcation. Some 10 years later, Slovenia 
started to move the river and create conditions for conquering 
Croatian territory. Today, it is blindingly obvious that the 
moving of the course of the Dragonja was planned and that it was 
moved from its original bed to the bed of the St. Onorika 
channel in order to get as much of Croatian territory as 
possible. Such a perfidious moving of borders is not tolerated 
by any court in the world. 
  By moving the river, the Republic of Slovenia gained control 
over the area between the two river beds. Researcher Ljubo 
Boban, however, could not find a single act according to which 
that very sector would be specially regulated. Therefore, the 
area should be discussed in a separate agreement between Croatia 
and Slovenia and it should be viewed separately from the 
question of the present course of the Dragonja (the so called 
Piran III). 
  The northern course of the Dragonja itself is not and cannot 
be disputed. 
  Convinced that historian Tudjman knows all this, the 
Istrians 
calmly await the results of Slovene-Croat talks in Zagreb, 
firmly believing that the ominous prediction "Kucan in Zagreb -- 
Zagreb in trouble" will not come true. 
  After this round of negotiations, the Bay of Piran will 
remain the biggest bone of contention in relations between 
Croatia and Slovenia. The border in that bay has not hitherto 
been regulated by any bilateral act and this is where one will 
be forced to apply international law on so called flank 
demarcation. All in all, it will not be Kucan and Tudjman who 
will pull the chestnuts out of the fire, but some other group of 
politicians. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31679 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ruling Party Official Says No Early Elections </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ruling Party Official Says No Early Elections </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306101194 Split NEDJELJNA DALMACIJA in Serbo-Croatian 1 
Jun 94 pp 7-8 </F>

<F P=103> AU1306101194 </F>
<F P=104>  Split NEDJELJNA DALMACIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jure Radic, Croatian Democratic Community </F>
secretary general, by Ante Gugo; place and date not given: 
"There Will Not Be Early Elections"] 
  [Text] Jure Radic, secretary general of the Croatian 
Democratic Community [HDZ], has lately been impossible to reach 
for an interview. His excuse was that the time is not right for 
giving interviews until the negotiations with the opposition are 
over. After much insisting and persuasion, and after saying that 
the representatives of the opposition make public appearances 
while the other side is silent, Radic agreed to give us an 
interview. As practically the second man of the state, Jure 
Radic is always an interesting interviewee, but the topic of 
this conversation was defined in advance by unsolved personnel 
problems in the Assembly. Obviously, this time we are not 
talking about mere political haggling, but about a process that 
could, in the next couple of years, define important political 
processes in the state, so we tried to focus our questions on 
that subject and reveal present positions of the ruling party. 
It is indeed strange that the HDZ, though it claims it has the 
majority, still agrees to make compromises that sometimes grow 
into blackmail. 
  [Gugo] As we speak (Tuesday evening), the media are 
revealing the information about new positions in negotiations 
between the HDZ and the opposition, which has reiterated the 
demand to annul the session of the Chamber of Representatives. 
What do you think about that? 
  [Radic] It is an unreasonable demand. That which is legal 
and constitutional, and does not go against the Standing Orders 
of the Parliament, cannot be annulled at the request of the 
opposition or any other political factor. The Croatian Assembly 
is a legislative institution defined by the Constitution and 
activities in the Assembly cannot be dealt with as controversial 
outside the Assembly. Therefore, the work of the Assembly can 
only be discussed by its legal bodies. All proposals of the 
opposition are based on the allegation that, for the time being, 
there are no other deputies in the Assembly except those 
representing the HDZ, which is not true. However, even if it 
were true, the work of the Assembly would be legal and 
legitimate provided that the HDZ has the majority vote. There is 
no reason to question the legality of its work. 
  [Gugo] If that is so, i.e., if there is a quorum in the 
Assembly, why do you persist in reaching an agreement with the 
opposition? 
  [Radic] We showed that the Assembly, in which the HDZ has 
the majority in both chambers, must work so as not to threaten 
the functioning of any other institution in Croatia. Many 
activities are dependent upon the work of the Assembly and we 
were aware of that. On the other hand, we wanted to hear out 
all proposals and suggestions of other political parties in 
order to use everything that might contribute to the general 
prosperity and interests of the Republic of Croatia. We do not 
want to use the power of majority at all times and work like 
that with regard to all activities of the Assembly. We have 
been trying to reinstate the opposition in the Assembly, to the 
benefit of the Croatian state. Nothing bad will come out of 
that. However, we will not do so at all costs. If they will 
not accept our good intentions, we are helpless. I am deeply 
convinced that the representatives of the opposition have left 
the Assembly quite unnecessarily. We are prepared to make 
certain compromises, but only provided they do not bring the 
essence of the functioning of Croatia into danger. That means 
we will not accept that what is legal and legitimate be declared 
illegal for the sake of political agreements. We understand and 
accept the new situation in the Assembly, and we are prepared to 
cooperate in accordance with the new circumstances, but only if 
that is politically correct. 

<H5>    More In Than Out </H5>
  [Gugo] Why is the HDZ against Mr. Mesic and Mr. Manolic as 
vice presidents of parliamentary chambers? 
  [Radic] The Club of the HDZ Deputies gave the freedom of 
choice to every deputy to decide as he or she thinks fit. We 
did not want to put pressure on anybody. I would not say that 
the HDZ does not accept certain individuals, since the HDZ did 
not make decisions with regard to individual members of the 
opposition. Mr. Mesic and Mr. Manolic were not accepted because 
the majority of parliamentary deputies, voting of their own free 
will, did not want to elect them. Those people have probably 
had their reasons for doing so. I think that the strongest 
reason for voting against them was that they left the HDZ, and 
turncoats always arouse indignation. The second reason are the 
letters written by Manolic and Mesic, which are negative about 
Croatia and which were sent abroad. 
  [Gugo] A couple of days ago, Bozo Kovacevic, secretary 
general of the Croatian Social Liberal Party, was the guest star 
of an OTV [Youth Television] broadcast. On that occasion, in a 
discussion with Drago Krpina [HDZ deputy; currently advisor to 
the president on military matters], he gave an example of Stipe 
Mesic's unconstitutional behavior when he was the president of 
the Assembly. Today, the opposition in which the Liberals are 
the strongest party, insist on having Stipe Mesic. Could you 
comment on that? 
  [Radic] I have not seen that program, so I do not know any 
details. I am convinced that there were no unconstitutional 
procedures in the Assembly, for the proper authorities would 
react to that. Personally, I am glad the opposition considers 
those two gentlemen their best representatives, for the Croatian 
public will be able to see their true colors. 
  [Gugo] Mladen Vedris has also recently left the party. 
Since his function is important for the economy of Croatia, 
this could be considered a serious blow to the party in which 
you are secretary general. Will that influence the stability of 
the HDZ? 
  [Radic] I was not surprised to see him leave. We were not 
weakened by the departure of some ten party members. Today, the 
Secretariat sent me new data which say that, in the past couple 
of months, 49 members left the party, but 796 new members joined 
the party in the same period. I have exact information about 
every county and I was particularly pleased to read this 
analysis. No member of ours is irreplaceable. We all have our 
reasons and those reasons should be dignified, so that we can 
realize our political plight, our confrontation of ideas, in a 
democratic and civilized manner. 
  [Gugo] What will happen if the opposition maintains its 
demand to trade Manolic and Mesic for the annulment of the 
session of the Chamber of Representatives? Will the HDZ manage 
to keep the Assembly functioning or will there be early 
elections? 
  [Radic] During those negotiations, an opposition leader 
asked us whether we negotiated because we wanted to develop 
democracy or whether we acted from the position of being a 
parliamentary majority. I said we negotiated from the position 
of a party that wanted to develop democracy in Croatia and we 
would do everything within limits to achieve that. At the same 
time, we are aware that we have the majority in the Assembly. 
We will try to reach an agreement with the opposition. Our 
concessions will not go below certain minimums which enable the 
functioning of the Assembly at present and in the future. 
  [Gugo] So you are not considering early elections in the 
HDZ? 
  [Radic] There is no reason for that, although I am convinced 
that would be beneficial for the HDZ. 
  [Gugo] Everything that happened in the Assembly boils down 
to fighting for power. Some analysts are trying to make it look 
like the defeat of the left in the HDZ, i.e., of the state 
leadership, and the same sources report that extreme rightists, 
who hinder the functioning of the institutions of the political 
system, are coming to power. Is there any truth in that? 
  [Radic] It is true that this is fighting for power. 
However, it is not true that this is the victory of the right 
wing of the party, i.e., that the HDZ lost its democratic 
quality. The latest events contributed to exactly the opposite. 
I am aware that we are losing the extreme left wing of the 
party, but that is good. At the Second General Assembly of the 
HDZ, we determined we wanted to be a firm party of the center 
with a very broad program. All those who cannot fit into that 
program will drop out. Our presidency and secretariat general 
implement this program. This does not mean that there are no 
extremes in our midst, but the problem lies in the fact that 
those people do not exert much influence on the work of the 
party. They act individually, and everyone has the right to do 
that. The most important thing is that no one can accuse of 
being extreme left or extreme right in our program or 
activities. Those events have taught us procedure and 
democratic process. On several occasions we confirmed our 
democratic orientation, and the presidential candidate for the 
Assembly was chosen by a secret ballot. We are aiming toward 
building a firmly central democratic orientation. 

<H5>    No Conflicts With the Church </H5>
  [Gugo] Rumor has it that relations between Church and state 
have been strained. Is there any truth in that? 
  [Radic] No. If each of those two institutions acts within 
its competence, there will be no conflict. It is important that 
the Church and the state do not interfere in each others' 
activity. I have personally witnessed good relations between 
the Church and the state and I know there are no conflicts, 
although there still is an occasional lack of understanding. 
However, that is mostly part of tradition, which can be 
transcended if there is a will. The Church and the state are 
working together for the benefit of the Croats. 
  [Gugo] As we speak, Russian envoy Churkin is negotiating 
with Martic and Mikelic in Belgrade. Does that mean we are 
facing a new round of talks with the authorities in the 
temporarily occupied territory? 
  [Radic] That gentleman will be here any minute now, and it 
is a pity that we cannot talk in a couple of hours. Our view is 
crystal clear: We do not want and will not delay solving the 
problem of our occupied areas. I say with full responsibility 
that this is the last mandate of the UNPROFOR [UN Protection 
Forces]! Our refugees can no longer bear the solution of their 
problems being postponed and we must remember that. The state 
leadership, considering the international circumstances, has no 
right to postpone the solution to those problems. An intensive 
diplomatic action is under way and we must explain to important 
international factors that this is the time to take concrete 
steps to solve the Croatian problem. Furthermore, we are 
prepared -- if the international community does not make any 
progress -- to start solving the problem with all the means at 
the disposal of a rule-of-law state. Those who died for our 
freedom oblige us to bring freedom into every Croatian home. 
That is our principal task in the following period. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31680 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Washington Agreement Seen as `Staggering' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Washington Agreement Seen as `Staggering' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0289B Split FERAL TRIBUNE in Serbo-Croatian 9 May 94 pp 
8-9 </F>

<F P=103> 94BA0289B </F>
<F P=104>  Split FERAL TRIBUNE </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Marinko Culic: "Tudjman Returns--to Continuity"] </F>
  [Text] From Tudjman's restrained answer to 
Izetbegovic, it can be concluded that the Croatian president has 
decided on the tactic of procrastinating, evidently convinced 
that it is only a question of time until Bosnia-Herzegovina 
disappears from the map. After the failure of the international 
community on the test of Gorazde, it seems that Tudjman's hopes 
are being realized. However, it might be useful to warn the 
local mediators in the division of Bosnia-Herzegovina of an 
opposite result of the Bosnia-Herzegovina drama--Bosnia stays, 
they fail. 
  While a ceremony for the Croatian-Bosnian agreement was 
being 
prepared in Washington, Ivan Bender recommended from Siroki 
Brijeg, not at all jokingly, that the Croats there will see how 
"this" looks in practice, and only then decide whether to accept 
the agreement. Several days after the rainy wedding ceremony in 
Washington, the Presidency of the HDZ [Croatian Democratic 
Community] of Bosnia-Herzegovina had already resolved, it seems, 
all dilemmas and announced actions that will be "louder than you 
think and different than you expect." 
  Indeed, events followed that are unambiguous, and some 
really 
announced "loudly" that the Washington agreement is staggering 
before it was put on its feet. The first contacts of the two 
sides showed that they are not in a position to find a common 
language even for that rare matter that is not fixed by the 
agreement but is left to their internal decision (the order of 
the election of leaders of the federation). Not long after 
Franjo Tudjman gave the usual interview on the eve of the visit 
of the chief of state to the other country and, quite unusually, 
announced that the visit to Sarajevo would perhaps--not take 
place. Finally, 15 days ago, someone very expertly set off an 
explosion in Livan, leveling the minaret of the 150-year-old 
mosque of Curcinica. In only a month, therefore, everything 
occurred that was necessary for the conclusion to be drawn that 
one side traveled to Washington not with the intention of 
achieving an agreement under the sponsorship of the most 
powerful administration in the world, but, under the umbrella of 
that authority--which was perhaps lulled that everything was 
ready--of doing just the opposite. 
<H5>  Why Curcinica? </H5>
  The incident with Curcinica is too striking and resonant to 
be treated simply as "just another" mosque that no longer stands 
erect. First, it was destroyed in a city that at one time was 
cited as an example of where that doesn't happen; this means 
that someone passionately wanted to emphasize that not even 
small islands exist in the sea of Croatian-Muslim hatred any 
longer. Therefore, if the other side is held to account for much 
lesser war crimes than its own, although it is claimed at the 
same time that the army of Bosnia-Herzegovina is more a 
leaderless army of bandits than a real, disciplined army, then 
the question of the responsibility of the allegedly well 
organized HVO [Croatian Defense Council] and the Croatian police 
arises with two-fold weight. In truth, they cannot be 
accused--without firm proof--as directly guilty parties for the 
destruction of the mosque, but they can be accused of not 
bringing in criminals and terrorists, because there is already 
proof of this. For example, it is known who leveled Stupni Do 
and why (the aim was to "warn" the Muslims, but also to incite 
them against Croats in Vares in order to resettle them), but 
that man is still--now under a new name--in his old position in 
the HVO. 
  Those who are leaving him in freedom are probably projecting 
through him intimate notions about prohibited, but desirable 
filthy messes--my God, it's war!--as Slobodan Praljak did 
several days ago, when he decisively denied that he had ordered 
the destruction of the Old Bridge.... But he then added, in the 
same breath and equally resolutely, that, in a situation where 
military reasons demanded it, he would do the same thing. As you 
can see, the "dogs of war" are not to be foreseen and tied up, 
but the chains are long and tight on which they are placed and, 
one hopes, anyone can easily reach home along them. Here it is 
interesting to mention that, according to Akmadzic's recent 
statement, two sides have agreed that each will clean from its 
ranks those who are hindering the establishment of a joint 
state, and it is certainly not accidental that right here and 
only here was "full sovereignty" insisted on. We will not guess 
who was more interested in this clause, but the conclusion is 
inevitable in view of the later series of recent actions by both 
sides. 
<H5>  Road Tax </H5>
  Although the facts were different, the Bosnians first 
roughly 
activated the staff sieve, having already replaced Safer 
Halilovic some time earlier, and then mercilessly having 
eliminated several "warlords" who could no longer be controlled 
(Caco, perhaps even Prazina). The only thing with which the 
Croatian side reciprocated was its moving of Boban and the 
arrival of the moderate Bosanac Zubak. But as nothing beside 
this happened, it was clear that the aim was not to clean up 
their own ranks but to blackmail the other side into sweeping 
them according to what was already swept, or, if it didn't want 
to--to refrain from everything. The present taking of bids on 
the election of the first leader of the federation is aiming at 
that. Croatians do not want a Muslim in that position, claiming 
that after five or six years it's the Croats' turn, but just 
when one thinks that it is a case of a stand on principle, he 
changes into--possibly a Muslim, but not the "belligerent" 
Izetbegovic. 
  Since we are talking about the leader of a state that, 
whatever has been said, enjoys the support of a large part of 
the citizens, the challenged one has evidently been sent not 
only to Izetbegovic personally, but also to the whole Bosnian 
people, who are just entering a period of maturity and 
self-awareness. This is all the more insulting in that, contrary 
to the internal agreement mentioned, what is exclusively in the 
jurisdiction of these people is being encroached upon, and at 
the same time notorious criminals are being tolerated in their 
own ranks. Moreover, local propaganda has set loose a mill of 
insinuations about how the Bosnians have abandoned the 
Washington agreement--it was claimed earlier that they had 
abandoned Bosnia-Herzegovina--allegedly swayed by Izetbegovic's 
legal adviser Boyle, who believes that the agreement practically 
sanctions the division of Bosnia-Herzegovina. But 
Bosnia-Herzegovina deputy prime minister Edib Bukvic stated 
lately that the Bosnian side had an insight into Boyle's opinion 
even before the signing of the Washington agreement; this means 
that it nevertheless believed in it, while only some trends in 
Bosnian policy, claims Bukvic, were submitted to Boyle's 
analysis. 
  In addition, Bukvic stated that Herceg-Bosna is again 
assuming the old form of a pseudo-state, which functions well 
only in a robbery. A road tax has again been introduced, this 
time with a firm scale of charges, so the shipment of goods over 
the border is encumbered with levies of 100 to 150 percent (!), 
and even humanitarian convoys for central Bosnia pay a "road 
toll." Although one shouldn't doubt the material greed of the 
leaders of Herceg-Bosna, the aim of the highway robbery 
described by Bukvic is indeed broader and is directed at 
provoking Muslims to erect firm borders toward Croats. With this 
the concept of cantonal division would definitely be destroyed, 
and a partition into two parts would be consolidated, which Ivo 
Komsic says is being hastily carried out. A further, more 
ambitious aim is to leave the Bosnians with the conviction that 
"their" Bosnia-Herzegovina is impossible and that it has 
remained only on their shoulders (about which Milovan Sibl 
recently wrote, in DANAS, an unusually detailed text, having 
failed to answer only the trifle of whether he wrote it as a 
journalist in politics or as a politician in the newspaper). 
  This could also be the explanation of why Djapic and his 
Croatian Rights Party members were recently attacked with tables 
and chairs in Siroki Brijeg. Although they say that he has often 
been on Pantovcak recently, where an alliance of the "right" 
against the "vampire-like left" has been worked out, Djapic 
nevertheless poured the cup too full. And this, it seems, not so 
much through attacks against the great (Zagreb) and the small 
(Mostar) leadership, and not even with charges that Tuta 
Naletilic is "responsible for destroying the Livanj mosque," as 
through dreaming by the Croatian Rights Party about the fighting 
unity of the Croatian and the Muslim people, which has also been 
supported in recent days by the announcement about a new 
founding of the HOS [Croatian Defense Force]. 
<H5>  Sarajevo Is Far Away </H5>
  If the Bosnians rear on their hind legs at all of this, so 
much the better! At an SDA [Party of Democratic Action] 
convention, Alija Izetbegovic recently reduced all the aims of 
his party to one basic and undoubtedly justified one--"We want 
all the territory back"--but with this also fell into the trap 
of national and confessional exclusivity, stating that there 
would be no more genocide against the Muslim people, because 
weapons would not be taken from anyone "except criminals." It is 
interesting that now, when critical repercussions from this 
should be expected in Zagreb, all of a sudden there are none, 
although whole tomes were written until recently about alleged 
Islamic fundamentalism. As if a little real fundamentalism in 
Sarajevo would be appropriate to the masters of local 
propaganda, so it would be easier for them to steal away from 
the Washington agreement, into which they have been pushed 
against their will anyway. Recent correspondence between 
Izetbegovic and Tudjman, in which the former is understandably 
concerned, and the latter not understandably satisfied with what 
has been achieved, indicates that the Croatian president has 
favored a tactic of making a resolution difficult (he announced 
a visit "soon" to Sarajevo, but he immediately mentioned 
"technical and communications" problems, as if we are somewhere 
in the middle of 1992), evidently convinced that it is only a 
question of time until Bosnia-Herzegovina disappears from the 
map. Taught by experience, he will just not keep making inroads 
this time, but he will let someone else do the coroner's job, 
possibly the United States. 
  After the failure by the international community of the 
Gorazde test, it seems that Tudjman's predictions and hopes are 
being realized (thus Sibl hurried to be hailed as a journalistic 
analyst). But both foresee that Bosnia-Herzegovina has been 
trying to divide itself in quarters, now, for more than two 
years already, but it isn't working. That this is really a 
question of an "artificial state," "a colonial creation," and 
however they have already called it, this would surely happen 
even without any great effort by Belgrade and Zagreb, and even 
the United States and Russia together would not be able to 
prevent disintegration. Thus we are warning the local mediators 
in the division of Bosnia-Herzegovina to keep in mind the 
opposite result of the Bosnia-Herzegovina drama--Bosnia stays, 
they fail. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31681 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zagreb Linked to Attack of HSP Leaders </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zagreb Linked to Attack of HSP Leaders </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0299A Zagreb GLOBUS in Serbo-Croatian 6 May 94 p 18 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0299A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb GLOBUS </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anto Djapic, Croatian Rights Party vice </F>
chairman, by Vlado Vurusic at Djapic's office in the Croatian 
Assembly building; date not given: "`Mladen Tuta Naletilic Is 
Responsible for Destruction of the Mosque in Livno!'"] 
  [Text] Anto Djapic, Assembly deputy and vice chairman of 
the HSP [Croatian Rights Party], who together with Karlo 
Varjacic, chairman of the HSP Supervisory Committee, and Velimir 
Kvesic, an official from party headquarters, was severely beaten 
on Sunday, 1 May in Siroki Brijeg, which he accuses soldiers of 
the controversial Herzegovinan commander Naletilic of doing, 
alleges in an interview with GLOBUS that Mladen Tuta Naletilic 
is responsible for the destruction of the mosque in Livno. 
  Mladen Tuta Naletilic is the commander of a unit known as 
the 
"Legion of Honor." He and the semiliterate General Ivan Andabak 
take orders from the top leadership of so-called Herceg-Bosna, 
but they in turn get their orders from Zagreb: This is the 
Zagreb-Herzegovina vertical. The Herzegovina police has not 
dared even to launch an investigation into the attack on the HSP 
leadership. If it were not for General Roso, Herzegovina's UDBA 
[former Yugoslav State Security Administration] and KOS [former 
Yugoslav Counterintelligence Service] agents and criminals would 
have recommenced the war with the Muslims. 
  The recent brutal attack on the leadership of the HSP--at a 
rally in Siroki Brijeg--when Karlo Varjacic (chairman of the 
party's Supervisory Committee), Velimir Kvesic (official from 
headquarters), and HSP vice chairman Anto Djapic were beaten 
black and blue with baseball bats, mallets, and pistol handles, 
has elicited a great deal of interest, especially since Djapic 
has said that the government of Herceg-Bosna, the Croatian state 
leadership, and the Croatian minister of defense are responsible 
for the attack. 
  We spoke with Anto Djapic about this occurrence and about 
his 
opinion on the situation in Herceg-Bosna at his office in the 
Assembly building. Anto Djapic walks cautiously; the 
consequences of the beating are obvious.... 
  [Vurusic] What happened at your party's rally in Siroki 
Brijeg? 
  [Djapic] That was an example of an assassination attempt. 
One 
slap is enough to qualify it as that, given our position in the 
Assembly, let alone when the attack is carried out by 50 armed 
people, some of whom were in uniform. The attack was 
painstakingly planned and has a strong political background. I 
believe that an explanation of this incident is due from not 
only the government of so-called Herceg-Bosna, but also, and 
most of all, from the Croatian state leadership. If they do not 
speak up, that I will feel like "he who remains silent agrees 
with what happened." 
  For days, we were warned by Tuta Naletilic's people not to 
go 
to Siroki Brijeg, that we could go there but that we would not 
leave alive, and so on. Nor does that surprise me about him. 
Ruffians from his unit (which, ironically, is known as the 
"Legion of Honor") frighten and terrorize the local population. 
  We decided precisely for that reason to go and hold a rally 
there, to restore the people's hope, but we knew very well who 
was waiting for us there and what all could happen to us. We 
wanted to dispel the fear among the local population, fear that 
has insinuated itself into them because of the precarious 
conditions under which they live. 
  [Vurusic] What is happening in Herzegovina? 
  [Djapic] A dictatorship in power there. Especially in Siroki 
Brijeg. UDBA and KOS agents are still wreaking havoc. There are 
only two people in the government of so-called Herceg-Bosna who 
were not employees of those two notorious services. 
  We arrived there as an alternative, which naturally bothered 
them, so they wanted to frighten us and other potential party 
leaders who were planning to go to Herzegovina. The situation 
there--and the attitude of the people toward the local 
authorities--is such that I have the impression that any 
alternative political option would win if elections were held in 
Herzegovina today. 
  Herzegovina today is fertile ground for crime, smuggling, 
wartime profiteers.... They have arrived from all directions, 
and against the will of the vast majority of Herzegovinans. All 
the political riff-raff from the former regime has remained in 
power there. However, to make things worse, nothing in 
Herzegovina happens by accident.... The Herzegovinans are 
despondent!!! 
  [Vurusic] Are the people in Herceg-Bosna opposed to 
implementation of the Washington agreement on a federation 
between the Croat and Bosniak nations? 
  [Djapic] The people want the agreement to be implemented. 
This policy of various Tutas and Andabaks in so-called 
Herceg-Bosna represents a desire to dash the Washington 
agreement. Because the smugglers and criminal structures there 
do not want peace between Muslims and Croats; peace means that 
there will not longer be as much lawlessness (and you must know 
that some people have managed to turn over hundreds of thousands 
of German marks a day) and that all the facts will finally be 
learned, because of which they want to channel the people's 
dissatisfaction toward the Muslims, not toward eradicating crime 
of unseen proportions. 
  They accuse us in the HSP of having come to scheme against 
the Washington agreement, which is ridiculous. The HSP has 
always advocated an integral Bosnia-Herzegovina and opposed the 
fighting between Croats and Muslims, and that is even the core 
of the HSP program principles. They want to block implementation 
of the agreement, because it is clear to them that as soon as 
the federation comes to life, Tuta and his ilk will be put on 
trial for war crimes. They are steeped in blood and there is no 
turning back for them! 
  Herzegovina is the backbone of our nation-building ideal and 
that is why they had to impose a reign of terror there, to 
compromise both the Herzegovinans and the nation-building ideal 
itself. They have indeed been partially successful in that, so 
that in some parts of Croatia a certain animosity has arisen 
toward Herzegovinans. We must not be duped by the tricks of a 
handful of UDBA and KOS agents! These people are "as thick as 
thieves" with Karadzic and Vucurovic, with whom they trade and 
smuggle.... The other 95 percent of Herzegovinans are for the 
agreement, democracy, and peace. 
  [Vurusic] You said that the policy of the HR [Croat Republic 
of] Herceg-Bosna is being guided from Zagreb? 
  [Djapic] Yes. But it is not that simple. Actually, our 
policy 
is turned around and refracted in Herzegovina, it is the key to 
the solution to our problems there. If things were put in order 
in the so-called HR Herceg-Bosna, if the current group of 
politicians were to leave, things would change in Zagreb too! We 
must undertake the transfiguration of Herzegovina for the sake 
of our own lives. 
  The top-most state leadership in Croatia, and thus even 
President Tudjman, is answerable for the fact that it is not 
disassociating itself from these sorts of occurrences that are 
rocking Herzegovina. I expect both President Tudjman and 
Minister Susak to say something about the attack on us in Siroki 
Brijeg, because the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Community] is in 
power there! 
  [Vurusic] You mentioned Mladen Tuta Naletilic and Ivan 
Andabak as the men who ordered the attack. Why? 
  [Djapic] Ivan Andabak is a semiliterate man with the rank of 
general, Naletilic is an executioner. Mladen Tuta is a so-called 
emigre with a dubious past and employer. I say "so-called 
emigre" because after the first elections many people returned 
who had been sent abroad by UDBA. The majority of emigres who 
joined the Croat government--both here and in Herzegovina--are 
former UDBA agents, previously infiltrated into Croatian emigree 
circles. 
  Moreover, Tuta was also directly involved in the murder of 
our knight, HOS [Croatian Defense Force--armed wing of HSP] 
commander Blaze Kraljevic. He has built a house above Siroki 
Brijeg worth several million German marks. Where did he get that 
much money? He gives orders to Andabak, the leadership of 
so-called Herceg-Bosna gives orders to Naletilic, and they get 
their orders from Zagreb. This is the Zagreb-Herzegovina 
vertical! 
  This Naletilic is an officer (but no gentleman) in the HVO 
[Croat Defense Council]. The fact that the Ministry of Defense 
reported the attack on us to the HVO clearly indicates their 
involvement. Why is the local police not saying anything--it has 
not even begun an investigation, much less dared to undertake 
anything concrete. 
  [Vurusic] Do you think that the HVO leadership is behind the 
attack? Are you also accusing General Ante Roso? 
  [Djapic] No, Gen. Roso is not connected to this. He is one 
of 
the rare people in the leadership of the so-called HR 
Herceg-Bosna who genuinely supports implementation of the 
Washington agreement. If it were not for him, these KOS and UDBA 
people would have already recommenced the war with the Muslims. 
Moreover, I think that Tuta is also responsible for the 
destruction of the Livno mosque 10 days ago. Tuta is the lord of 
Herzegovina, the lord of life and death in that region of ours. 
  [Vurusic] You said that Naletilic and Andabak are only the 
executors of someone's orders? Could you be more specific and 
say whose orders? 
  [Djapic] It is no secret that Tuta is a favorite of Mr. 
Gojko 
Susak! Still, I do not want to prejudice the matter. That is why 
I call upon the minister of defense of the RH [Republic of 
Croatia] to make a statement. Let him confirm or refute my 
suspicions. We spoke on Monday, right before the press 
conference. Her asked me what was going on. I told him that he 
was in a better position to tell me what was actually going on. 
And why! He had no answer for me! 
  I will raise this question at the next session of the 
Assembly. I have already asked the president of the Assembly 
House of Representatives, Stipe Mesic, to put this subject on 
the agenda of the next session. 
  [Vurusic] You always call the HR Herceg-Bosna "so-called 
Herceg-Bosna." How did the people attending your rallies 
throughout Herzegovina react to that? 
  [Djapic] Our rallies in Tomislavgrad and Grude were 
extraordinary, well-attended, and we got an exceptionally warm 
reception. The people know our positions, they know that we 
support the Washington agreement. It is a little ridiculous that 
we, as an opposition party, have to go around Herzegovina 
promoting the agreement that Tudjman signed while his people 
attack and kick us. Moreover, why would the prefix "so-called" 
offend them? Since the Washington agreement the HR Herceg-Bosna 
has no longer existed, there are only cantons or zupas and 
velezupas. They signed the Washington agreement that abolishes 
this entity, and now they are acting as if it still exists. It 
is ridiculous that we from the HSP are working on promoting the 
Washington agreement, instead of Vukojevic or Milas, and the 
so-called HDZ right wing. But ultimately we must ask ourselves: 
Is the Washington agreement Croatian state policy? I hope that 
it is, but after everything that has happened to us I am 
beginning to doubt that. But we were there and we will go back. 
Our rally in Siroki Brijeg was not finished, and I am someone 
who finishes all his business. We have to go down there without 
fear, even if it means getting hurt. Because I know that they 
will not stop at beating us. We must not lose Herzegovina! Let 
Budisa and Racan go to Herzegovina, if necessary--at the same 
time! We must show that there is an alternative, that democracy 
and a multiparty system must ultimately come there too. 
  At the rally, I managed to say: "Gentlemen, we have come 
here 
to show you that we are not afraid. We have shown that we are 
even willing to die for the Independent State of Croatia." We 
cannot open fire on Croats, even though they wanted to provoke 
us into doing that. 
  [Vurusic] You have brought up the suspicion that Minister of 
Defense Gojko Susak is behind the attack on you and your party 
colleagues. However, in the Assembly you recently defending him 
when the opposition sought his dismissal because of the 
explosion in Duboki Jarak. 
  [Djapic] I said that he is responsible until he makes a 
statement. That is disinformation by news commentators, 
including yours at GLOBUS. This is a question of principle. The 
opposition must unite around key questions, not around less 
important ones. 
  [Vurusic] There are reports that now, after the split in the 
HDZ and the departure of Stipe Mesic and Josip Manolic from the 
party, the HSP will become a coalition partner of the HDZ, 
because you are close to its right wing, which is now in the 
majority.... 
  [Djapic] That is fantasy. Moreover, I no longer even know 
what the HDZ is. We have a neutral stance toward the conflict 
within the HDZ. 
  [Vurusic] Do you think that the Washington agreement is in 
danger and that the fighting between Croats and Muslims could 
resume? 
  [Djapic] I am afraid that that could happen. The people in 
power in Herceg-Bosna are the same ones who initiated the 
fighting. Because of their whims, our young people perished at 
Vakuf and Vitez, instead of fighting the Serbs with our combined 
forces, instead of defending the corridor, which was closed. 
What would there be of so-called Krajina and the so-called 
republic of Srpska today if the corridor had remained in our 
hands? We would be at the Drina today! The bombing of the mosque 
in Livno and the attack on us, as representatives of a party 
that has supported the alliance with the Muslims the whole time, 
is the best indication of how much individual leaders of 
so-called Herceg-Bosna do not want the Washington agreement to 
succeed.... They are defending their positions, not the position 
of the Croat nation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. They are thwarting 
the multiparty system in Herzegovina! But they will not halt the 
arrival of democracy to Herzegovina with one beating. We must 
settle scores with this gang. The entire government of so-called 
Herceg-Bosna is responsible for this situation. 
  [Vurusic] Does the thing that is conditionally called the 
Herzegovinan lobby exist? 
  [Djapic] I do not believe such reports. That is an erroneous 
expression, which compromises Herzegovina. The leadership of the 
HDZ is behind the attack on us, the ones who formulate policy 
toward Bosnia-Herzegovina. Because we are their stained 
conscience. 
  If they are for the Washington agreement, why not dismiss 
those people who are undermining it? Or rather, why does Tudjman 
not go to Herzegovina to promote the agreement? That would 
reassure the local population, which is not guilty of anything, 
but is living in fear. 
  I would clip the wings of that gang of criminals that is in 
power. The government of so-called Herceg-Bosna was not able to 
prevent the bombing of the Livno mosque, but it was able to 
prevent--in hooligan fashion--our rally in Siroki Brijeg. We 
have had enough of the Herzegovinans paying the price of flawed 
policies, lost wars, suffering at Bleiburg. We do not need 
another Bleiburg! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31682 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Chairman Horn Interviewed on MSZP Goals </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Chairman Horn Interviewed on MSZP Goals </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406102394 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406102394 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Budapest Duna TV in Hungarian at 1920 
GMT on 13 June carries an unscheduled 30-minute compilation 
called "Help Yourself, the West Will Help You Too." The 
program, which deals with the political and economic conference 
held in Innsbruck on 11 June, includes a 20-minute exclusive 
interview with Gyula Horn, chairman of the Hungarian Socialist 
Party, MSZP. Jozsef Laszlo hosts the program; the place and 
date of the interview are not given. 
  Laszlo outlines the agenda of the Innsbruck conference and 
introduces its participants. Video clips are shown of Gyula 
Horn's arrival at the venue; there are extracts from his 
interview given to Austrian Television. Also shown are an 
extract from an interview with German politicians Hans-Dietrich 
Genscher and Rudolf Scharping, who both express their trust in 
Hungarian democracy and Gyula Horn's premiership. 
  The interview with Gyula Horn follows next. Horn reiterates 
his criticism -- outlined at the Innsbruck conference -- of the 
European Union, EU, for not having concrete programs on 
cooperation with the Visegrad countries. He repeats his 
arguments in favor of an urgent change. He confirms Hungary's 
readiness to repay its debts and urges the EU to draw up a 
timetable for Hungary's process of joining the EU. 
  Horn also confirms the three main elements of the MSZP's 
foreign policy. Asked about relations with Hungary's neighbors, 
he says: 
  "There is a basic treaty with Ukraine, as well as an 
agreement of about 20 pages on cooperation in minority matters. 
I have to say that the question of whether the Ukrainian side 
indeed observes the agreement also has to be examined, since 
there have been reports that this is not happening exactly the 
way it should." 
  Horn adds: "There have been problems in its implementation, 
and what is happening is not exactly what had been promised by 
the other side, in Kiev." 
  Horn is then asked about relations with Slovakia. He 
replies: 
  "When I met [Slovak Prime Minister Jozef] Morvacik in 
Bratislava about one and a half months ago, I said that we 
should try to free the entire Danube matter -- the Gabcikovo 
matter -- from its political overtones and hold substantial 
talks on it. We cannot reconcile ourselves to the situation 
they created, which would mean the eventual implementation of 
variant C. We consider unacceptable any kind of divergence from 
the water distribution system recommended by the EU, which would 
be disadvantageous for Hungary. We regard this as a key 
question, and Moravcik promised that they would revise the 
decisions, the position, taken by them [Slovakia]." 
  After further elaborating on the subject, he says: 
  "As far as the Office for Hungarians Beyond the Border is 
concerned, I do not know whether there is any need for it or 
not. I am personally convinced that there is no need for it. I 
have to say -- although the reports may be exaggerated, or 
perhaps they are not well founded -- that I have heard a lot of 
negative things about its activities. However, there are people 
even within the party who say that this office should be 
maintained. We will examine this question. We will not make a 
hasty decision on it." 
  At the end of the interview Horn outlines the most urgent 
tasks of the new government: a detailed review of the economy, 
decisions on the world exhibition and the Gabcikovo project, and 
solutions to the most serious problems in health service. He 
says: 
  "I am convinced, finally, that the Hungarian Government has 
to prepare an overall program -- which should be handed over, 
first and foremost, to the EU and, in addition, to the United 
States and Japan as well -- that would serve as a basis for 
Hungarian modernization. I mean complete modernization of the 
infrastructure, including roads, transport, telecommunication 
and all large networks in connection with this, since 
modernization cannot be started without this. And I am thinking 
of a revision of all the rules, regulations, laws, and decrees 
that prevent a larger influx of foreign capital into the 
country." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31683 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114aa_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kinkel, UK Minister Comment on Bosnia Crisis </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kinkel, UK Minister Comment on Bosnia Crisis </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306222994 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2219 GMT 13 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1306222994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Luxembourg, June 13 (TANJUG) -- German Foreign 
Minister Klaus Kinkel said on Monday that Germany would try, as 
president of the European Union in the second half of this year, 
to have the Yugoslav crisis brought as close as possible to a 
resolution. 
  Presenting the objectives of Germany's mandate to the press, 
Kinkel was asked by the TANJUG correspondent if there were real 
possibilities for the crisis to be resolved during Germany's 
term in office, Kinkel said that it would be wonderful if this 
happened. Kinkel observed, however, that because of the 
complications of the Yugoslav crisis, it would be too much to 
pledge to do this. In any case Germany will, together with its 
international partners, wholeheartedly act for the Yugoslav 
crisis to be fully resolved as soon as possible, he said. 
  To confirm his thesis that much has already been done in 
that 
respect, Kinkel listed the ceasefire (between Croats and Serbs) 
in Krajina and the current situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina -- 
the agreement on a one-month cessation of hostilities, the 
establishment of safe areas, including Sarajevo, the placing of 
Mostar under European Union [EU] administration, the founding of 
the Moslem-Croat federation and the joint actions by 
international negotiators within the contact group for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  There is the intention in the international community, 
Kinkel 
said, for the one-month ceasefire in Bosnia, which became 
effective on Friday, to be used as an incentive for seeking a 
lasting peace solution. 
  Interpreting the E.U. policy, Minister at Britain's Foreign 
Office Heathcoat Amory said that the E.U. plan for resolving the 
Yugoslav and Bosnian crises remains the pillar around which all 
peace talks are based. Asked by TANJUG to comment statements 
that the plan had been somewhat altered, the British minister 
said that the changes were in the sense of negotiations on maps 
of the territorial delimitation in Bosnia-Herzegovina, but did 
not explain if this meant that the E.U. plan could be 
interpreted differently by each side and accepted only up to a 
certain, suitable, point. 
  Asked if the international contact group for Bosnia could 
still be considered as a united body following a United States 
House of Representatives decision to exempt Moslems from the 
international arms embargo on former Yugoslavia, since the 
group's unity was underscored as its main asset in the talks, 
Amory answered with a general statement that the international 
community was using all available means which could, in his 
assessment, contribute to a peace solution. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31684 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_a_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ALBANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meetings With Serb Representatives Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meetings With Serb Representatives Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306112194 Lezhe KOHA JONE in Albanian 8 Jun 94 pp 3-4 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306112194 </F>
<F P=104>  Lezhe KOHA JONE </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Andi Bejtja: "What Did the Albanian Socialists </F>
Discuss with the Serbian Representatives in Sofia?"] 
  [Text] "Secret" meetings to solve the Kosova question are 
coming into fashion on both sides of the border, and there is in 
the meantime every possibility that official Albanian-Serbian 
meetings will also become fashionable. As was reported last 
week, it was the Serbian side that announced a new proposal for 
a possible Albanian-Serbian dialogue at the foreign minister 
level. Meanwhile, the media reported a short time ago a secret 
meeting between Albanian representatives of Kosova and Serbian 
representatives in the Swiss Embassy in Belgrade. The 
participants in the meeting in a way denied this report, leaving 
the Albanian mass media to fight it out with the Serbian mass 
media. 
  The center of fashion has this time shifted from Prishtina 
to 
Tirana. The Democratic Party [PD] newspaper reports a secret 
meeting between the Albanian Socialists and representatives of 
Milosevic in Sofia, during an academic seminar on the topic of 
peace in the Balkans. RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE cites the Belgrade 
papers POLITIKA and NOVOSTI on this, specifically a statement 
issued by Keslanin, one of the main leaders of the Serbian 
Socialist Party. He is quoted as having said, "We reached an 
understanding with the Albanian Socialists, who are undergoing 
the consequences of the ruling party's right-wing revanchism 
dictated from abroad (they have their chairman in prison as the 
result of a show trial), and in spite of this won the local 
elections in 54 percent of the communes. This understanding is 
to continue dialogue and to cooperate in the interests of our 
two neighboring peoples and of general stability in the 
Balkans." 
  But what did the Albanian Socialists discuss with the 
Serbian 
representatives in Sofia? This question arouses a lot of 
curiosity even among the ordinary membership of the Socialist 
Party [PS], while the PS leaders are quite calm and ready to 
give an answer. Two of the PS leaders, Deputy Chairman Luan 
Hajdaraga and Bashkim Zeneli, head of foreign relations, are two 
of the Socialist personalities who have held many meetings with 
foreign diplomatic representatives in Tirana and who appear to 
be entrusted with the PS's foreign policy. They did not 
hesitate to talk to KOHA JONE about the aforementioned meeting. 
  "A PS delegation took part in an academic conference about 
the problem of peace in the Balkans. At this conference, there 
were also representatives from 13 other countries, with whom 
views were exchanged over the situation in the Balkans and the 
possibility of avoiding a conflict. In this context, our 
delegation presented our well-known standpoints. As far as we 
know, these standpoints were reported to the Serbian delegation. 
This seems to us utterly normal, especially at an academic 
conference," the Socialist leaders concluded, trying to 
demonstrate moderation in connection with questions put to them 
over the Kosova issue. Bashkim Zeneli recalled his article of 
one year ago, which mentioned the first and last Nano-Rugova 
meeting in Villa Number Two in Tirana, at which, according to 
Zeneli, the PS chairman made it clear to Rugova that dialogue is 
the only means for solving the issue. Likewise according to 
Zeneli, Rugova agreed with Nano's views. 
  It is also Zeneli and Hajdaraga who a short time ago held a 
meeting with representatives of the Yugoslav Embassy in Tirana, 
at which the problem of Kosova was particularly discussed. 
  However, what does the PS think about solving the issue of 
Kosova? 
  Deputy Chairman Hajdaraga replies: 
  [Bejtja] Mr. Hajdaraga, at a news conference, you called the 
PD's policy in connection with the Kosova question a failure. 
Could you be more specific about this conclusion that your 
party has drawn? 
  [Hajdaraga] If we look back at the PD's attitudes to the 
national question, there is in general terms a coherence. 
Tactically, there have been vacillations and coherence has been 
lacking. Of course, there are differences between strategy and 
tactics that arise from circumstances and external factors. 
However, the truth is that the ultimate logic of the tactical 
plan of action has often not been clear. 
  Specifically, if one talks about the national cause, one 
talks about unification. This is a long-term platform that will 
be realized on the basis of a program to which all political 
forces, large and small and within or outside Albania, will 
commit themselves. This final goal will be achieved on the 
basis of a phased and well-studied policy. Unfortunately, we 
lack a national political platform of this kind. The PS long 
ago asked for this. The steps that have been taken have been 
publicized as tactical steps for solving the question of Kosova. 
It is still not clear what will be demanded. I say this 
bearing in mind reality, and having visited the field. 
According to the PS, a formula for a solution will be 
determined by the will of the people of Kosova and by 
international conventions, and the solution of the problem will 
necessarily proceed along the road of dialogue. 
  I wish to underline that the national question cannot be 
subdivided among political parties or personalities. Especially 
today, when it seems that a solution is knocking at the door, 
consultation among all the political forces, large and small, is 
more than urgent. I even consider a political consensus over 
this issue to be overdue. A roundtable of Albanian political 
forces in Kosova and Albania must be proposed as soon as 
possible, including the two Albanian presidents Rugova and 
Berisha. 
  In this context, I wish to see that Berisha has recently 
taken a sensible line. In today's Europe, large and especially 
conflict-ridden problems are only solved by dialogue, with 
efforts to respect at the same time national interests and 
international conventions. We cannot let our national problems 
be solved outside this spirit and this reality. I can say 
firmly that our stands on the Kosova issue have been and will be 
in this spirit. 
  [Bejtja] What are your objections to Rugova's policies? 
  [Hajdaraga] On one hand, I am glad that Rugova is coming 
down to earth in a new reality. However, on the other hand we 
think that Rugova, in any talks or negotiations, must 
necessarily bear in mind the views of other Albanian political 
forces on both sides of the border, and not reduce his 
activities in this sphere to meetings with the PD and President 
Berisha. The national problem is not a question of one or two 
persons. Even though Rugova has not heeded us, although we are 
the largest opposition party, we are sincerely open to dialogue 
with him. We ask for Rugova at the table. This would be to the 
good of the national cause, today and tomorrow. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31685 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_b_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Resolution of 41st BSP Congress Published </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Resolution of 41st BSP Congress Published </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306135994 Sofia DUMA in Bulgarian 8 Jun 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306135994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia DUMA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Resolution of the 41st Bulgarian Socialist Party </F>
Congress": "Bulgaria Faces New Choice"] 
  [Text] Bulgaria is at a crossroads and faces a difficult 
choice. Our society faces dramatic questions that require a 
clear and unequivocal answer. 
  Will we create a new political climate and and atmosphere of 
national consensus, or will we continue the descend the downward 
slope of lethal disunity, intolerance, and confrontation? 
  Will we strengthen the state, or will we allow chaos, 
anarchy, and war to prevail among the institutions? 
  Will we stop the catastrophic destruction of our economy and 
plundering of our national wealth and allow Bulgaria to become a 
state of poverty and humiliated human dignity? 
  Will we remain indifferent toward the growing unemployment, 
corruption, speculation, and the unprecedented increase in 
crime, or will we establish the rule of law, democratic order, 
and security -- guarantees of the protection of our life, 
property, and peace for our children, and their future? 
  Will we reconcile ourselves to the collapse of intellectual 
life, the smothering of the Bulgarian language, the destruction 
of Bulgarian education and science, the commercialization of our 
art and culture, and watch them replaced by harmful imported 
surrogates, or will we revive the Bulgarian spirit and preserve 
our cultural assets? 
  The choice between these alternatives is a choice between 
disaster and recovery for Bulgaria, between national destruction 
or revival. 
  1. The Bulgarian Socialist Party [BSP] confirms its striving 
for a peaceful transition and its policy of dialogue and 
cooperation aimed at national consensus and reconciliation. It 
calls upon all citizens, political forces, and public 
organizations in Bulgaria to display prudence and good will in 
overcoming political hostility and the desire for revenge, and 
to create a civilized atmosphere in Bulgarian political life. 
The BSP is against the war between the institutions. It finds 
relations between the political forces to be anything but normal 
and nationally responsible, and rejects manifestations of ethnic 
confrontation. 
  2. The BSP favors holding early parliamentary elections in 
the fall of 1994. Despite the efforts of the people's 
representatives, the current parliament is about to exhaust its 
legislative possibilities and political and moral prestige. A 
new poll is the only democratic and nationally responsible way 
to stabilize power in the country. 
  The BSP's success in the elections would allow a new policy 
of salvation to be pursued in Bulgaria that will help to 
overcome the acute crisis, stop the destructive processes, curb 
inflation, and change the model of transition. In its election 
platform the BSP will present its positions on those changes 
that are vital for our society. The way those positions are 
realized will depend on the voters. The BSP views the coalition 
agreement as the best formula for our country. If it is 
impossible to achieve this, the BSP is prepared to assume 
responsibility for governing the country. 
  The main tasks of the socialist deputies during the period 
until the elections are: 
  -- to adopt amendments and addenda to the Constitution of 
the 
Republic of Bulgaria; 
  -- to adopt amendments and addenda to the Law on Electing 
People's Representatives, Mayors, and Municipal Councillors, and 
the Law on Municipal Self-Management and Administration; 
  -- to adopt the Judiciary Bill and the Bill on Defense and 
the Armed Forces, and adopting amendments to the Law on 
Restructuring and Privatizing State and Municipal Enterprises 
and the Mass Privatization Program. 
  The congress proposes to the Parliamentary Union for Social 
Democracy [PSSD] to implement until the elections systematic and 
strict parliamentary control over the government's work 
regarding timely and just income compensation, especially the 
incomes of the socially deprived, struggling effectively against 
speculation, enrichment that is not the result of work, and 
crime, and concluding a deal on our foreign debt. 
  3. During the period of transition the BSP supports an 
economic policy that will guarantee: 
  -- a revival of production and its restructuring and 
renewal, 
and protection of Bulgarian national capital; 
  -- the stimulation of a variety of forms of ownership and 
acceleration of privatization by applying market and social 
mechanisms; 
  -- the efficient management of state property; 
  -- the acceleration of agricultural reform with a view to 
creating a modern and efficient agriculture; the creation of 
state protection and stimulation of agricultural producers; the 
creation of conditions for developing all economic forms and 
advantages for cooperatives and associations as a means of 
improving the economic and social status of farmers and halting 
the fragmentation of the land; 
  -- a qualitatively new budget policy that will stabilize the 
country financially and in terms of foreign currency, overcome 
the disproportions in the budget, improve the collection of 
taxes, finally resolve the bad credits problem, and bring about 
a gradual transition toward developing own sources if financing 
in the municipalities; 
  -- the orientation of the Bulgarian economy toward 
exporting, 
creating conditions for changing the import-export structure, 
restoring our country's traditional markets, and linking 
Bulgaria with the European and world economy. 
  4. The BSP views the following as its basic tasks: 
  -- guaranteeing the social security of the population; 
  -- providing social compensations and social aid, conducting 
a struggle against unemployment, and providing every Bulgarian 
citizen with the possibility of self-fulfillment; 
  -- effecting strict control over the prices of goods 
monitored by the government and conducting an anti-inflation 
policy; 
  -- providing the necessary means for education, health 
protection, and the activity of the municipalities; 
  -- forming independent pension, health, education, and other 
humanitarian funds. 
  5. The BSP declares the irreversible character of the 
democratization processes and supports the improvement of the 
political system; 
  -- it draws public attention to the danger of the 
authoritarian degeneration of the transition and of the 
deliberate striving to destabilize the democratic institutions; 
  -- it supports restoring and expanding local 
self-management, 
and expanding the possibilities of conducting a regional and 
local policy through developing financial, property, and 
organizational autonomy of the municipalities and settlements; 
  -- it insists on real political independence for the 
judiciary, which implements the basic role determined by the 
constitution, namely, to be a barrier against crime and anarchy; 
  -- it declares its adherence to the pluralistic and 
democratic character of the national media, overcoming their 
manipulative and confrontational character, and turning them 
into a public tribune. 
  6. The BSP supports the protection of Bulgarian culture and 
arts and the achievements of our education and science, 
language, and spiritual identity, and opposes the persecution of 
Bulgarian intellectuals for political reasons. 
  7. The BSP supports religious tolerance, but it is seriously 
concerned about the schism in the Bulgarian Orthodox Church. It 
categorically opposes the infiltration of foreign religious 
sects and the continuing Turkicization of the Bulgarian 
population. 
  8. The BSP will seek cooperation in the future with the 
trade unions in protecting the people's labor interests, and it 
favors the further strengthening of the tripartite partnership. 
  The BSP is against the use of the trade unions for achieving 
political goals and opposes their direct interference in 
governing the state. 
  9. The BSP supports the depoliticization of the armed forces 
and guarantees their high social prestige, financial situation, 
and combat ability. It protests against attempts to 
repoliticize the armed forces and views the kindling of 
conflicts associated with the military reform as a threat to our 
national security. 
  The BSP is in favor of maintaining the stability of the 
security organs, providing their material needs, preserving 
their high professionalism, and improving their authority as 
protectors of law and order. The BSP is in favor of an 
uncompromising struggle against manifestations of corruption in 
the system of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and attempts to 
utilize the agencies of law and order for political goals. 
  10. The BSP is in favor of conducting an active foreign 
policy that corresponds to Bulgaria's national interests and 
international obligations; 
  -- it adheres to peace and goodneighborly relations in the 
Balkans and opposes dragging Bulgaria into the Yugoconflict in 
any form; 
  -- it adheres to our further integration in the European 
structures; 
  -- it supports strengthening confidence and cooperation with 
our partners on an equal bilateral and multilateral basis; 
  -- it adheres to guaranteeing the country's national 
security; 
  The congress adopts the report on the BSP's political line 
and approves the reports on the activity of the BSP Supreme 
Council, the All-Party Control Commission, and the socialist 
deputies after the 40th BSP congress. 
  -- 6 June 1994 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31686 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Review, Analysis of Coal Companies </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Review, Analysis of Coal Companies </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94EP0064B Warsaw ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE in Polish No 20, 15 May 
94 p 50 </F>

<F P=103> 94EP0064B </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksander Szpilewicz: "The Coal Companies"] </F>
  [Text] A year is about to elapse since the formation of the 
coal companies. Much indicates that the effects of this measure 
have been positive so far. The companies group mine clusters by 
the criterion of contiguity of mining land according to land 
registers. (In accordance with that criterion, the so-far 
single-mine autonomous Bogdanka joint-stock company has been 
established.) 
  A stronger export standing: It was possible, more so than in 
the preceding years, to mesh the structural and seasonal slump 
in domestic sales of coal with a commensurate increase in export 
shipments, as illustrated by the tabulation below of sales (in 
millions of metric tons) in the years 1989, 1992, and 1993. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1Coal Sales in Millions of Metric Tons                               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |1989              |1992              |1993              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|To power plants   |57.2              |39.0              |37.2              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|To coking plants  |21.7              |14.4              |13.0              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|To other domestic |98.7              |54.1              |57.2              | 
|customers         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Exports           |28.9              |18.7              |23.8[.sup]1[/]  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]1[/]plus 1.4 million metric tons from the stocks of Weglokoks      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Receiving credit for their coal exports enabled the mines to 
meet their most urgent obligations and especially to disburse 
wages. The nightmare of spreading coal dumps vanished. At year's 
end, the coal-storage areas were empty. 
  The following coal companies rank foremost among coal 
exporters (tonnage exported and proportion of exports to total 
sales in parentheses): Jastrzebie (7.1 million metric tons, 47 
percent), Rybnik (4.9 million metric tons, 33 percent), Katowice 
(4.4 million metric tons, 19 percent), Gliwice (3.9 million 
metric tons, 22 percent), Ruda (1.5 million metric tons, 11 
percent), Bytom (1.4 million metric tons, 10 percent), and 
Nadwislanska (0.8 million metric tons, 3 percent). 
  Concentration of mining operations. These 
operations became less extensive, reflecting a more selective 
concentration of extraction at mine levels and galleries and 
assuring a more efficient utilization of machinery and 
personnel. The overall length of extraction walls dropped to 79 
km (compared with 112.4 km in 1989), and the number of active 
extraction walls dropped to 440 (compared with 640 in 1989). 
While the volume of extraction was the same as in 1992, 
employment in mining companies declined by 19,000, and 
productivity, as measured by the number of metric tons of coal 
extracted annually per employee, increased by 6 percent and 
reached 415 metric tons. 
  The maximum productivity--greater by a factor of 1.5 than 
the 
average--was attained by the Lublin Coal Company. 
  Decline in the real extraction cost of coal. This 
is due to lower operating expenses (other than wages), which in 
dollar terms decreased by $2.6 per metric ton, to $14.10 from 
$16.70--i.e., by 18 percent--compared with the preceding year. 
Of these expenses (in dollars per metric ton): 

  -  The cost of materials and energy decreased by 10 percent, 
to $6.20 from $6.80. 
  -  The cost of outside services decreased by 
three-fifths, to $2.70 from $4.60. 
  -  Depreciation, owing to, among 
other things, greater sales, decreased by 10 percent, to $1.70 
from $1.90. 

  The expenditures on wages and salaries, on the other hand, 
increased by $0.30 per metric ton, to $16.2 from $15.9, of which 
direct wages increased to $11.50 from $11.40 and the cost of 
fringe benefits to $4.70 from $4.50. 
  During the year, the value of the dollar rose, and the zloty 
[Z] was devalued by a factor of 1.3 times. The mean annual 
currency exchange rate amounted to Z18,300 per dollar, compared 
with Z13,600 in the preceding year. 
  Altogether, the real production cost of coal dropped to 
$31.20 [per metric ton] from $32.60--i.e., by 4 percent. 
  What problems were encountered by the coal companies during 
the period in question? 
  First, there was the price "Rubicon." It was quite explicit, 
as shown by a comparison of domestic and export prices of coal. 
In domestic sales, coal prices increased in real terms (by 8 
percent after a year) to $29.90 from $27.60 per metric ton, of 
which, for lump coal, by 13 percent, to $52.50 from $46.40; for 
coal breeze used by power plants, by 13 percent, to $22.40 from 
$19.80; and for coking coal, by 18 percent, to $41.20 from 
$34.80. 
  As for the export prices, there was a big slump in export 
sales owing to the decline in the prices of crude petroleum. As 
a result, in real terms, export prices plummeted by 18 percent, 
to $30.30 from $36.0 per metric ton, of which the decreases 
were: for lump coal, by 9 percent, to $58.20 from $62.90; for 
coal breeze used by power plants, by 27 percent, to $21.6 from 
$29.60; and for coking coal, by 11 percent, to $33.00 from 
$37.20. 
  Viewed in this light, reflections on the so-called import 
parity have to be qualified. To domestic customers, only lump 
coal is cheaper (almost $6 per metric ton) than to foreign ones, 
whereas they have to pay more (almost $1 more per metric ton) 
for coal breeze and coking coal ($8 more per metric ton) than 
foreign customers. Thus, on the whole, the average price 
optained for exported coal has become only slightly higher 
($0.40 per metric ton) than the domestic price, while the 
differences in quality remain considerable. In the preceding 
year, the situation was much better because then the average 
price obtained for exported coal was $8.40 per metric ton higher. 
  These proportions were averaged over the year and do not 
quite reflect the actual variations. Price movements in the 
first three quarters of last year were moderate, so most of the 
increases in domestic prices of coal occurred during the last 
quarter. That was needed to balance income with expenditures, 
but it adversely affected the costs of fuel (lump coal, coke), 
electricity, and heat--hence the increases. 
  arket capacity. The domestic market for [black] 
coal is shrinking and will continue to shrink owing to 
competition by the cheaper brown coal (used by power plants) and 
the more convenient natural gas used in the households not 
connected to the heating mains. Each year the gas industry is 
gaining 200,000 new customers, of which 100,000 are for gas 
heating of homes. 
  An export offensive on the West European market might afford 
us an opportunity. Another, more long-term opportunity is 
presented by Ukraine, Belarus, and the Baltic countries. As for 
overseas markets, freight cost is too high to make exports to 
them profitable. Last year, imports by the West European 
countries were about 130 million metric tons, of which 90 
million tons were of power coal and 40 million tons of coking 
coal. That was 17 million tons less than in 1992. Owing to the 
recession, purchases by power plants declined by about 10 
million tons, and by coking plants by about 7 million tons. In 
that situation, exporters, including Poland, benefited from the 
withdrawal of Russian coal (12 million tons in 1992) from the 
market owing to the government-ordered soaring increases in the 
cost of Russian rail freight. Among coal exporters to the West 
European market, Poland ranked fourth, with about 18 million 
metric tons, after South Africa (about 34 million tons), 
Australia (about 30 million tons), and the United States (about 
2 million tons [as published]). 
  It would be vain to expect a resurgence of coal demand in 
West Europe, despite the continuing decline in extraction in 
Great Britain, Germany, and France. It remains for us to 
continue an obdurate struggle to retain our beachheads in 
competition with such low-cost "tigers" as, chiefly, South 
Africa and Australia, not to mention a turnaround toward the 
"East," considering that, under the barter system, coal and 
coke, for example, are swappable for Krivoi Rog ore and iron 
nodules. 
  Financial performance of the coal companies. The 
closing balance sheet for last year was somewhat negative (sales 
declined by $1.60 per metric ton compared with a decline of $5 
per ton in 1992), although by December it turned positive (sales 
increased by $4.80 per ton). Table 2 illustrates the performance 
of individual coal companies for 1993 as a whole and for 
December 1993 alone. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 2Financial Performance of Coal Companies in 1993(in dollars)           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1993                     |December 1993            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bytom Coal Company       |- 2.7                    |+ 2.7                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ruda Coal Company        |- 3.1                    |+ 4.0                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gliwice Coal Company     |+ 1.5                    |- 1.3                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Katowice Mines           |+ 0.1                    |+ 4.7                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Nadwislanska Coal Company|- 1.2                    |+ 3.0                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rybnik Coal Company      |- 2.2                    |+ 2.7                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Jastrzebie Coal Company  |- 1.6                    |+ 6.8                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bogdanka, Inc.           |0                        |+ 7.6                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The principal wish for the future is that the coal companies 
improve their performance on their own rather than at the 
expense of the consumer and the currency devaluation. Miners' 
jobs depend on this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31687 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_y_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Issues Statement on Depot Explosion </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army Issues Statement on Depot Explosion </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406085694 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0250 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406085694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 14 Jun (TANJUG) -- The situation is under 
control and there is no danger for the population, the 
information service of the Yugoslav Army's General Staff 
reported after a fire broke out which caused an explosion in the 
Lisicji Potok army ammunition depot Monday evening. 
  The statement sent to TANJUG early this morning says: 
``During a storm over Belgrade, at around 2330 last night, 
lightning hit a depot containing explosives for army drills. 
  ``Fire spread to the depot building, setting off the 
explosives. No casualties have been registered so far. 
  ``The situation is under control and there is no danger of 
the explosions spreading. Residential and other buildings and 
the population are not threatened. 
  "Top-ranking officers of the Yugoslav Army's General Staff 
are on the spot, headed by [Chief of the General Staff] General 
Perisic. During the night the scene of the incident was 
inspected by the head of the Belgrade local authorities, Nebojsa 
Covic," the statement issued by the information service of the 
Yugoslav Army's General Staff says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31688 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kucan Discusses Relations With Croatia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kucan Discusses Relations With Croatia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1106145594 Zagreb VECERNJI LIST in Serbo-Croatian 4 Jun 94 
pp 10-11 </F>

<F P=103> AU1106145594 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VECERNJI LIST </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Milan Kucan, president of the </F>
Republic of Slovenia, by Vlado Zagorac; date and place not 
given: "I Will Come To Improve the Political Atmosphere"] 
  [Text] Milan Kucan, president of the Republic of Slovenia, 
should visit Croatian President Franjo Tudjman on Tuesday [7 
June]. This will be an unofficial meeting of the two heads of 
state, like the one held in Brdo near Kranj in October 1992, 
when Mr. Kucan and Mr. Tudjman agreed that it would be useful to 
meet at least once a year. Instead of that, it came to a break 
which has lasted for almost 20 months now, and during which a 
series of unsolved questions between the two states has appeared. 
  We asked President Kucan to give an interview for VECERNJI 
LIST immediately before his visit to Croatia. We asked him to 
refer primarily to the relations between Slovenia and Croatia, 
but also to other important issues. 
  [Zagorac] Can you tell us something about the relations 
between Slovenia and Croatia during the period in which you have 
not met with President Tudjman? 
  [Kucan] We should in any case go back into the history of 
our relations in order to see that they can be divided into two 
parts. Our cooperation was excellent during the period when both 
Slovenia and Croatia fought for their independence. Although we 
knew that the situation in Croatia was more difficult, and that 
that fact might affect the materialization of Slovene ambitions, 
we still required that the Croatian right of self-determination 
be implemented in the same way as ours. Since independence was 
achieved, our cooperation has deteriorated, but I do not think 
that there is a plausible reason for it. It is true that the 
conditions in Croatia are different from those in Slovenia, but 
this does not justify the present situation. I think that 
Slovenia has much understanding for special problems Croatia 
has, but this understanding has its limits, too, simply because 
the burden of unsolved problems has become heavier than the 
understanding for the more difficult conditions in which Croatia 
lives. 
  There was a period of time during which there had been no 
political dialogue whatsoever between Slovenia and Croatia; 
relations were then resumed only on the level of governments and 
ministries. In other words, there has been no cooperation on 
the level of presidents for a long time, so that I think that 
the understanding of problems and the interest to solve them has 
been considerably reduced. What is even more important is that 
the mutual confidence which is necessary if we want to solve 
problems has significantly fallen, too. I support the political 
dialogue and I think that it is not only good, but also 
necessary to talk; the attitudes, interests, and arguments of 
the other side have to be known in order to be able to search 
for solutions. If there is no dialogue, only short-term 
solutions, or no solutions at all, can be expected. 
  [Zagorac] Relations between states are usually defined as 
being on a high, low, or medium level. Where would you put the 
Slovene-Croatian relations on that scale? 
  [Kucan] It cannot be claimed that they are on a high level. 
They are far below the level which is necessary in order to 
solve the existing problems on the onehand , and our vital 
interests on the other hand. I have noticed the lack of 
political will; there have been numerous opportunities which 
allowed us to start solving our problems, but they have simply 
not been taken. Chances have often been missed because of 
egoistic political interests of both states and because of the 
ambition to solve all problems at once. It is in my opinion, 
however, impossible to solve all problems at once because they 
are too complicated and too sensitive. Since this approach has 
not borne fruit, I think that we should now decide to solve 
problems gradually. Priority has to be given to those problems 
which have to be solved in order to normalize life along the 
Croatian-Slovene border, and economic life in general. The 
Slovene Government has proposed such an approach, and I hope 
that we could reach a solution more easily in this way. 
  [Zagorac] Is Slovenia ready to make special efforts for the 
improvement of the present situation? 
  [Kucan] I would like to repeat that the present situation is 
contradictory to the vital interests of both states, so that it 
is only logical that it must be changed, and it can be changed 
only if both sides are ready to change it. This means that 
alternatives to old solutions and attitudes have to be found, 
without giving up each state's own principles, though. A way 
for the materialization of interests of both sides has to be 
found in order to enhance the mutual respect which is necessary 
in the search for a solution. I think that comments on internal 
circumstances in other states only harm the positive atmosphere. 
The assessment was made, for example, that Slovenia belongs to 
those countries between the Baltic and the Black Sea in which 
communists are returning to power, and which are characterized 
by rifts between coalitions. As far as I am concerned, I think 
that this is a Slovene matter. I think that Slovenia does not 
assess the situation in other states and that it does not 
interfere with internal political matters of other states. It 
leaves it to the citizens of those states to realize whether 
their regime is democratic or not. 
  I think that I can generalize and say that there is an 
unhealthy competition between Croatia and Slovenia, as it can be 
seen between the former Eastern European states, for example, 
since they are trying to confirm their European affiliation by 
exaggerating their own and diminishing the achievements of the 
others in the field of transformation, which is certainly a 
demanding and a long-lasting process. Expressions such as, 
"compared with others, we have the advantage...," or "we have 
achieved much more than others," can often be heard. To whom do 
they want to prove this? The international community knows very 
well what they have achieved. They cannot prove such a thing to 
their neighbors because this only causes suspicion and 
misunderstanding. In other words, this is only used for 
political conflicts in domestic politics. 
  If I look at Slovene-Croatian relations in the light of 
what I said before, I still think -- although I have just made a 
very pessimistic statement -- that the circle of our bilateral 
relations has not been closed yet. It must only be established 
whether there is political will and readiness in both states to 
solve problems in the atmosphere of mutual understanding. 
Mutual respect has to be encouraged, and the starting point of 
the search for solutions has to be the assumption that the 
interests of both states have the same value. 
  [Zagorac] Can it be expected, and is it realistic to expect 
international help in the sense of an arbitration or similar in 
solving problems between Croatia and Slovenia? When I say this, 
I primarily have the problem with the border in the Bay of Piran 
in mind. 
  [Kucan] The international community has certain institutions 
of "preventive diplomacy," which should enable peaceful 
solutions to conflicts when it is impossible to achieve a 
solution through bilateral cooperation. These instruments are 
even being enlarged now. If we fail to reach an agreement about 
the border in the Bay of Piran, there is the possibility of 
international arbitration. I think, however, that this would 
harm the prestige of both Slovenia and Croatia, because it would 
mean we cannot find a criterion or a combination of criteria for 
the definition of a state border and solve the problem 
ourselves. International institutions can apply the same 
criteria as we, they do not have any additional. 
  [Zagorac] Have Croatia and Slovenia reached the point at 
which such help is necessary? 
  [Kucan] The question is whether our two states have 
exhausted all possibilities which could enable us to solve the 
problems ourselves. If there are no further possibilities, it 
could be considered to cede the responsibility to an 
international institution. The same is true of arbitration. 
  [Zagorac] Does this mean that we still have not tried 
everything? 
  [Kucan] I think so. That is why we have problems. The old 
attitudes have simply not changed. If no solution can be found 
with these attitudes, it is obvious that other approaches have 
to be looked for. 
  There is the tendency to simplify this complex issue and 
reduce it to single problems such as the border crossings at 
Raskrizje, Sveta Gera, or the Bay of Piran, but these are not 
real problems and difficulties. Furthermore, if emotions are 
added to the whole thing, the picture can easily become blurred. 
The biggest problem is that the economic relations between 
Slovenia and Croatia have been deteriorating for a long time 
already. Economists usually claim that cooperation is made 
impossible by politicians. 
  This means that we are in fact confronted with two sorts of 
problems, the border issue and economy. It is bad that border 
issues have not been solved yet. This harms the sovereignty of 
both countries, since this is a condition for a legitimate 
status in international associations. But as long as there is 
no solution, the best thing would be to accept the situation as 
it is and look for new solution in the meantime. It is bad to 
try to change the present situation by imposing things on the 
other side. This creates suspicion and diminishes the 
possibility to reach a long-term solution. If one of the 
international criteria for border determination is applied, it 
should be possible to draw the border at those places where it 
is controversial from the point of view of any side. 
  [Zagorac] What in your opinion are the elements of force 
applied by either side with the aim to change the present 
situation? 
  [Kucan] It is certain that felling of trees in the area of 
Sneznik is a one-sided measure, since the property of citizens 
of the other state is made use of. Take, for example, the 
construction of the border crossing facility in Secovlje by the 
Croatian side. It is being built on ground which can be assumed 
to belong to Slovenia. These things cannot contribute to a 
better understanding. In my opinion, these are some of the 
unnecessary one-sided measures; the present situation should 
remain unchanged until final solutions are found. If no 
solution can be found to a problem, it is better to apply 
alternatives as temporary solutions. Could not Plovanija, for 
example, be used as the alternative border crossing for 
Secovlje, and is it not possible that the Bay of Piran is under 
Slovene supervision as it has been by now? I would like to 
repeat that these could be temporary solutions until final 
solutions are found. 
  If there is not this minimum of will, people have the 
feeling 
that there is no readiness to solve problems, or that both sides 
are incapable of finding a solution. Life is already requiring 
certain regulations, and the unsolved border, economic, estate, 
and other issues inevitably affect the intensity of economic 
relations. This is what I have in mind when I say that 
politicians disturb the cooperation of economists. If there is 
no good will, if there is no agreement on a free trade zone, or 
on investments, if there is no anti double tax treaty, in short, 
if there is no basic legal infrastructure for the regulation of 
economic relations, people will look for illegal possibilities. 
This affects the economic power of both Slovenia and Croatia. 
This also affects their integration into Europe. 
  [Zagorac] There are countries in the world in which 
economists are quicker than politicians, but this seems to be 
impossible here; our economists are waiting for politicians to 
prepare the situation for their activities. 
  [Kucan] Yes, they are, but I still think that economic 
relations have not been completely frozen yet. This is good. 
  [Zagorac] This is true, but their scope and value have been 
considerably decreasing. 
  [Kucan] There are well-founded grounds for this situation, 
but politics cannot be the excuse for everything. 
  [Zagorac] What is the position you would like Slovenia to 
achieve in the international community? After the idea about a 
confederation between Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina had been 
confirmed, it was heard that Slovenia might join that 
association. Are these expectations realistic? 
  [Kucan] I would like to stress that Slovenia already has its 
recognizable position in international life, which it would 
still like to improve, though. It is a member of the Council of 
Europe, it has signed the agreement on cooperation within the 
Partnership for Peace, it has signed the agreement on 
cooperation with the European Union, and it has started 
negotiating on its associate membership in the EU. I hope that 
the EU Commission will formally approve of these negotiations in 
the meeting of the EU ministers in June. Slovenia has been 
invited to join the Treaty on Stability, it is a UN member, and 
a member of international financial institutions. It lives a 
normal international life. As a young state it has difficulties 
with the confirmation of its rating in international life. 
Since it is aware of the fact that it cannot live alone, and 
does not want to live alone, it is therefore trying to make 
contacts with the world, but by trying to establish 
international contacts it is confronted with the danger of 
losing its still not very recognizable identity. I would say 
that the most important Slovene task is to make sure that its 
identity does not get lost in the search for economic, 
political, defense, and other connections with the world. 
  Regarding Yugoslavia and, I would say, "exotic" thinking of 
certain poor, superficial, and ignorant "experts" on the 
political situation in the Balkans and on the history of the 
Slovene, the Croatian, and other peoples in the former 
Yugoslavia, on the reasons for its collapse, and on the founded 
wish of Slovenia and Croatia for independence and their 
improvised ideas about the creation of a third Yugoslavia -- I 
can say that this is not a realistic project for Slovenia. 
  As far as the confederation between Croatia and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is concerned, this is probably a realistic 
interest of these states, but Slovenia does not have any formal 
relation to that confederation, and it does not want to have 
one. Slovenia's interest is to cooperate with all European 
states, including the European southeast, the Balkans, and, 
naturally, all the states which arose or will arise from the 
former Yugoslavia. When everything normalizes, the quality of 
the cooperation will be significantly different from the one we 
had when we lived in one state. These relations will be neither 
better nor worse than they were as long as we lived together. 
They will be determined by interests. 
  [Zagorac] There are opinions in Europe that Slovenia could 
join Europe more easily in association with some other countries. 
  [Kucan] This is how those people think who do not want to 
face complicated problems and who want to make things easy for 
themselves. The case of Yugoslavia proved, however, that this 
makes things more difficult. Every country is a separate 
matter. We were in "one package" with Croatia when this was 
necessary, we even insisted on it, but we are two separate 
states now. If we regulate our bilateral relations, we shall 
both be able to reach what we want more easily, and that is 
Europe, without being in "a package." 
  [Zagorac] There were opinions in European political circles 
that Slovenia was lucky because it was taken as the example of a 
peaceful disintegration . 
  [Kucan] I did not feel the benevolence of such a judgment in 
my work. I do not know whether this judgment is realistic. It 
is true that Slovenia supported a peaceful disintegration of 
Yugoslavia. We made efforts and concrete proposals, also 
together with Croatia, but they were all strictly rejected by 
Belgrade and the federal leadership at that time. Our proposals 
were similar to the Czech Republic and Slovakia, but they 
applied them in a much better way, without bothering the 
international community with their disintegration. 
  [Zagorac] Slovenia has lately been confronted with 
demonstrations and similar forms of political life outside the 
parliament. 
  [Kucan] I think that the scandals we have been confronted 
with lately are a part of the democratization process in all 
countries in transition. These phenomena are more or less 
normal, although they are not desirable in countries with a 
parliamentary democracy. The scandals in Slovenia have had a 
positive effect, too. They have contributed to the awareness of 
the real value of a parliamentary democracy, of human dignity 
and rights. Their most important effect is, however, that they 
have made people aware of the necessity to use and respect the 
instruments of the constitutional state since this is the basis 
of democracy. 
  [Zagorac] To what extent did these events affect the 
reputation of Slovenia in the world? 
  [Kucan] We have been much more concerned on how this might 
affect our reputation in the world than the world itself. We 
have our idea on how the transition process should go and know 
that it is affected by such phenomena, but this is not of great 
interest for other states. What is important for them is that 
Slovenia makes sure that it will carry out its economic and 
political reforms, that it will respect human rights and grant 
rights to its minorities, that it is ready not only to 
materialize its rights in the international community, but also 
to take over responsibilities. These are the basic elements for 
political judgments. To my knowledge they have so far been more 
or less positive regarding Slovenia. There have been 
suggestions to make certain improvements in Slovenia, but 
generally speaking they have been positive and benevolent. 
  [Zagorac] During the preparations for this meeting with 
President Tudjman, there arose the question in Slovenia about 
different powers of the two presidents according to the 
respective constitutions. There were even rumors that it would 
be better to organize a meeting between Mr. Tudjman and Mr. 
Drnovsek (Slovene prime minister), or between Tudjman, Valentic, 
Kucan, and Drnovsek. Are these differences an impediment to 
successful negotiations? 
  [Kucan] I think that all contacts are useful, regardless of 
the fact whether they are organized between two or four people. 
It is important that it comes to negotiations and that they are 
continuous. It is important to bring arguments and solve 
problems, because this improves the confidence in the other 
partner. I do not underestimate the problem of the formal power 
of the president. This is a problem. The Croatian Constitution 
introduced the presidential system in contrast to the Slovene, 
which is a typical parliamentarian system with clearly defined 
and very restricted powers of the president, but this is no 
reason why the political dialogue on that level should be given 
up. 
  Regarding my negotiations with President Tudjman, I can say 
that they can represent a serious effort for the creation of a 
favorable negotiating atmosphere. In other words, we shall not 
solve concrete problems, but we shall try to define them and 
express our political will that they be solved. Concrete 
solutions will have to be offered by our governments and other 
institutions. Apart from that, bilateral relations will be only 
one of the topics discussed. They can, however, best be 
discussed in a broader, in the European context, for example, if 
we know that Slovenia and Croatia want to join the European 
Union and other political, economic, and defense associations. 
With the burden of unsolved bilateral problems we shall not be 
able to join European associations, though. This can best be 
proven by the example of bilateral difficulties Slovenia has 
with Italy. This problem could slow down the Slovenian 
integration into Europe. 
<H5>  [Box, p 10] </H5>
<H5>  Unpleasant and Worrying </H5>
  [Zagorac] A new, very unpleasant chapter has been opened in 
the relations between Slovenia and Italy. 
  [Kucan] This is a very unpleasant and worrying matter. Mr. 
Drnovsek has recently said that our relations, including the 
problems regarding the estate cases of those people who chose 
one of the two citizenships, were solved by the Ossimo 
Agreements. Slovenia insists that it is the legal successor to 
the agreement signed between Yugoslavia and Italy. Slovenia was 
recognized the status of the legal successor of Yugoslavia by 
the Italian government. Whether the confidence and the 
political atmosphere will improve remains to be seen. In any 
case, this has to be the will of both states. I think that it 
is contradictory to the logic of contemporary democratic 
relations in the international community to make bilateral 
matters a condition for Slovenian integration into multilateral 
associations, as this is the European Union, for example. 
<H5>  [Box, p 11] </H5>
<H5>  Markovic and the Attack Against Slovenia </H5>
  [Zagorac] Ante Markovic has appeared in Slovenian media with 
the opinion that "there was an agreement between the Slovenian 
leadership and Serbia about a forged attack against Slovenia." 
Is this true? 
  [Kucan] If he had really made that statement, I am very 
surprised. I cannot imagine that a man like Ante Markovic would 
make statements without any arguments. It would be better for 
him to think about his responsibility for the things which have 
happened in Yugoslavia. As the federal prime minister he had 
the possibility to contribute to the process of peaceful 
disintegration of Yugoslavia at the moment when it was clear 
that it was impossible to save it. It would be good to remind 
him of the conversation President Tudjman and I had with him in 
the Villa Weiss [in Zagreb] on 29 November 1990 about his 
possible future role in the process of peaceful disintegration. 
He refused such a possibility then. This is true. The Slovene 
agreement with Serbia he mentioned is simply not true. I do not 
know who made such an agreement. It was not me, this is certain. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31689 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   President Interviewed After D-Day Observance </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    President Interviewed After D-Day Observance </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306144194 Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 8 Jun 94 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306144194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Michal Kovac by Milan Rusko; place </F>
and date not given: "An Opportunity To Present Slovakia"] 
  [Text] Slovak President Michal Kovac, accompanied by his 
wife, returned home yesterday. He had been in Great Britain and 
France to take part in the 50th anniversary commemorations of 
the Allied landings in Normandy. He gave us an interview before 
his return, from which we have selected the following: 
  [Rusko] Mr. President, what is your view of the significance 
of the visits you have just made? 
  [Kovac] This was an excellent opportunity for us Slovaks, an 
opportunity for us to feel proud that our citizens also took 
part in the historic battles and that Slovakia--of course, along 
with the citizens of the Czech Republic--also contributed in 
this way to defeating fascism. It was also an opportunity to 
draw attention to Slovakia not only in the eyes of the European 
public because, apart from the European countries, 
representatives from the United States, Canada, Australia, and 
New Zealand were there. The opportunity to meet so many 
presidents, prime ministers, and members of royal families at 
the same time crops up, perhaps, once in 50 years; therefore, I 
believe that this event will help to create a favorable image of 
Slovakia. It was also a great opportunity for me to meet with 
our citizens, veterans, in England and Normandy and to thank 
them for the sacrifices they made. There was plenty of time to 
talk with those present, and it was pleasant for me to find out 
from them that they are following the situation in our Republic 
and that they view our future with hope. 
  [Rusko] Did you have talks with French Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur? Did you touch upon the issues involved in the 
Stability Pact initiated by him? 
  [Kovac] I made use of the fact that I was Mr. Balladur's 
first guest, and I followed up on the talks that Prime Minister 
Moravcik had with him during his visit to France. We also 
discussed the breakup of Czechoslovakia and the Stability Pact. 
I praised the proposal as a significant French contribution to 
extending the zone of stability in Europe. Mr. Balladur was 
obviously aware that the Slovak Republic and the Central 
European region, in general, plays and will play a major role in 
the European situation. He said that the French Government's 
policy is oriented toward helping the countries of this region 
become incorporated into European structures. 
  [Rusko] A very favorable atmosphere prevailed among the 
representatives of the participating states. Did you make use 
of this to intensify your contacts? 
  [Kovac] I made use of each contact to acquaint people with 
Slovakia and its policy. During my conversation with President 
Mitterrand, I expressed my delight that he has accepted my 
invitation to visit in September. He confirmed that he will 
come to visit because he realizes that it is necessary to 
support the Slovak Republic's democratic forces. Britain's 
Queen Elizabeth II, the Canadian prime minister, and others also 
spoke positively about Slovakia. 
  [Rusko] In the televised relay from the royal yacht 
Britannia, we saw you talking with President Bill Clinton. 
During the voyage, did you also have an opportunity to discuss 
your forthcoming visit to the United States? 
  [Kovac] Yes, I informed Mr. Clinton that President Goncz and 
I will be receiving an award in the United States from the 
Institute for East-West Studies in New York and that we will be 
in the United States at the end of June. He promised that he 
would find time for us. We also discussed our domestic 
political situation. He is also among those who have noticed 
certain changes, and he spoke about them with understanding. He 
expressed his conviction that we will continue to bolster 
domestic political stability and carry on in our course of 
transformation. 
  [Rusko] You saw how the commemorations held to mark the 50th 
anniversary of the Allied landings were organized. What is your 
view, on the basis of this experience, of the coming 50th 
anniversary commemorations of the Slovak National Uprising? 
  [Kovac] I also observed everything from the point of view 
that I am the main host and that it is very much up to me to 
ensure that it all turns out well. I think that something of 
what we have seen here could also be implemented in the scenario 
for our commemorations. I realized that we have a unique 
opportunity to present Slovakia in a favorable light. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31690 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_i_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian President Makes `Official' Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian President Makes `Official' Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406093694 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 0900 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406093694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Dr. Franjo Tudjman, president of the Republic of 
Croatia, and his aides have arrived on the first official visit 
to Bosnia-Herzegovina and Sarajevo, as was announced for some 
time. President Tudjman was met and welcomed by Alija 
Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Kresimir Zubak and Ejup Ganic, president of vice president of 
the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina respectively, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic, Sarajevo 
Mayor Tarif Kupusovic, and other prominent politicians and 
public dignitaries. 
  The official Izetbegovic-Tudjman talks and the talks at the 
level of the delegations of the governments of the Republics of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia opened in the building of the 
Presidency of Bosnia-Herzegovina immediately after the festive 
welcome with the highest state honors. After these talks, Dr. 
Franjo Tudjman, president of the Republic of Croatia, will visit 
the Embassy of the Republic of Croatia. 
  Dr. Tudjman's visit to Bosnia-Herzegovina and Sarajevo will 
end early this afternoon with a luncheon that will be hosted in 
honor of the prominent guest from the Republic of Croatia by 
Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31691 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman Confers With U.S. Ambassador Galbraith </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudjman Confers With U.S. Ambassador Galbraith </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1006175794 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1700 GMT 10 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1006175794 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Croatian President Franjo Tudjman today received 
U.S. Ambassador Peter Galbraith in the presidential palace. 
Tudjman informed him about the activities of the Croatian 
authorities in implementing the Washington agreement, and about 
his imminent visit to Sarajevo. He particularly stressed that, 
despite certain rumors in the public, the establishing of the 
Croat-Muslim federation is closely linked with the setting up of 
a conferederation with Croatia. Ambassador Galbraith said that 
the U.S. leadership holds the same stances on that issues. 
  They also discussed the improved bilateral relations between 
the two states and specific steps that need to be taken in that 
sphere. They spoke especially about investments by U.S. firms in 
the Croatian economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31692 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_k_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  12 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman Receives Herceg-Bosna Delegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudjman Receives Herceg-Bosna Delegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1206123594 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1100 GMT 12 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1206123594 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] In Zagreb yesterday President Tudjman received the 
leaderships of the Croatian republic of Herceg-Bosna and the 
Croatian Democratic Union [HDZ] of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Croat 
deputies from the Constitutional Assembly of the Federation of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, stated the presidential office on Saturday 
evening. 
  The Croatian president and his guests discussed the further 
implementation of the Washington agreements and confirmed that 
it was very important to make efforts for implementing the 
agreement regarding the organization of the B-H Federation and 
the creation of a confederation with the Republic of Croatia. 
Undertaking these efforts, the Croatian people in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina should remain united in order to achieve its 
political aims and the strategic interests of the Croatian 
state. On this occasion President Tudjman announced his 
forthcoming visit to Sarajevo in an effort to contribute to the 
implementation of the Washington agreement. 
  Last night's meeting was also attended by Croatian Foreign 
Minister Mate Granic, Defense Minister Gojko Susak, Ivan Milas, 
president of the HDZ deputies' club in the assembly, Ivan 
Aralica, deputy spokesman of the Chamber of Counties, Ivic 
Pasalic, HDZ member and the president's internal affairs 
adviser, and Miomir Zuzul, Croatian Ambassador to the United 
Nations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31693 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_b_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhelev Assesses Benefits of `Partnership' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhelev Assesses Benefits of `Partnership' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406174694 Sofia BULGARSKA ARMIYA in Bulgarian 9 Jun 94 pp 
1,3 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406174694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BULGARSKA ARMIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Georgi Kardanov: "Security by All for All"] </F>
  [Text] Joining the European and Euro-Atlantic economic 
structures and security systems, which represents part of our 
foreign policy strategy, offers us the best opportunity to give 
scope to Bulgarian national interests -- Bulgarian President Dr. 
Zhelyu Zhelev made this statement at the Central Military Club 
in Sofia yesterday in a speech he made to the Atlantic Club. 
  After our association with the European Union [EU], our 
membership of the Council of Europe, and our "enhanced" status 
in the Western European Union [WEU], Bulgaria's relations with 
NATO within the framework of the Partnership for Peace 
Initiative acquires particular importance, Dr. Zhelev said. 
Bulgaria has already signed the outline agreement and has 
committed itself to the process of seeking a higher degree of 
security, called security by all for all. Dr. Zhelev outlined 
the most important features of the initiative: The equality of 
the parties in their initial positions does not exclude, but 
presupposes a differentiation, close in time, between the 
Eastern European states according to their abilities to share 
responsibilities and fit into the NATO structures and 
mechanisms; the North Atlantic Alliance aims to internally 
reorganize and adapt itself to become a common system of 
security; within this system, the United States retains its 
participation in building European security, and the role of the 
WEU will be enhanced; and, lastly, the Partnership initiative in 
no way aims to isolate Russia, nor does it intend to favor 
Russia. 
  Dr. Zhelev noted that for a number of years Bulgaria has 
been 
making immense efforts to change the nature of interstate 
relations in our region, directing them into a new channel; 
toward good-neighborliness, cooperation, stable development, the 
opening of borders, and real integration into the rest of 
Europe, due to which the ideas of the Partnership for Peace are 
in harmony with our own national interests. The president sees 
grounds for this in the following factors. First, now the 
Balkans are no longer split into blocs or divided along 
ideological lines; quite the reverse, the Balkan countries, 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] 
included, accept the initiative. In this way we can avert the 
greatest danger for the region, namely the appearance of 
alliances -- "Orthodox or Pan-Slavic axes," an "Islamic 
crescent," and other configurations -- that in past history were 
the precursors of Balkan wars and disasters. 
  Second, Bulgaria is surrounded by neighbors that are 
militarily superior to it in both absolute and relative terms, 
producing a tendency for the imbalance to become greater. It is 
precisely the PFP Initiative that will help to fill the "vacuum" 
in the sphere of regional balances. Bulgaria is also interested 
in mutually acceptable levels of the individual components of 
the military balance, in transparency, and in the application of 
the Treaty on Limiting Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, but 
measures in relation to the Balkans cannot be delayed; action is 
needed now, before it is too late! 
  After speaking about the possibilities offered by the 
initiative to the Eastern European countries regarding access to 
Western markets, Dr. Zhelev urged Bulgarian companies, banks, 
and institutions to utilize these opportunities in the most 
rational manner, including in the struggle of the police and the 
investigation organs against organized crime, narcotics 
trafficking, and smuggling, by relying on partnership and 
professional cooperation within the framework of NATO. 
  The president devoted special attention to the effect that 
the Partnership initiative will have on the reform of the 
Bulgarian Army, military science, and the country's defense 
potential. First, the Defense Ministry and the army command 
would gain indisputable benefit from the relevant NATO 
documentation -- in juridical matters, standardization, material 
and equipment supplies, communications, and management 
coordination. In the future, this cooperation may also extend 
to the fields of military production and the control of and 
trade in special products. Bulgaria sees possibilities for 
cooperating with NATO in training specialized units for missions 
under the aegis of the United Nations and the CSCE. The 
training of the officer corps also offers broad scope for 
cooperation, such as in special training courses at NATO centers 
and military schools, cooperation in training exercises, command 
staff exercises, and many national field and naval maneuvers. 
It is no accident that the plan of the Defense Ministry 
includes the "Breeze '94" naval exercise, with the participation 
of naval units from the U.S. 6th Fleet, Russia, Greece, Turkey, 
Ukraine, and Romania, and with observers also invited from 
Georgia. 
  Bulgaria's armed forces are going through a difficult and 
demanding stage of profound reform, in both essence and scope, 
the aim of which is to maintain in peacetime a small, but 
high-quality army. Close cooperation with NATO is a 
precondition for reform to succeed and for the Bulgarian 
officers corps and all the military to make a worthy 
contribution to the democratic civic society. 
  The president's speech was listened to with great interest 
by 
the capacity audience, which included representatives of 
parliament and the government and state institutions; 
ambassadors and military attaches; Army General Lyuben Petrov, 
chief of the Bulgarian Army General Staff; representatives of 
the Defense Ministry and senior officers of the armed forces; 
eminent Bulgarian intellectuals; and members of the Atlantic 
Club. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31694 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_b_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Deputy Alleges `Ethnic Purge' in Kurdzhali </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Deputy Alleges `Ethnic Purge' in Kurdzhali </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306201594 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1900 
GMT 13 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1306201594 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] An ethnic purge is fully under way in the cultural 
and economic fields and in the executive power in the Kurdzhali 
region; this is a deliberate line being followed by the Rights 
and Freedoms Movement [DPS]. Stefan Stefanov, National Assembly 
deputy for the Bulgarian Socialist Party [BSP], made this 
statement this evening at a news conference in Kurdzhali. He 
cited dozens of examples of leading Bulgarian officials being 
replaced by DPS activists lacking the necessary professional 
qualities. According to the BTA report, Stefan Stefanov 
tomorrow will brief the BSP parliamentary group on the 
activities of the DPS in the region and will demand a meeting 
with Interior Minister Viktor Mikhaylov. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31695 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_b_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Democratic Justice Leader Discusses Elections </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Democratic Justice Leader Discusses Elections </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306185294 Sofia KONTINENT in Bulgarian 10 Jun 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306185294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia KONTINENT </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nedim Gendzhev, leader of the Democratic </F>
Party of Justice, by Nataliya Vuchkova; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Vuchkova] Dr. Gendzhev, is the Democratic Party 
of Justice ready with its program and, if elections are held, 
among which parties will it seek a coalition partner? 
  [Gendzhev] Our party will have a leftist orientation. We 
can work in coalition with both the Aleksandur Stamboliyski 
Bulgarian National Agrarian Union and the Bulgarian Socialist 
Party [BSP], despite the fact that some people will not like 
this. The party's program is social democratic in nature and 
close to the BSP program. The Union of Democratic Forces, which 
claims to be a democratic party, has nothing to show the people 
apart from a pronounced primeval anticommunism. However, this 
will not help us emerge from the economic crisis, which can only 
be achieved by national consensus reached by making compromises. 
  If anyone analyzes the activities of the Bulgarian 
Parliament 
during the last two years, he will reach the conclusion that 
Bulgaria has no Bulgarians who think about their state, only 
anticommunists and sodomists. 
  [Vuchkova] Dr. Gendzhev, do you think your party will 
capture votes from the electorates of the Movement for Rights 
and Freedoms [DPS] and Mehmed Hodja's party? 
  [Gendzhev] We address ourselves to all people, regardless of 
their party affiliations or official position. We want to 
develop an economic program for the regions that are in the most 
wretched situation. The present government is a DPS one, but 
not one that represents the DPS electorate; it is a government 
of Ahmed Dogan, Osman Oktay, Yunal Lyutfi, Kadir Kadir, and a 
handful of others. More than a half of the electors who voted 
for the DPS at the last elections will now cast their votes for 
the coalition that we will form. However, one thing is clear -- 
namely that from now on we will not enter any coalition with the 
DPS or Mehmed Hodja. 
  [Vuchkova] How will you react to possible accusations that 
you formed a party on an ethnic basis? 
  [Gendzhev] One should not make such speculations if a Turk 
or Muslim stands at the head of a party. I believe that, in 
this case, one cannot say that our party is religiously or 
ethnically based. 
  [Vuchkova] Would you like to comment on the recent practice 
of identifying religious with ethnic features. 
  [Gendzhev] One cannot identify the Muslim religion with 
Turkish nationality. Armenians, Bulgarians, Turks, and Romanies 
may all be Muslims. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who was both a 
Frenchman and a Muslim, did not identify himself as a Turk, did 
he? It must be made clear that Islam is a world religion, not a 
Turkish one. 
  A degree of Turkification may indeed be taking place in 
certain regions, but the more attention you draw to a problem, 
the more it comes to the forefront of public attention. When 
they made the Muslims change their names and closed the mosques, 
did this turn them into Bulgarians? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31696 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_b_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Second Reactor at Kozloduy Plant Restarted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Second Reactor at Kozloduy Plant Restarted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506101994 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 0900 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506101994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The 440-megawatt second reactor at the Kozloduy 
Nuclear Plant was restarted and connected to the country's grid. 
It is expected that by the end of the day it will be 
functioning at 50 percent of its capacity. The reactor was 
switched off for three months, during which time it was repaired 
and refueled. Three additional reactors are functioning at a 
total capacity of 1,400 megawatt. The plant's fourth and fifth 
reactors are being repaired. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31697 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_c_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus Interviewed on Policies, Death Penalty </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus Interviewed on Policies, Death Penalty </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406144794 Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 10 Jun 94 pp 1, 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406144794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague LIDOVE NOVINY </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus by Eva </F>
Martinkova; place and date not given: "I Am Worried about 
Parkinson's Sprouts of Bureaucracy"] 
  [Text] [Martinkova] The fact that the government has been 
in power for half of its term raises the question whether you 
have the feeling that certain points in the government policy 
statement, adopted precisely two years ago, remain to be 
fulfilled. 
  [Klaus] I really do not have that feeling. The government 
policy statement is a document created by 19 government members 
-- some of whom did not know each other before -- in the span of 
several hours. In the span of four years of the existence of 
this government, a number of ideas are being finalized, 
completed, pushed from the left to the right, up and down. On 
one hand, I take the document seriously, but on the other, I do 
not believe that each of its conjunctions or prepositions has a 
constant weight. It is possible to say in this global 
evaluation that the government program is being fulfilled. 
  [Martinkova] The proposal of the Civic Democratic Party 
[ODS] Executive Council regarding districts as the fundamental 
pillars of self-administration has surprised not only the 
coalition partners, but also many ODS representatives. What 
made the Executive Council present a proposal about which they 
could anticipate that it would run up against such resistance? 
  [Klaus] First, I would like to say that this is not a new 
opinion. We voted on the proposal in the Executive Council six 
months ago and it won slightly less than 50 percent of 
supporters at that time. Now it has acquired a substantial 
support of three-quarters of the Executive Council's members. 
  The ODS is a party that constantly bases its policy on the 
citizen. It fears all institutions that are established over 
the citizen, be it on small or large territory. That is why we 
try to minimize such institutions. If there is something we are 
unable to do at present, then it is to suppress completely all 
Parkinson's sprouts of bureaucracy that are running wild in our 
country. That is one of the things that I am tremendously 
worried about. 
  We are building on the fact that the citizen is the basic 
and 
absolute value. All the institutions over him are derived from 
the citizen, and must be established according to their purpose, 
efficiency, and also according to whether people want them or 
not. In that sense, it seems to us that the minimal 
intervention in the existing regional arrangement would be to 
utilize the districts that have existed for 35 years and have, 
due to that fact, certain authenticity, no matter how much 
people disliked them when they were established in 1960. Adding 
an elected component to the district bodies could be the least 
painful and most inexpensive way in the process of forming the 
regions. That is simply it. 
  [Martinkova] Serious considerations have appeared recently 
as to whether the death penalty should be reinstated. Did you 
give it a thought? 
  [Klaus] I personally do not believe it is necessary. Being 
a politician, however, it is my task to think about matters that 
I have no desire to ponder. I try to react sensitively to 
public opinion. I have noticed in that respect a noticeable 
shift in public opinion. I am a bit surprised by it; 
nevertheless, I respect it. In the first post-November years, 
the standard humanitarian reaction to the death penalty question 
was the answer that the death penalty was an extreme solution, 
which man should not adopt. People pointed to errors and 
mistakes, etc. That opinion met with unequivocal response and 
applause in the first post-November years. I have noticed that 
it has changed over the past six months. My unchanging 
arguments do not have unequivocal support any longer. There are 
an increasing number of voices in favor of the death penalty. I 
pay great attention to the situation, but it is the only 
reaction to this problem I can describe at the moment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31698 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_c_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus Comments on Fund Chief's Departure </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus Comments on Fund Chief's Departure </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406194794 Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network in Czech 1615 
GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406194794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Regular Tuesday interview with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus </F>
by correspondent David Stahlavsky on 14 June; place not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Stahlavsky] Mr. Prime Minister, in our regular 
interviews it has always been me who asked the questions. It 
occurred to me that we could perhaps make an exception today so 
that you yourself could pick an event or topic of the past days 
that you would like to talk about. 
  [Klaus] You have taken me by surprise. I am really not 
prepared for this. I think that the topic that somewhat stirred 
up public opinion as well as the political sphere was, of 
course, the recalling of Tomas Jezek as the head of the National 
Property Fund [NPF] and the appointment of the new candidate to 
that post. [passage omitted] 
  It seems to me that it is a serious matter. As far as I can 
see I think the way it was done did not satisfy many -- the 
public in particular. I think that this is a pity. Most of 
all, it would be a pity to send out to the world any confusing 
signals which, in my opinion, are not appropriate. 
  [Stahlavsky] Mr. Prime Minister, in connection with Tomas 
Jezek's departure from the NPF, Jaroslav Ortman, a 
representative of the left bloc, said that this is the beginning 
of a search for the one who is guilty of errors made during 
privatization. 
  [Klaus] No, that is certainly not the case. I believe that 
with Ortman it is a case of wishful thinking. It really is not 
the case. The problem is on one side a standard problem, that 
is a political struggle of one against another. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Stahlavsky] [passage omitted] What is your opinion on the 
strengthening of presidential office powers? 
  [Klaus] None of us has discussed the strengthening or non- 
strengthening of the presidential office. Similarly, none of us 
has dealt with eliminating the Senate from the Constitution. We 
are permanently being attributed ideas like that and I repeat 
that we are not dealing with such issues. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31699 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_c_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister Outlines Arms Procurement `Philosophy' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Minister Outlines Arms Procurement `Philosophy' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406202494 Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 13 Jun 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406202494 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CESKY DENIK </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Antonin Baudys by Miloslav </F>
Frydl; place and date not given: "Money Is the Determining 
Factor in the Modernization of the Czech Army"] 
  [Text] No decision has been made yet on whether the Army 
of the Czech Republic will be reequipped with the multipurpose 
Lada weapons system, Defense Minister Antonin Baudys told CESKY 
DENIK in an interview. According to his words, Czech firms 
should be given preference in equipping the Army with modern 
types of weapons. "In modernizing and reequipping the Army, we 
are guided by the following basic philosophy: The final 
supplier will be a Czech company. Only those components will be 
imported that cannot be manufactured here or for which no one in 
our country holds a production license. We will have all 
modernization projects ready by the end of June. The problem 
lies in disposable resources, that is, in how much money we are 
going to get from the government and parliament. Money is the 
absolutely determining factor in modernization. We focus on 
Czech suppliers, which means that finances invested in the 
modernization of the army could yield a multiple return because 
they mean jobs for hundreds of thousands of people. As regards 
foreign firms that will be interested in cooperating with us by 
means of joint ventures, licenses, or technology transfers, we 
want this cooperation to help us secure markets for our 
products. To put it in simplified terms: 100 pieces will be 
manufactured, of which the army will take 10 and the rest will 
be sold abroad. The profit made on those 90 pieces must cover 
the cost of the army's 10 pieces. This approach means, first, 
that the army will be equipped with modern weapons; second, that 
people will have jobs and money will flow into the state coffers 
from exports; and, third, that money will be saved that would 
otherwise be spent on restructuring, unemployment, and so forth." 
  [Frydl] Will you tell me with the weapons of which domestic 
firm the Army will be reequipped? 
  [Baudys] I will not. A quite regular tender will have to 
take place to determine this. Zbrojovka Cesky Brod is no longer 
the sole company capable of manufacturing weapons for the Czech 
Army although, naturally, it is a hot contender. I repeat 
again: We will have the modernization projects, including 
priorities, ready by the end of June. Then it will be necessary 
to conduct a series of talks to determine what we can actually 
count on. That will be followed by the invitation of tenders 
and, subsequently, talks with foreign firms. There are areas in 
which the Czech Republic is traditionally on a top level. One 
is small arms, the other is aviation technology. The future 
L-159 fighter plane could become a hit worldwide. Some heavier 
types of weapons are another area. Here we count on the 
utilization of our heavy industry, such as Skoda Plzen and 
others. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31700 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_c_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Socialist Party Congress Elects Chairman </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Socialist Party Congress Elects Chairman </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406200594 Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 13 Jun 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406200594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague LIDOVE NOVINY </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [CTK report in the "From the Political Scene" column: "Milan </F>
Adam Elected Chairman of the Czechoslovak Socialist Party"] 
  [Text] Pardubice -- Milan Adam, 66, former minister of 
education in the post-November 1989 government, was elected 
chairman of the Czechoslovak Socialist Party [CSS] at the 27th 
CSS Congress in Pardubice. The participants in the congress 
also approved party statutes and the program of this 
extraparliamentary party. In the adopted documents, the 
Socialists have subscribed to the traditions of the CSS since 
1897 when the CSS' predecessor "was born of the will of 
nationally and socially minded workers." 
  However, the status of legal successor to the pre-November 
CSS was also claimed by Hirs' Liberal National Social Party 
[LSNS] when it was founded in May 1993. Unlike the present CSS, 
the LSNS emphasizes the tradition of Benes' National Social 
Party. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31701 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    SZDSZ's Peto Views Talks </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406121094 Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP in Hungarian 11 Jun 94 p 
13 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406121094 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ivan Peto, chairman of the Alliance of Free </F>
Democrats, by Noemi Sumegi; place and date not given: "The 
Details Will Not Be Published Later, Either -- Ivan Peto on the 
Deputy Prime Ministerial Post, the Need To Prove, and the 
Cohabitation Agreement"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Sumegi] Before the 
elections, the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] often 
mentioned the lack of unity in the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP], and that your cooperation with them would depend a lot 
on which of these forces would dominate in the MSZP. 
  [Peto] During the talks, it has become clear that the MSZP's 
coalition intention is serious and this cannot at the moment be 
doubted by the SZDSZ. The coalition will obviously increase the 
chance that policies that are acceptable to the SZDSZ prevail in 
the country, and it is no secret that this was one of the 
factors that influenced us. Therefore, if we had and have 
worries about the possible existence of various intentions in 
the MSZP, we will be able to influence these intentions through 
the coalition. I do not think that this needs to be kept 
secret. [passage omitted] 
  [Sumegi] You have often mentioned the example of Germany, 
where the Free Democrats, in spite of their few mandates, occupy 
an important position in the government. Is it possible that 
the SZDSZ will get the positions of foreign minister, interior 
minister, and justice minister in Hungary? 
  [Peto] If we only looked at the speculation then the whole 
government would belong to us because it has already been 
suggested regardomg all ministries that we insist on having it. 
We do not wish to talk about this in public during the talks. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Sumegi] Returning to the German example, is it possible 
that, whoever acquires majority, the SZDSZ can always be a 
governmental factor? 
  [Peto] Hungarian political life consists of three lines and 
practically none of the political forces can form a government 
on its own -- although the MSZP has now acquired the absolute 
majority. I assume that this situation will be prolonged and 
that a similar landslide-like victory cannot be expected at the 
next elections. Therefore, at least two forces will always have 
to work together. The SZDSZ is a serious factor in political 
life and, at the next elections, it can be one of the parties 
that will choose coalition partners. 
  [Sumegi] Do you even think cooperation with the conservative 
parties possible? 
  [Peto] On the basis of statements made by some leaders of 
the Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF], I assume that there is a 
chance that the MDF will conduct moderate politics in 
opposition. It is not necessary for our relations to remain the 
way they have been in the past few years. I can imagine that 
the Hungarian political life will be like the German one where 
there are joining points between the various political forces. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Sumegi] The SZDSZ, which has so far been open about its 
politics, appears to be more hostile to the press. 
  [Peto] We consider it extremely important to inform the 
public but we also have other obligations. If our convention 
had been public then our debate could not have been so open. A 
decision that will determine a party's life in the long run does 
not necessarily have to be made before the public, and the same 
applies to the coalition talks. The negotiations would not 
achieve their objective if we were also trying to adapt to the 
needs of publicity. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31702 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    SZDSZ's Magyar on Progress in Talks </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406145194 Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP in Hungarian 14 Jun 94 p 
4 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406145194 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Sz.Sz."-signed interview with Balint Magyar, executive </F>
chairman of the Alliance of Free Democrats; place and date not 
given: "People Cannot Legally Be Made To Adhere to the 
Coalition Agreement"] 
  [Text] I dare say that it was not us who spent the most 
money on the election campaign, Balint Magyar told MAGYAR 
HIRLAP. We also interviewed Magyar, member of the coalition 
negotiating team of the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ], on 
the planned agreement and the chances of the negotiations. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] What is the guarantee that the coalition 
partners will adhere to the contents of the agreement that is to 
be made? 
  [Magyar] The coalition agreement is a political arrangement 
and of course no one can be forced by legal measures to adhere 
to it. The agreement is valid while the sides observe it. If 
someone violates the agreement, this means that he no longer 
wishes to govern together with the partner. In this case, the 
coalition can collapse. The coalition agreement establishes the 
conditions for joint governmental decisionmaking, the 
implementation of the jointly made decisions, and joint 
responsibility for these. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Many people might believe that the coalition 
talks have been halted because, according to the indications, 
you did not manage to make any progress on 12 June. 
  [Magyar] The views are constantly being brought closer 
together and the number of disputed issues is being reduced all 
the time. With Imre Szekeres, executive chairman of the 
Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP], we are continuously 
coordinating the text on the mechanisms and guarantees of joint 
governmental work. There is no need at all for concern; even in 
Germany, the coalition talks last two to four weeks although 
they already have established mechanisms for such talks. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Is it possible that you will manage to agree 
on the guarantees today or this week? 
  [Magyar] I would not exclude this possibility. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Between the two rounds of the elections, you 
said that the MSZP would exclude the possibility of coalition 
cooperation with the SZDSZ if it named [MSZP Chairman] Gyula 
Horn as prime ministerial candidate. Did this cause any 
problems in the negotiations? 
  [Magyar] Both parties acted independently when they set up 
the negotiating delegations for the coalition talks. I find it 
perfectly natural that neither side interfered in the other 
side's selection of the delegation members or in determining its 
size. As for the quoted statement, a fundamentally different 
situation arose after the second round of the elections because 
the MSZP acquired a 54 percent majority in Parliament. 
According to the surveys, the majority of the MSZP's and 
SZDSZ's voters are committed supporters of the two parties' 
coalition, and the Socialists made a coalition offer to us. All 
these made it perfectly clear for us that we had to enter the 
coalition talks. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] As one of the SZDSZ's influential 
politicians, do you have governmental desires, would you accept 
a nomination for some kind of governmental position? 
  [Magyar] I have already said many times that I do not have 
such ambitions. I have not changed this view. As a matter of 
fact, participation in the coalition talks does not necessarily 
mean that the person in question wishes to take a role in the 
new government. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] According to assessments published in the 
press, the SZDSZ had spent the most money on the election 
campaign. According to certain information, the party has 
serious debts. I am asking you, as the SZDSZ's campaign chief, 
what is true from all this? 
  [Magyar] The SZDSZ does not have serious debts. As a matter 
of fact, the assessments of campaign costs did not contain the 
costs of certain advertisement carriers. The SZDSZ used the 
amount that is had at its disposal during the campaign rather 
efficiently. I dare say that it was not us who spent the most 
money on the campaign but at least two parties were ahead of us 
in this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31703 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Foreign Ministry Possibilities Noted </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406112594 Budapest MAGYAR NEMZET in Hungarian 11 Jun 94 p 
7 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406112594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MAGYAR NEMZET </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Laszlo Kovacs, member of the National </F>
Committee of the Hungarian Socialist Party, by Gabor Lambert; 
place and date not given: "We Can Envisage a Coalition-Led 
Foreign Ministry"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Lambert] There is really 
little difference between the foreign and security policy 
programs of the Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP] and the 
Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ]. Starting from this premise, 
can you envisage a Foreign Ministry leadership in which 
coalition factors are asserted? 
  [Kovacs] I could envisage such a leadership. It is true 
that there are no basic differences between the two programs 
regarding the main goals, the mentality, the means, or the 
style. I can envisage a leadership in the Foreign Ministry in 
which one party provides the minister and the other the 
political state secretary, although the statements by the MSZP 
so far are generally in favor of "one-colour" ministries. My 
personal opinion is that in some cases dual leadership is 
perhaps more comfortable, namely that the minister and the 
political state secretary do not belong to the same party. One 
can also envisage a solution in which one party has the position 
of minister and the other party the position of chairman of 
Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee. I know from experience 
-- because I have filled this position for the last one and a 
half years -- that the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee 
also has an opportunity to influence foreign policy. 
  [Lambert] Looking at the recent past, we can say that the 
Foreign Ministry was under the strong influence of the prime 
minister. Now, if we start from the premise that Gyula Horn 
will be the prime minister, a politician who has serious 
diplomatic experience, how will this be reflected in the 
leadership of the Foreign Ministry? 
  [Kovacs] In most countries, the prime minister takes an 
active part in shaping and implementing foreign policy. There 
are a lot of summit meetings, including NATO meetings, meetings 
in the NATO Cooperation Council, meetings between the European 
Union and the associate members, the Western European Union, and 
the CSCE, meetings in which the prime minister has to 
participate. Prime ministerial meetings also represent the 
summit in bilateral relations. As for Gyula Horn, he has indeed 
spent most of his life in the area of foreign relations. If I 
became the head of the Foreign Ministry, this would not be a 
problem for me, because I have been working with Gyula Horn 
together for many years, and we understand each other well, and 
I think we also complement each other. [passage omitted] 
  [Lambert] The programs of both the SZDSZ and the MSZP carry 
the proposal to incorporate the Ministry of International 
Economic Relations into the organizational framework of the 
Foreign Ministry. What are the chances of such a development now 
when increasing exports is one of the major tasks of our 
economic policy, and the aforementioned ministry could play a 
role in this? 
  [Kovacs] Actually, in its current form, the Ministry of 
International Economic Relations has become obsolete. Foreign 
trade is no longer a monopoly and this ministry lost a series of 
functions that used to be important in the past. Therefore, I 
think it is logical to envisage the incorporation of some of the 
tasks of this ministry into a future "economic top ministry," 
and some other tasks into the Industry Ministry and the Trade 
Ministry, and the foreign activity should come under the 
authority of the Foreign Ministry, as is the case in most 
countries. In this case, the current commercial representations 
abroad would be incorporated into the respective embassies. 
  [Lambert] If I am correct, the National Information Office 
is already considering a possible halt in its activity. Could 
you confirm that this is also an MSZP view? 
  [Kovacs] The MSZP has not yet examined the situation of 
various government offices and government-affiliated offices. 
My personal opinion is that the activity carried out by the 
National Information Office in recent months only harmed 
Hungary's international evaluation, so it is certain that this 
body cannot function in its current form and with its current 
personnel. 
  [Lambert] How do you envisage the contacts with the 
Hungarians living beyond our borders? 
  [Kovacs] Support for the Hungarians living beyond our 
borders in their endeavor to receive constitutional and legal 
guarantees for their rights is one of the major directions of 
activity in the foreign policy concepts of the MSZP. Thus, it 
is absolutely natural that the government must be ready for 
close cooperation. We must, however, develop these contacts 
without discrimination, namely with all the legitimate 
organizations of Hungarians in Slovakia, Ukraine, Romania, 
Serbia, Vojvodina, Croatia, and Slovenia, and not only with 
parties, trends, and personalities that are politically and 
ideologically close to the Hungarian government. Unfortunately, 
this has been the practice in the past four years. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Lambert] As chairman of Parliament's Foreign Affairs 
Committee, you repeatedly criticized the Foreign Ministry for 
failing to provide sufficient information about the diplomatic 
steps under consideration. From your own experience, how do you 
envisage future parliamentary control over the Foreign Ministry? 
  [Kovacs] I have indeed criticized relations between the 
Foreign Ministry and the Foreign Affairs Committee, but I also 
recognized the fact that these relations have steadily improved 
in the past four years, as we have learned the laws of a 
multiparty parliamentary democracy, both government party 
members and opposition members. We had to learn what it means 
to be a government party member and an opposition member and how 
to tolerate each other's situation and views to a certain 
extent. In view of these experiences, I believe things will 
work better in the next parliamentary cycle, because the MSZP 
and the SZDSZ -- the two parties that will now form a government 
coalition -- have opposition experience, and the Hungarian 
Democratic Forum [MDF] and the Christian Democratic People's 
Party [KDNP] -- parties that will now be in the opposition -- 
also have governing experience. Therefore, we have a mutually 
better understanding of each other's situation. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31704 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Foreign Policy Plans Compared </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406182594 Budapest NEPSZABADSAG in Hungarian 14 Jun 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406182594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest NEPSZABADSAG </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Laszlo M. Lengyel: "There Are No Major </F>
Differences in the Foreign Policy Programs"] 
  [Text] The coordination of the foreign policy programs of 
the Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP] and the Alliance of Free 
Democrats [SZDSZ] starts today within the framework of the 
ongoing coalition negotiations. Comparing the documents, we can 
say that there are few actual differences between them. The 
foreign policy section of the negotiations will be mostly a 
field of expert coordination, rather than political fighting. 
Neither of the programs is an ideological one; they can be 
clearly called pragmatic, and both are based on international 
realities and interests. 
  Both parties regard European integration and neighborhood 
policy as the cornerstones of Hungary's foreign policy attitude, 
and this provides the goals of our foreign economic, security, 
integration, and national minority policies. 
  The SZDSZ regards full NATO membership as the most important 
concluding moment of integration; the MSZP puts Hungary's 
membership in the European Union in first place. Therefore, the 
MSZP regards the Partnership for Peace program as an adequate 
step on the road leading to the NATO, stressing that this 
strengthens the confidence of the countries in our region toward 
each other and creates the conditions for the NATO-compatibility 
of the Hungarian defense forces. The SZDSZ does not emphasize 
the importance of the Partnership stage so clearly. The MSZP 
would use a referendum in the matter of NATO membership, but 
this is not so clearly formulated in the SZDSZ program. 
  Both the MSZP and the SZDSZ are aware of the fact that the 
conditions of economic, political, and security policies and 
military alliance cooperation with Europe must be primarily 
created within Hungary itself; a hasty and unprepared 
integration would cause serious damage to our economy. It is 
impossible to start a "competition" in this process in our 
region and get a more favorable position than others; at the 
same time, we must be aware of the fact that Hungary has 
recently been present in Western considerations "according to 
its weight" and, although this might give the impression of 
devaluation, this is actually not the case. However, the 
unsettled relations with our neighbors is a factor that hinders 
integration and it harms the measure of our acceptance. Looking 
at it from both directions, it is important to create a 
modernized and attractive Hungary, a desirable partner. 
  The differences derive from the political habits and cadres 
of the two parties. Foreign policy has traditionally been a 
success area of the MSZP and, along with Gyula Horn, Laszlo 
Kovacs, and Csaba Tabajdi, numerous other theoretical and 
practical experts, former ambassadors, and foreign officials can 
now be employed. The SZDSZ-shop led by Istvan Szent-Ivanyi, 
with its straight strategic line that puts greater emphasis on 
principles, will emerge along with the MSZP foreign policy that 
will probably be able to react to the changes with great 
security. 
  In Csaba Tabajdi, the MSZP has a considerable expert on the 
international standards on the issue of ethnic Hungarians living 
beyond our borders and the national minority issue in general. 
The Tabajdi-group clearly declared the principle of "national 
minority rights in exchange for the border clause," which does 
not contradict the idea of the Szent-Ivanyi group according to 
which "Hungary does not have any territorial demands that can be 
implemented; nor can it have such demands; however, guaranteeing 
national minority rights is clearly a European norm." It is a 
matter of taste which of these has more argument value and which 
is more idealistic, or more practical. (One can also mention 
here a pseudo-argument, but the issue can also be interpreted in 
the way that the border issue on the other side, and the 
situation of national minorities on the Hungarian side received 
a psychological weight that led to the development of a real 
situation of something in exchange for something else). 
Differences mostly emerge in the clear stand in favor of the 
autonomy concept of the ethnic Hungarian minorities, because 
this appears more clearly in the MSZP. The fact that both 
parties think in terms of contributing to the social and 
economic modernization of the neighboring countries, economic 
contacts that improve the situation of ethnic Hungarian 
minorities and generally the bilateral relations, including the 
legal conditions (investment protection, avoiding double 
taxation, and the creation of special economic zones) takes away 
the strength of possible debates. The MSZP is more in favor of 
a basic treaty with an adequate content, formulation, and 
guarantees; the SZDSZ, however, regards the treaties an 
important, albeit not outstanding, element of the means of our 
neighborhood policy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31705 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  19 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP's Bekesi Wants `Ideology-Free' Policies </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP's Bekesi Wants `Ideology-Free' Policies </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0285A Budapest FIGYELO in Hungarian 19 May 94 pp 1, 14-15 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0285A </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest FIGYELO </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Laszlo Bekesi, parliamentary representative </F>
and economic expert of the Hungarian Socialist Party, by Dr. 
Gyorgy Varga; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Varga] Laszlo Csaba's most important thesis is that 
economic policy could again become subordinated to power issues, 
and this could lead to a breakup, a fragmentation of economic 
policy. Is this concern warranted? 
  [Bekesi] The concern is not unfounded, but it is avoidable. 
I 
dare assert this so plainly because we are after the first round 
of elections, and two parties of the opposition won, both of 
which are ready to free the economy from an 
ideological-political domination. 
  If a government coalition composed of the Hungarian 
Socialist 
Party [MSZP] and the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] wants to 
complete its four-year term, in the present situation of the 
country it cannot neglect focusing its attention and energy on 
the economy. One cannot initiate new discussions about the coat 
of arms and new gestures of retribution and compensation. The 
crisis must be attended to, the prerequisites for economic 
growth must be created, the deterioration of the balance must be 
stopped, and the country must finally be put on a track of 
modernization. Thus, a socialist-liberal government will be 
under constraint. In the current situation there is simply no 
alternative to a pragmatic, ideology-free economic policy. I 
stress this because I largely agree with Laszlo Csaba that the 
economic policy of the past year and a half was characterized by 
distribution. This was an election-year economic policy. The new 
government must concentrate on creating the prerequisites for 
income production, and unfortunately, this presupposes a series 
of decisions which are painful for the entire society. 
  [Varga] Is the establishment of a ministry for economic 
affairs a necessary prerequisite for preventing the 
fragmentation and atomization of economic policy? 
  [Bekesi] From the aspect of the issue under discussion I do 
not consider it crucial. It is more important to create within 
the government the personal and organizational framework of a 
unified economic policy. This can happen through the 
establishment of a ministry, but the coordination is also 
possible through the person of a deputy prime minister with a 
strong expertise and sufficient political support, or in the 
form of an efficiently directed economic cabinet. Of course, a 
prime minister who is an expert on economic policy can also 
present a solution. In other words, the main issue is to prevent 
having several centers of economic policy within the government. 
  [Varga] The country's economic situation would justify 
having 
an individual well versed in economic issues at the head of the 
government. 
  [Bekesi] I agree, but this ought to be discussed during the 
coalition talks. 
  [Varga] The next source of danger is that the management of 
the crisis and the protection of jobs puts the protectionist 
instinct of defense in the foreground. Is this trap unavoidable? 
  [Bekesi] I share Laszlo Csaba's fears, even though in the 
course of the campaign only parties with extremist, populist 
agendas were in favor of a protectionist economic policy aiming 
at an exaggerated protection of the Hungarian market. 
  The MSZP and the SZDSZ excluded protectionist measures from 
the arsenal of fostering the domestic market. Still, I must add 
that with the current capability of the Hungarian economy to 
compete on the international market, it would be suicidal to 
allow complete freedom to market forces. Incidentally, it is not 
done in that way anywhere in the world. The frameworks of 
agreements with the European Union and GATT will provide 
adequate protection for the Hungarian economy in the critical 
segments of the market. Namely, the Hungarian Government is 
entitled to institute measures for the protection of the market 
up to 10 percent of the country's yearly imports. This 
possibility must be utilized skillfully. This figure concerns 
imports to the value of $1-1.2 billion, which is a considerable 
sum. Thus, in this amount, one may utilize the possibilities 
afforded by customs, contingents, quotas, and technical 
specifications. It is a fact that up to now the government did 
not fully utilize this 10-percent limit of market protection. A 
new government must do this much and not more. 
  [Varga] In connection with the protection of the nation's 
land and the peculiar implementation of consumer protection, 
Laszlo Csaba mentions the dangers inherent in an exaggerated, 
economically irrational, protection of agriculture. 
  [Bekesi] The strategic purpose of economic policy must be to 
restore, and establish the competitiveness of, agriculture and 
food industry. That is to say, the improvement of the position 
of the agricultural-food industry complex is a stabilizing 
factor for the economy and is one of the prerequisites for 
economic growth. I am convinced that within a short time, with 
relatively little investment, the greatest growth of 
productivity might be achieved in this branch of the economy. 
  As far as the ownership of land is concerned, in the short 
run it is unavoidable to exclude foreign capital, but in the 
long run it would be a mistake. In other words, it is only 
justified to forbid foreign ownership of land until a market for 
land and realistic land prices are established. However, within 
a foreseeable time period the land market will begin to grow, 
because the estates which were formed are so small that they do 
not allow competitive farming. In other words, under pressure, 
we will soon witness the beginning of a concentration process. 
As a result, realistic market prices for land will be 
established. At that time, the prohibition of land ownership by 
foreigners must be abolished. 
  As far as agrarian subsidies are concerned, the 30-40 
percent 
level which has been established in Europe is an unrealistic 
goal for us. In Hungary the subsidy is currently 7-8 percent. 
This also plays a role in the huge decline in production. It is 
without precedent that in our exports we were unable to fulfill 
the contingent allowed by the European Union. In my opinion, in 
the course of four years the level of subsidy can be doubled, 
i.e., it can be increased to 15 percent. This will mean 120 
billion forints [Ft] a year, compared to the current Ft60-70 
billion. 
  [Varga] Is this a straight subsidy? 
  [Bekesi] Not at all. I am thinking primarily of preferential 
interest rates for agricultural investments, procurement 
intervention by the state to restore a minimal level of 
production security, procurement guarantees, and the 
introduction of guaranteed procurement prices in the area of 
basic produce. The latter would not be the market price, rather 
a minimal price. Thus, one must anticipate the increase of 
producers' prices. And in the case of some articles--when our 
export interests require--we must provide subsidies. It is a 
fact that these measures will create inflationary pressure. 
  [Varga] Laszlo Csaba wrote that a financial system was 
created, the viability of which depended on the goodwill of the 
central power and not on its effectiveness on the market. How 
can this situation be changed? 
  [Bekesi] My answer in one sentence: by privatizing banks as 
soon as possible, by concurrently increasing their capital. 
  [Varga] Can you already name some measures to be introduced 
during the new government's "honeymoon"? 
  [Bekesi] The future coalition government should focus its 
energies on the implementation of two goals: The first one is 
the creation of the prerequisites for growth, and the second one 
is an increase in employment. There are, however, two difficult 
challenges before the realization of these two goals: One is the 
balance, or rather, the lack of balance, between internal and 
external finances, and the other one is the danger of 
hyperinflation. In other words, the aforementioned goals must be 
realized by maneuvering between these two challenges, while at 
the same time preserving social harmony. 
  The most urgent task is to stop the dramatic deterioration 
of 
the external and internal economic balance. If this does not 
take place, the country's financial security will be endangered 
in 1995. Urgent measures must be taken to stop the decrease of 
exports. To achieve this goal, the principle of neutrality must 
be exercised in exchange rate policy, i.e., we must avoid 
reacting too late to a revaluation of the forint; decided steps 
must be taken to recapture eastern markets; export-oriented 
projects must be supported within the framework of the tax 
system. Overspending by the state must be restrained. The 
increase of the budget deficit in relation to the GDP must be 
stopped. It is important to have at least as much in domestic 
savings to finance the debt in order to offset the consolidated 
deficit. Today, the gap between domestic savings and the deficit 
is approximately Ft100 billion. In 1995 this will be untenable. 
If the GDP cannot be increased in 1995, the expenses of the 
budget must be reduced. A "cut" of Ft50 billion must already be 
made in the supplementary budget to be prepared in 1994. 
  [Varga] The situation would certainly be alleviated if the 
privatization of large state-owned firms, such as the Hungarian 
Telecommunications Enterprise [Matav] and the Hungarian Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation [Mol], continued in a more determined 
fashion. 
  [Bekesi] I agree with you, but this continuation should take 
place in the framework of a new privatization strategy, namely, 
a privatization method involving the increase of capital must be 
implemented. 
  [Varga] You stressed several times, and this time as well, 
the importance of returning to the eastern markets. How 
realistic is this return for us? 
  [Bekesi] As a strategy, based on the natural order of the 
international division of labor, the return is unavoidable. This 
is hardly disputed by now. What can be disputed is what can be 
achieved and how, and whether today or tomorrow. On the markets 
in question there is great demand, but their financial situation 
is bad. In other words, beyond conventional trade methods we 
must exploit the possibilities of barter, such as raw materials 
for food. Furthermore, it is in our strategic interests to 
participate in the privatization of these countries. We must 
acquire property; considerable capacities and property can be 
acquired very cheaply nowadays. For instance, in return for 
export goods, for as yet not expended Hungarian credit balances, 
or in the framework of joint ownership. 
  [Varga] Foreign capital was not pleased that the government 
abolished the system of normative preferences and awarded state 
preferences in connection with the investment of foreign capital 
on the basis of individual agreements. Do you think change is 
warranted? 
  [Bekesi] By all means. The MSZP is determined to restore the 
system of normative preferences for foreign and Hungarian 
investors. The retention of the right to make individual 
decisions by the government would only maintain an atmosphere of 
suspicion and the possibility of abuse. 
  [Varga] You said in a recent interview that genuine economic 
measures can only take place in September. Is this acceptable in 
the current economic situation? 
  [Bekesi] I uphold my opinion that genuine economic measures 
can take place in September at the earliest. Namely, the new 
government can be formed at the beginning of July. The 
announcement of the government's program can occur at the 
earliest at the end of July; in August, bills can be prepared 
which the government can submit to parliament in September. 
  On the other hand, urgent decisions cannot be postponed 
until 
September. For instance, the Hungarian National Bank [MNB] can 
make monetary decisions concerning the balance of payments. 
Adjustments in the exchange rate can take place any time, based 
on an authorization by the government. A huge amount of state 
bonds are stored in the safes of the central bank which could 
be, or should be, used as a means of restricting liquidity. If 
it is advisable, the central bank can raise the prime rate. 
Furthermore, after the end of June, the coalition partners can 
ask the acting government to make justified and urgent economic 
decisions. For instance, to freeze spending budget reserves, 
suspend subsidies to decentralized funds beyond the prorated 
amount, and stop injurious privatization measures, such as the 
KRP [expansion unknown]. 
  [Varga] Finally, I return to Laszlo Csaba, who pointed out 
the dangers inherent in the trilateral arbitration mechanism. 
However, both the MSZP and the SZDSZ intend to construct such a 
social mechanism. Are you not afraid that this would slow down 
economic decision-making and diminish the economy's ability to 
adjust? 
  [Bekesi] In Hungary's current situation, in the given 
political-economic situation, when crisis management is 
necessary, when a series of unpopular measures must be 
instituted, when a policy of savings and investment stimulation 
must be conducted, and not a policy of distribution, an 
argumentation of economic rationalism can hardly suffice to 
convince society of the necessity of these measures. However, 
social harmony is indispensable for the implementation of such a 
program. If it cannot be protected, the Polish effect comes into 
action. Here, under the current circumstances, the prerequisites 
for preserving social harmony can only be established within the 
framework of a system of arbitration. It is to be expected that 
the three partners participating in the arbitration -- the 
employees, the employers, and the state -- will not put an 
emphasis on distribution, and will not fight about who should 
receive a relatively larger slice of the shrinking cake, but 
rather endeavor to make the cake as large as possible. The state 
must lead the way in self-restraint, but the other two partners 
can also be expected to exhibit similar behavior, especially in 
the first period of the government cycle. Thus, the coalition 
must from time to time persuade its two social partners. 
  I think in the beginning this will be very difficult, 
because 
it requires self-restraint from the participants. I don't deny 
that I am expecting big discussions and fights, but I am 
convinced that with a social-liberal coalition, there is a 
chance for agreement. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31706 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Views of Party Supporters Polled </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Views of Party Supporters Polled </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20867A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20867A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H5>  MSZP Voters Found To Oppose Reform </H5>
  Polling voters of the parties that ran in the May election, 
the Hungarian Gallup Institute found that supporters of the 
Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP)--which won an absolute 
majority, with 209 of a total of 386, of the parliamentary 
seats--are considerably more likely to oppose economic reform 
and are less tolerant of minorities than supporters of the 
Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ), which the MSZP has invited 
to become its coalition partner. According to the findings, 
MSZP supporters are also far less inclined to favor economic 
reform than supporters of the Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF), 
the main party of the defeated right-of-center government, while 
the views of MSZP and MDF voters differ little in terms of 
social tolerance. Published in the 2 June issue of the 
Budapestweekly BESZELO, the poll was conducted 21-23 May between 
the two rounds of election balloting and reflects views 
expressed on a questionnaire by 1500 Hungarians "representing 
all voting-age inhabitants of the country nationwide." Although 
15 parties ran in the election, the poll results published in 
BESZELO pertain mainly to the six parties that made it into 
parliament by getting at least 5 percent of the vote, the 
threshold set by law. 
<H5>  Gallup Official's Commentary </H5>
  In the commentary accompanying the data, Hungarian Gallup 
official Gyorgy Fischer suggested that the voters' dislike of 
economic reform played a key role in determining the outcome of 
the election and that this antireform attitude may undermine the 
stability of any MSZP-SZDSZ governing coalition. "The most 
promarket voting camps," Fischer noted, "are those of the MDF 
and the Federation of Young Democrats (Fidesz)," the parties 
that lost the most--MDF dropping to 38 seats from 159 in the 
1990 election, and Fidesz barely surmounting the 5-percent 
barrier into parliament with 20 seats, even though for a time 
last year it had led popularity polls. 
  At the same time, Fischer indicated, the fact that voters of 
the SZDSZ--which came in a distant second to the MSZP, with 69 
seats--support a market economy "to a great degree" suggests 
that if the MSZP and SZDSZ form a coalition, the two parties' 
leaders will be under conflicting pressures from their 
respective constituents. Voters of the two parties are "far from 
each other" on key economic issues, Fischer stressed. "SZDSZ 
voters are characterized by a promarket attitude and almost 
completely lack support for the redistribution of wealth by the 
state," while "in contrast, the MSZP's voting base is 
characterized by strong hostility to the market and supports on 
a large scale the idea of redistribution." 
<H5>  Views on Economic Reform </H5>
  The contrast between MSZP voters and supporters of the other 
parties was sharpest on the question of whether private property 
should be dominant, with only 18 percent of MSZP voters saying 
they agree, as opposed to the following percentages for other 
parties: SZDSZ, 40; MDF, 40; Independent Smallholders Party, 49; 
Christian Democratic People's Party, 34; and Fidesz, 37. 
Conversely, 43 percent of MSZP voters rejected outright the 
proposition that private property should be dominant, while the 
percentages for the other parties are significantly lower: 
SZDSZ, 22; MDF, 28; Smallholders, 21; Christian Democrats, 24; 
and Fidesz, 30. The antireform attitudes of MSZP voters was 
shown, for example, by the fact that only 22 percent of them 
agree that "unprofitable enterprises must be allowed to go 
bankrupt." This is well below the percentages for other 
parties: SZDSZ, 30; MDF, 44; Smallholders, 30; Christian 
Democrats, 33; and Fidesz, 38. Conversely, the following 
percentages disagreed with allowing bankruptcy: MSZP, 47; SZDSZ, 
41; MDF, 33; Smallholders, 42; Christian Democrats, 39; and 
Fidesz, 37. 
  Only on one question, asking whether respondents agreed 
"that 
Market competition should be limited," did supporters of another 
party, the Christian Democrats, score higher than those of the 
MSZP in opposing reform. The breakdown in the "agree" column 
was as follows: MSZP, 45; SZDSZ, 37; MDF, 35; Smallholders, 43; 
Christian Democrats, 53; and Fidesz, 37. The percentages in the 
"disagree" column were MSZP, 24; SZDSZ, 36; MDF, 41; 
Smallholders, 25; Christian Democrats, 23; and Fidesz, 36. 
  Although the aggregate data indicated that the MDF and 
Fidesz 
voters are the most consistently promarket, Fischer noted, the 
survey showed that on "attitudes toward the redistribution of 
wealth and toward the market," the MSZP and the SZDSZ are the 
most sharply divided. The desire to increase the state's role 
in redistributing wealth "is least characteristic of the 
Smallholders and SZDSZ," while "social envy and the desire for 
redistribution are by far the most characteristic of MSZP 
voters," he said. 
<H5>  Social Tolerance </H5>
  The poll indicated that among Hungarian voters there is 
little correlation between socialist economic attitudes and 
social tolerance. According to Fischer, the aggregate data show 
that, along with Smallholders voters, supporters of the MSZP are 
"more intolerant than the average," while the "most tolerant" 
voters are supporters of the SZDSZ--indicating that, as in the 
case of economic reform, the respective voters of the MSZP and 
the SZDSZ have "radically" different views, which could strain a 
coalition between the two parties. Fischer noted that this 
difference in social attitudes is also "what sharply separates 
the SZDSZ from the Smallholders, to which it is so close in 
terms of economic attitudes." At the same time, the data 
indicate that the Christian Democrat camp, which stands closest 
to the MSZP in socialist economic views, comes closest to the 
liberal SZDSZ in social tolerance. 
  The Gallup Institute's survey provided a breakdown of voter 
attitudes toward three groups: Gypsies, Jews, and "people of 
color." The survey indicated that about half of the population, 
with only an 8-percentage point spread among the parties, has 
"an aversion to Gypsies": MSZP, 47; SZDSZ, 46; MDF, 49; 
Smallholders, 52; Christian Democrats, 44; Fidesz, 44. 
Responses to a question about anti-Semitism, on the other hand, 
suggest that hostility to Jews is far less prevalent than toward 
Gypsies, with socialist voters more inclined to anti-Semitic 
views than supporters of the liberal parties, SZDSZ and Fidesz, 
and more than supporters of the three right-of-center parties. 
Percentages of those who said that they "dislike Jews" are as 
follows: MSZP, 15; SZDSZ, 7; MDF, 10; Smallholders, 13; 
Christian Democrats, 10; and Fidesz, 10. The MSZP was in the 
middle of the pack, however, on the topic of racial tolerance. 
Asked if "it would be better to limit the number of people of 
color in this country," the following percentages of party 
voters answered in the affirmative: MSZP, 30; SZDSZ, 27; MDF, 
27; Smallholders, 35; Christian Democrats, 31; and Fidesz, 34. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31707 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Efforts Made To Halt Illegal Border Traffic </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Efforts Made To Halt Illegal Border Traffic </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0281A Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 16 
May 94 p 14 </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0281A </F>
<F P=104>  Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Krisztina Koenen: "Migration of Nations on New </F>
Paths; Smugglers of Illegal Immigrants in the Sight of the 
Hungarian Border Protection Service"] 
  [Text] Budapest, Spring -- A group of about 20 Russians 
some time ago caught the eye of the Hungarian border protection 
authorities in the vicinity of Miskole in the northeast border 
area: They seemingly had traveled aimlessly back and forth by 
railway. When the group had found accommodations in a cheap 
hotel, surveillance was begun. It was observed that one man in 
the group--evidently in expectation of a call--appeared every 
day at the same time at a public telephone capable of receiving 
incoming calls. The border protection service also determined 
that the passports of the suspicious Russians without exception 
were issued at the same time and by the same agency. The group 
had entered from Ukraine by hitch-hiking, because no pedestrians 
are cleared at the border crossing that it used. Little by 
little all members of the group left the hotel in the direction 
of western Hungary; they drove to Gyoer, the largest city in the 
vicinity of the Austrian border. There, together with their 
observers, they continued to wait. Ten days later the 
impatiently awaited escorters turned up. Their vehicles, a Lada 
and a minibus, bore license plates from the Czech city of 
Teplitz. The group prepared to continue its journey when at last 
the Hungarian border protection service intervened and brought 
to light some surprising things. The leader of the escorters was 
a Georgian, the remaining smugglers of illegal immigrants were 
Czechs and Hungarians. One of the Czechs had been known to the 
border protection service for a long time. He had already been 
expelled from the country once, not quite a year ago, because of 
smuggling human beings and illegal border crossings. In the end, 
32 adults were arrested, to whom belonged more than 20 children. 
Not one of them was a Russian: All of them came from 
Afghanistan. They had purchased the Russian passports in Moscow 
for 200 marks [DM] each from a Georgian at Vnukovo Airport--no 
forgeries, but originals with fictitious names. The destination 
of the group was Germany. North of Teplitz they were to be 
infiltrated into Bavaria. 
  This story from the Hungarian magazine MAGYAR NARANCS shows 
how quickly and fundamentally border protection organizations of 
the former socialist countries had to change their way of 
thinking. Before the change, the chief occupation of the 
Hungarian border protection service, which at that time 
consisted of conscripts, was securing the western border against 
escape attempts from Hungary in the direction of Austria and--to 
a lesser degree--Yugoslavia. Today prospective Hungarian 
travelers have a passport issued to them, and the Austrian 
border is watched by the Austrians themselves. On the Hungarian 
side there are no longer protective strips or electronic alarm 
fences. 
  Today the Hungarian guards control and protect first of all 
the borders of the former socialist camp, which previously were 
not borders at all. "Here is the border of Europe," says Colonel 
Krizsan, media spokesman of the border protection service, and, 
in a dramatic gesture, traces with his forefinger the red line 
that separates Hungary from the former Yugoslavia, Romania, and 
Ukraine on the map. 
  The fact is that the paths of the migration of nations to 
the 
West (to Sweden and Germany, above all) from the southeast lead 
essentially through Hungary. The war in the former Yugoslavia 
has shifted the traditional routes to the north, and the change 
of German asylum laws makes it appear advisable to go to Germany 
across the green border. Austria has increased the security of 
its borders. So now the traffic goes across the green borders of 
the Czech Republic, Slovakia, or in another direction through 
Slovenia and Italy. Hungary, a country with many neighboring 
states, offers itself geographically as an ideal corridor. 
  This is also known by the smuggling gangs who in the 
meantime 
have become East European-international in composition and, in 
addition to the business in human misery, also pursue such 
lucrative activities as trafficking in drugs and arms, as well 
as car smuggling. They work professionally, confirms Border 
Guard Lieutenant Colonel Szoeke, the director of the department 
for smuggling of human beings. One should merely imagine, he 
said, the organizational achievement embodied in a plan, which 
determines the interrupted path from a Chinese or Turkish 
province through five or six countries all the way to Germany. 
For the first time, the border guard smirks, the extinct CEMA 
[Council for Mutual Economic Assistance] functions smoothly. The 
departure points for those who want to go to the West, as a 
rule, he says, are Moscow, Kiev, or Bucharest, since the former 
Soviet Union and Romania, thanks to the socialist foreign policy 
of the former years, let most of the Third World citizens enter 
without a visa. 
  The smugglers pick up their clientele at Vnukovo or Otopen 
airports and take them to cities close to the border, such as 
Arad or Temesvar. There they are taken over by natives 
acquainted with the locality and led across the green border to 
Hungary. Another "collaborator" of the smuggling organization, 
who has valid travel documents, drives a car or, still better, a 
bus quite legally across the border and then collects the 
refugees on Hungarian territory in small groups along the 
country road. The same process is used when passing into the 
Czech Republic or into Slovakia. The border protection service 
must have a great deal of luck or good informants if it wants to 
track down such a group. It is equally difficult to find people 
among peanuts, fruit and vegetables, or in furniture in trucks 
that are apparently properly sealed. In Hungary, Budapest is the 
take-off point of most of the migrants. At the eastern railway 
station the Arabian traders offer original Hungarian travel 
documents for as little as 10,000 forints (approximately DM170). 
  Hungary is squeezed as in a vice: As soon as the Western 
countries find out that the immigrants came through Hungary, 
they send them back at once. At the same time, the migration 
pressure from the east is growing. The estimates of the stream 
of immigrants to be expected vary, but it is presumed that, 
around Moscow, Kiev, and Bucharest each, several tens of 
thousands of people are waiting for smugglers. Among those 
waiting there are hardly any natives; for the most part they are 
people from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, China, or 
Vietnam. In 1993 more than 27,000 border violations and illegal 
border crossings became known to the Hungarian border protection 
service, and within two years more than a million people were 
turned back at the borders. The illegal border crossings are on 
the increase: For this year an increase of about 30 percent is 
expected. Not only is there an increase in the number of border 
violations that have become known, but also in their danger: The 
share of punishable offenses has increased. How many punishable 
offenses or trespasses have remained undiscovered no one dares 
to estimate. 
  The foreigners traversing Hungary increasingly destabilize 
Hungarian society. The incidence of crimes in the southeastern 
border regions--caused by the war in the former Yugoslavia--has 
assumed disturbing dimensions. Increasingly one can hear the 
view that Hungary, at high costs and the use of immense human 
resources, must solve problems with whose origin it has nothing 
to do. The border protection service has been modernized; 
instead of persons liable for military service, attempts are 
being made to employ civil servants. Beginning in 1995, it is 
planned to do completely without persons liable for military 
service. Assistance with the training and information exchange 
came from the target countries, which are being shielded by 
Hungary. A modern computer network was developed with American 
assistance; from Germany came, above all, professional and moral 
support. Material assistance, on the other hand, remains 
limited. But how should a border protection service function 
which does not even have at its disposal mobile telephones in 
sufficient number and quality? 
  A further difficulty is the administration of justice of the 
Hungarian courts. Smugglers who have been caught, even if they 
are not in court for the first time, can count on light 
sentences. As a rule, they are warned and deported. The social 
danger of smuggling human beings is for the most part rated low 
by the courts, although the consequences, for Hungary, too, are 
incalculable. So it can happen that the smugglers get away with 
lesser penalties and fines than their victims. Bad prospects for 
the future--if the expectations of the border guards should come 
true. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31708 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_k_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Galbraith, Martic View Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Galbraith, Martic View Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406214094 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 2037 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406214094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Knin, 14 Jun (TANJUG) -- U.S. Ambassador to Croatia 
Peter Galbraith visited Knin and the republic of Serb Krajina 
[RSK] today where he held talks with RSK President Milan Martic 
and his associates, the ISKRA news agency has reported. 
  The basic topic of their talks was, as both Galbraith and 
Martic said at a news conference, the issue connected with the 
implementation of the Zagreb cease-fire agreement, i.e. the 
removal of the remaining misunderstandings between the Croatian 
and Krajina sides ahead of negotiations on economic issues and 
cooperation to be held this week. Galbraith and Martic assessed 
the talks as useful and stressed that they encompassed a wide 
spectrum of current issues and problems. 
  Galbraith particularly stressed that at the meeting today 
the 
Krajina side told him of their concern over Croatia's failure to 
comply with the cease-fire agreement and a reduced level of 
monitoring by military observers of the demilitarized zone on 
the Croatian side of the separation line. He said that he was 
taking these demands extremely seriously and that he would 
inform his government and the Croatian side about them. 
  President Martic particularly underlined Galbraith's stance 
that the Krajina-Croatia conflict could no longer be resolved by 
force. The war option accomplishes nothing, Martic stressed and 
added that today's talks focused specifically on the conduct of 
the Croatian and Serb police in the buffer zones. He also said 
that most misunderstandings have been removed as far as the 
Krajina side was concerned, while Ambassador Galbraith promised 
he would take similar steps to remove misunderstandings in 
Zagreb. 
  Asked by reporters which issues could be agreed on quickly 
at 
the upcoming negotiations, Martic replied: These issues concern 
the securing of water supplies for Zadar by us, in return for 
the delivery of spare parts for the Obrovac hydroelectric power 
plant and the securing of water supplies for Teslingrad and 
Drnis by the Croatian side. 
  We would then review humanitarian issues regarding 
compensation to hard currency account holders and pensioners -- 
57,000 pensioners on the territory of the RSK. Only then will 
we discuss the opening of the Adriatic oil pipeline, on 
condition that it is completely opened all the way to Pancevo 
where Krajina crude oil is processed, Martic concluded. He 
added that communications issues could only be tackled after 
peace was stabilized and other issues are resolved. 
  Ambassador Galbraith will also be visiting the Benkovac 
area, 
especially the devastated Serb villages of Kasic and Islam 
Grcki, ISKRA reports. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31709 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kukan's Visit, Relations With Slovenia Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kukan's Visit, Relations With Slovenia Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506085094 Rijeka NOVI LIST in Serbo-Croatian 9 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506085094 </F>
<F P=104>  Rijeka NOVI LIST </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Drazen Vukov-Colic: "In the Shadow of the </F>
Unpredictable Neighbor"] 
  [Text] What the proverbially calm, polite, and balanced 
Slovene president stated after the meeting with Franjo Tudjman 
could hardly be described as routine protocol ingratiation. 
"These were open, polemical, at times hard talks, but there can 
be no solution without dialogue," said Milan Kucan polemically, 
openly, and hard, but also with a sigh of relief because the two 
presidents did meet after 20 months; the malicious will 
establish that in this unsettled period Zagreb meanwhile had 
more meetings with Bucharest than with Slovenia, which is at its 
doorstep and its neck. In these belated discussions, Tudjman, as 
usual -- regardless of the fact that it has only been several 
years -- viewed the whole thing with the inevitable historical 
distance, while the Slovene president mostly spoke of the dark 
Balkan present and the uncertain European future. To what 
extent these things are out of joint in a completely unnatural 
way is best witnessed by Tudjman's choice of words, when, 
speaking of contentious interchanges, spoke out as if the 
nonaligned summit in Cairo were still on: "Neither Slovenia nor 
Croatia have any expansionist or imperialist demands in relation 
to each other." 
  In the international diplomatic vocabulary such terms ended 
up on the ideological trash-heap of the defeated state-ology 
long ago, but evidently the Croatian president feels great only 
when he uses great words that sound dark and dire. The 
uninformed would think that it was Rabin and `Arafat who met, 
rather than the leaders of two states whom the world keeps 
reproaching for arguing like two sulky children competing in 
inventing evidence of greatness. During the time of the 
disintegration of Yugoslavia, Slovenia and Croatia seemed to 
many like Siamese twins that were about to start a happy family 
as soon as they ran away from the hateful Belgrade family, and 
then they started to look at each other across the Sutla River 
as if across the banks of the Jordan. In their renewed greed, 
some Italian politicians have proclaimed Slovenia a small 
provincial region, but Croatia also suffers such slander all the 
time, even when Istria is not at issue. The blindness of 
self-sufficient triumphalism can then perhaps be described no 
better than by Kucan's ineffective lamenting over the newly 
liberated and newly established states' childish habit of 
extolling themselves too much while speaking of everyone else in 
an unreasonable way. 
  The Slovene president did not say so publicly, but evidently 
the Slovenians justifiably feel nauseous when Tudjman talks 
about Croatia as the "super-state" with "super-democracy" and 
"super-economy" that all the countries of former communism can 
look up to, never -- or only seldom -- looking over his shoulder 
and into the neighbor's yard, in which fruit trees (the 
agreement with the European Union, the Partnership for Peace, 
the Council of Europe, the PHARE [Economic and Reconstruction 
Aid to Poland and Hungary] program), which he keeps specifically 
promising to Croatia, have already grown. 
  After the unwrapping of the "Croatian-Slovene package," 
which 
started after the first unfruitful visits of the "European 
threesomes," and became inevitable as soon as Slovenia got rid 
of foreign supervision and European observers, Ljubljana thought 
too soon that it had run away from the Balkans, while Croatia 
hoped too soon that it would replace Serbia as a new regional 
superpower, primarily in Bosnia-Herzegovina -- regardless of the 
outlaws in its own backyard -- and then as the fortress wall of 
something long gone by, such as the stories about "the bulwark 
of civilization" and "the dividing-line of the worlds." This 
language is still spoken, although there are few who believe in 
this kind of delirious dream, while in the meantime Slovenia has 
also realized that its TV's and water heaters do not fascinate 
European consumers just because it has decided to proclaim 
itself Europe and has preached everywhere that it has no ties 
with or obligations to "those Balkans." 
  Ljubljana and Zagreb kept arguing over a dry river bed until 
they realized -- if they realized -- that both live in the 
shadow of an unpredictable neighbor who, deep down, hopes that 
hundreds of kilometers on both sides of the disputed former 
river will again become his property. In that framework, some of 
Berlusconi's ministers inadvertently did a great favor both to 
Croatia and Slovenia, who were constantly looking too high and 
too far, over and above their heads, and which in many ways 
still come within the same mirror, as there can be no 
imperialism without an empire, and both Croatia and Slovenia 
occasionally suffer from the delusion that by contemplating 
their own navels they are contemplating the navel of the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31710 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary Views Tudjman-Kucan Meeting </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Commentary Views Tudjman-Kucan Meeting </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506085394 Split SLOBODNA DALMACIJA in Serbo-Croatian 8 
Jun 94 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506085394 </F>
<F P=104>  Split SLOBODNA DALMACIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Josip Antic: "Good Vibrations"] </F>
  [Text] Yes -- no -- yes! These binary oppositions with a 
happy ending are one of the shortest ways of describing the 
state-protocol battle of wits that the media promptly 
communicated to the people of both states before the unofficial 
visit of Milan Kucan, president of Slovenia, to Croatian 
President Franjo Tudjman. In spite of the hesitations of the 
important Slovene guest, the visit did take place as planned. 
The Slovene side first did not understand the circumstances of 
the presidential invitation, and then -- with the new summer 
wave of tightening the interstate ropes -- whether 7 June was 
the most suitable time for a one-day trip to Zagreb. Namely, 
the short distance from the Slovene capital to the Croatian one 
is still inversely proportionate to the great quantity of the 
unresolved diplomatic luggage that the representatives of the 
two states take out at the joint table. This should not be 
surprising, since the Croatian and Slovene presidents last met 
some 20 months ago -- although at that time they publicly stated 
the willingness to meet at least once a year to develop good 
neighborly relations. 
  At any rate, everything Franjo Tudjman took out of his 
suitcase at Brdo near Kranj in 1992 to show Milan Kucan will now 
be presented by Kucan to his host in Zagreb in a somewhat 
different wrapping: the unresolved border issues, the untouched 
legal infrastructure regarding the property issues, the 
stagnation of the economic relations.... On the other hand, the 
unresolved regime in the bay of Piran, the arguments with which 
Croatia is building a border crossing at Plovanija, which 
Slovenia disputes, the Slovene ownership of the company vacation 
homes in Pineta, in which Croatia has accommodated refugees from 
central Bosnia, the Ljubljanska Banka issue, and similar issues 
will be discussed in a less abstract manner. Without the fear 
of prejudicing matters, one thing that can be said before the 
official announcements reach the media is that the two 
presidents will find no concrete solutions. 
  One of the reasons is certainly the fact that the 
competences 
of the two state leaders, according to the constitutional 
organization of their states, are not the same: The Croatian 
president, who works within a semipresidential system, has more 
authority than his Slovene counterpart. However, even if this 
were not so, Croatian-Slovene relations have been so neglected 
and negatively warmed-over -- which both sides are responsible 
for -- that what is at the moment much more important for 
unfreezing them is genuine relaxedness in issuing public 
statements, rather than a false compromise that each of the 
sides would soon interpret in their own way. This would mean 
that the basic question -- if there is a joint willingness of 
the two states to resolve the problems -- has been given a 
positive answer, which would meet with quite a positive response 
of the wider European circles. Good vibrations between Tudjman 
and Kucan would also be an indicative message to the exponents 
of the political tendencies that have been waiting at the 
western side of the Adriatic for a chance to use the 
disagreements between the "premature European babies" to their 
own advantage. All in all, the greatest responsibility that 
Tudjman and Kucan bear lies in creating a good atmosphere that 
should soon prepare and prompt a new rythm at top-level 
meetings: from those of Prime Ministers Drnovsek and Valentic 
to those at the level of expert groups, which are dozing at the 
moment. Everything else is a matter of interests. Whether they 
will be coordinated or disunited depends on good will. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31711 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Delay in Talks Between HDZ, Opposition Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Delay in Talks Between HDZ, Opposition Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406203094 Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 9 Jun 94 pp 1-3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406203094 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksa Crnjakovic: "The Opposition Will Not Give </F>
Up Mesic"] 
  [Text] Zagreb -- "Owing to the need for consultations 
within our parties, we agreed to conclude them by Friday and to 
agree on the continuation of the negotiations then," Jure Radic 
stated briefly on Wednesday, after the meeting between the 
representatives of the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Community] and 
parliamentary opposition parties that lasted for an hour and a 
half. 
  The representatives of the Croatian opposition have briefly 
confirmed Radic's statement and wanted to make no more comments 
about the negotiations. The HDZ representatives in the 
negotiations are: Jure Radic, Mate Granic, Adam Mestrovic, Ivan 
Valent, and Ivic Pasalic. The representatives of the opposition 
in the negotiations are: Savka Dabcevic-Kucar and Slavko 
Mestrovic (Croatian National Party), Drazen Budisa (Croatian 
Social Liberal Party), Stjepan Radic (Croatian Peasants Party), 
Ivica Racan (Party of Democratic Changes), Ivan Jakovcic 
(Istrian Democratic Congress), and Slavko Degoricija (Croatian 
Independent Democrats). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31712 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ministers To Sign Cooperation Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ministers To Sign Cooperation Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0315A Ljubljana DELO in Slovene 1 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0315A </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana DELO </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Vodusek: "Unfounded Criticisms of the </F>
`Policization' of the Army"] 
  [Text] News conference of Defense Minister Jelko 
Kacin and State Secretary Boris Znidaric 
  Ljubljana, 31 May--The ministers of defense and internal 
affairs will sign a protocol next week, a document on 
cooperation between the two ministries. A coordinating group 
that will settle unresolved issues in the area of preparing 
systemic legislation and derivative legal acts and in the area 
of education on an ongoing basis will meet for the first time in 
May, according to a statement at today's news conference by 
Defense Minister Jelko Kacin and State Secretary Boris Znidaric. 
  The protocol will delineate precisely the areas of operation 
and confirm agreements on closer mutual cooperation, ongoing 
notification, and mutual assistance in coordinating tasks and 
operations. 
  Both Znidaric and Kacin rejected criticisms of the 
"policization" of the army as unfounded. Regarding those 
criticisms by former Defense Minister Janez Jansa, made nine 
days after the appearance of the new state secretary, Jelko 
Kacin said that it was not possible to policize any system in 
such a short time, especially not a military one. 
  The results of an internal investigation within the Defense 
Ministry regarding the Smolnikar scandal have been sent to the 
prime minister, Kacin said. The internal commission, which is 
headed by Miran Bogataj, will function as long as there is a 
possibility of discovering new aspects of the background of the 
event in the village of Depala. 
  The investigation of the attack on Mitja Kunstelj and the 
Krkovic-Blagojevic case are in the hands of the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs. The defense minister did not confirm the 
suspicions that organized dark forces, which might threaten the 
lives of the chief witnesses in the case, might be behind the 
incident (except that "the events happened in the dark"). The 
Defense Ministry learned about the attack against Mitja Kunstelj 
only late in the afternoon, whereas the attack happened at 
midnight. Kunstelj, judging by the defense minister's answers, 
evaded the protection of the bodyguard assigned to him by the 
Defense Ministry, Jelko Kacin also said. 
  The news conference was otherwise devoted primarily to the 
Defense Ministry's foreign policy activities. Defense Minister 
Jelko Kacin cited numerous meetings with the defense ministers 
of foreign countries during the Brussels conference. In the 
final documents of that conference, Slovenia, in addition to 
neutral Sweden and Finland, is also mentioned as a signatory of 
the Partnership for Peace. In Kacin's opinion, admission to the 
Western European Union will only be possible after Slovenia 
obtains associate membership in the European Union. 
  Jelko Kacin also mentioned as important his talks with the 
U.S. and Italian defense ministers. With the U.S. secretary of 
defense, Kacin talked about the possibility of lifting the 
embargo against Slovenia, while the subject of the talks with 
the Italian defense minister was a document on cooperation in 
the military area. Italy will be the third country with which we 
have signed such an agreement. 
  Tomorrow, Austrian President Thomas Klestil will also be 
accompanied by the Austrian defense minister, the Czech defense 
minister is coming to Slovenia in September, and also during 
that month a Slovene delegation will visit the NATO base in 
Avignan. 
  At the news conference, Miran Bogataj assessed the Defense 
Ministry's participation in an international conference on 
reducing natural disasters, at which there was a discussion of 
the global threat and of a strategy until the year 2000. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31713 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_s_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Personnel Reshuffled in Defense Ministry </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Personnel Reshuffled in Defense Ministry </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0303D Ljubljana DELO in Slovene 23 May 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0303D </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana DELO </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Vodusek: "Shifts in the `Pentagon'"] </F>
  [Text] The most radical changes were suffered by 
Moris; consequences of the Smolnikar scandal in VOMO [Defense 
Ministry Security Service]; the army's support depends on the 
governing policy. 
  Ljubljana, 23 May--At this morning's meeting the Defense 
Committee, among other things, discussed a report from Minister 
Jelko Kacin on personnel changes in the Slovene "Pentagon." 
There are no longer many individuals in the ministry's 
leadership from the inner circle of former Defense Minister 
Janez Jansa and the coordinating group that prepared and 
conducted the country's defense within the army. 
  If we can judge by Jelko Kacin's statements, the expected 
shifts will stop with the chief of the Republic Headquarters of 
Territorial Defense [TO], Albin Gutman. Specifically, approval 
from President Milan Kucan is required for replacements in the 
leadership of the General Staff. 
  Colonel-General Albin Gutman was the commander of the 
provincial TO headquarters for Carniola, which is headed by Rade 
Klisaric. Along with some of Jansa's associates involved in the 
maneuvers structure of national defense, he is on the notorious 
list from Dossier 13. With the replacements of the provincial TO 
headquarters commanders--the last one was at the provincial TO 
headquarters for the southern coastal region--the list of 
expected replacements has probably been exhausted. 
  Two politicians, however, think that the situation in the 
army is "extremely problematic." Janez Jansa is convinced that a 
political purge is being conducted at the Defense Ministry, 
while the former chairman of the Defense Committee, Zmago 
Jelincic, is of the opinion that Minister Kacin has no other 
choice but to clean up after his predecessor. "If he does not 
succeed, it is best to disband the army and rely on the police," 
Jelincic concluded in the latest SOBOTNA PRILOGA. 
  Jansa criticized State Secretary Boris Znidaric, who came to 
the Defense Ministry after 23 years of service in the police 
leadership, of running the army like the police. Znidaric, in 
addition to two other state secretaries, is responsible for 
training, organization, and personnel in the Defense Ministry. 
  The most radical changes, after Jansa's removal, were 
suffered primarily by the Moris First Special Brigade. After the 
replacement of Brigadier Anton Krkovic, the defense minister was 
not satisfied with its effectiveness. If we can judge by the 
experiences of foreign countries, one should not expect it to be 
disbanded, although even outwardly Moris is to be made 
equivalent to other Slovene army units. 
  The disputes between the army's special brigade and the 
police have a political background, if we can reach a conclusion 
from the dramaturgy of the Smolnikar scandal, and they also 
originate from the conflicts and old grudges among individual 
participants in that operation. In fact, the agents in the spy 
scandal were employed by the First Special Brigade. 
  The above conflict was most evident in the Defense 
Ministry's 
Security Service. Three heads of VOMO have been replaced in a 
six-month period. The departure of Andrej Lovsin at the peak of 
the war among the intelligence officers several months before 
the replacement of Janez Jansa allows different explanations. 
Dusan Mikus, who was replaced by Marjan Miklavcic, had to leave 
his job as director because of the Smolnikar scandal. A 
conversation lasting several hours between Jelko Kacin and Dusan 
Mikus about the top secret Bizjak report did not bear any 
significant fruit. 
  Among the directors of the individual administrations, the 
only one to be dismissed was Janez J. Svajncer, who left as 
managing editor of the magazine SLOVENSKI VOJAK. The director of 
the Second Administration, Joze Zagozen, after talking to the 
parliamentary commission on the arms scandal, reportedly told 
the defense minister that after taking leave, he intends to 
resign from his position. 
  The statistics, according to which the new defense minister, 
Jelko Kacin, appointed 15 new people in two months, while 
approximately as many people left the ministry, do not say much, 
since those figures apply to the structure of the Defense 
Ministry. More important is the political decision on how many 
soldiers and what kind of army the state needs, and there will 
undoubtedly be parliamentary discussions of this. 
  The Assembly's decision on the defense tolar, i.e., 
investments in fundamental development programs over the next 10 
years, which, after the personnel changes, will undoubtedly be 
the most important topic of polemics regarding the Defense 
Ministry, is only halfway toward building our own army. 
  The dilemmas concerning Slovenia without an army, which 
several politicians recorded in the so-called "Declaration for 
Peace" in 1991, have not yet been surmounted, at least judging 
by the views of parliamentarians, in spite of the war and the 
fundamentally changed circumstances in our vicinity. For the 
time being, support for the army depends upon the control and 
influence of the ruling policy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31714 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_s_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  20 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fulfillment of 1989 `May Declaration' Assessed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fulfillment of 1989 `May Declaration' Assessed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0303F Ljubljana DELO in Slovene 20 May 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0303F </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana DELO </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article signed by 40 Slovene politicians: "The May </F>
Declaration--Five Years Later"] 
  [Text] The May Declaration as a political starting point 
for social renewal contains four fundamental goals: 
  --state independence; 
  --democracy as a basis for social restructuring; 
  --a parliamentary multiparty system as a basis for the 
political structure; 
  --an economic system based on the experiences of the modern 
welfare society. 
  All those fundamental goals are mutually interdependent 
conditions for each other, and are therefore only attainable as 
a whole. 
  We have achieved: 
  --state independence and international recognition; 
  --a constitutionally sovereign state, which has created the 
necessary normative starting point for Slovenia as a 
law-governed and social-welfare state based on the protection of 
human rights, private property, and free enterprise; 
  --a formal democracy as a basis for social renewal and 
restructuring; 
  --a political structure with a parliamentary multiparty 
system. 
  The following have not been achieved: 
  --the new state actually has not broken off continuity with 
the previous totalitarian structure. It has not acknowledged and 
has not condemned the worst actions of totalitarian violence and 
the violation of human rights; 
  --the constitution has not been followed by legislation that 
would take its general starting points to the level of 
feasibility. The constitution has remained an unfinished work 
that cannot survive without executive legislation and is 
therefore threatened itself; 
  --democracy, as a basis for social restructuring, has 
admittedly been achieved on the formal level, but the oligarchic 
structure of society from the communist period has been 
preserved, mostly with the same people in social roles and with 
essentially unchanged relationships of social power. That allows 
those who hold that power to have their present positions also 
formally legitimized, and to use them to block further 
democratic transformation. 
  An assessment of the present political and legal situation 
leads to the conclusion that there is almost complete continuity 
withthe structure and distribution of social power that 
prevailed under the communist regime, and an actual 
discontinuity with the political will and efforts that governed 
the so-called Slovene Spring. 
<H5>  What Next </H5>
  We have to continue where we were stopped: 
  --to reunite and mobilize all those forces which carried out 
the break with communism and began social renewal, and moreover 
on the basis of modern political organization; 
  --to continue resolutely with the democratization of society 
on the basis of a new redistribution of social power and social 
roles. Above all, accelerated privatization and the 
reorganization of the state administration and state services 
should contribute to that goal. All illegally appropriated 
social property should be returned; 
  --to accelerate legislation that will ensure actual 
implementation of the constitution and not just the formal 
coordination of the former legal order that was the basis for 
the communist regime. 
  Note: Among the first to sign "The May Declaration--Five 
Years Later" were Dr. Miha Tisler, Dr. Ludvik Toplak, Dr. Anton 
Trstenjak, Dame Zajc, Dr. Janez Bernik, Dr. Peter Jambrek, Dr. 
Miha Brejc, Drago Jancar, Niko Grafenauer, Joze Snoj, Tone 
Kuntner, Dr. Ivo Urbancic, Evgen Bavcar, Marja Strojin, Boris 
Cavazza, Dare Valic, Dr. Primoz Simoniti, Vinko Kobal, Dr. Berta 
Jereb, Boris Pahor, Leon Gostisa, Ivan Persak, Dr. France Bucar, 
Viktor Blazic, Dr. Joze Pucnik, Dr. Franc Zagozen, Ivan Oman, 
Marjan Podobnik, Janez Jansa, Vane Gosnik, Saso Lap, Marjan 
Vidmar, Ivan Pucnik, Janez Podobnik, Dr. Anton Strojin, Dr. 
Marjan Jereb, Rudi Seligo, Veno Taufer, and Lojze Lebic. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31715 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_s_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll Shows Slovene Intolerance, Fears </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll Shows Slovene Intolerance, Fears </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0306A Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 30 May 94 pp 
28-29 </F>

<F P=103> 94BA0306A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Svetlana Vasovic-Mekina: "Germans Closer Than </F>
the Croats"] 
  [Text] The southern neighbors are threatening the 
Slovenes; why 36 Jews are threatening 20 percent of Slovenia's 
citizens. 
  In a few days the findings of the "Slovene Public Opinion 
'94" poll will be officially presented to the Slovene public. 
The results of this year's undertaking are also interesting 
because of the possibility of a long-term comparison; the 
Slovene public opinion poll (which has been conducted since back 
in 1968 by the Public Opinion Research Center of the Ljubljana 
School of Social Sciences, under the leadership of Dr. Niko Tos) 
can boast of the longest tradition of that type on the territory 
of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This 
year 1,050 respondents participated in the project. 
<H5>  Strengthened Right Wing </H5>
  This year's results undoubtedly show interesting shifts. 
Last 
year the constantly emphasized dispute between Slovene President 
Milan Kucan and former Defense Minister Janez Jansa led to a 
"rewarding" of Jansa's aggressive policy, and a partial 
reconciliation of the electorate with Jansa's side, although 
Kucan still remains the politician who enjoys the confidence of 
all strata of Slovene society. At the same time, the recent 
dispute between the Police and Defense Ministries (the arrest of 
civilian Milan Smolnikar, overstepping the authority of the 
Defense Ministry's commissioner, as a result of which Jansa then 
took off), in spite of the stormy media campaign of the media 
loyal to Jansa, nevertheless did not harm the police at all, but 
rather primarily the Defense Ministry. Although the Slovene 
Defense Ministry, after 1991 (the June conflicts with the 
Yugoslav People's Army--author's note), received only the 
highest assessments in comparison with all other state 
institutions, after the above-mentioned case of the beating of a 
civilian, the situation abruptly changed; the ministry lost 
credit, and the public became much more critical of the 
activities of the Defense Ministry, which is now headed by Jelko 
Kacin. 
  Naturally, the most interesting indicators are those 
concerning the oscillations of nationalism and interethnic 
intolerance. A comparison with last year's results leads to the 
assessment that those phenomena are slightly rising. The 
researchers see changes in the social structure as the causes of 
this. The feeling of being threatened is increasing primarily 
because of the war in the vicinity of Slovenia, as well as the 
increasingly clearer realization that the presence of refugees 
in Slovenia will remain a lasting problem. Only two years ago, 
at the time of the fiercest Serbian-Croatian war, polls at that 
time showed a very high, almost euphoric solidarity with the 
refugees; today the euphoria has vanished, and the solidarity 
has turned to rejection. The most perverse fact in all of this 
is that as many as 20 percent of the Slovene citizens polled 
"would not like to have a Jew as a neighbor" (in the 1991 
census, according to data from the Slovene Statistical Yearbook, 
"as many as" 36 inhabitants stated themselves to be Jews); 
although anti-Semitism has not flourished in Slovenia to date, 
the latest results show the power of a stereotype, in which the 
respondents' personal experience obviously does not play any 
role at all. The researchers' interpretation is that such 
extremely nationalistic and racist prejudices are the results of 
"nonexperiential orientations," which means that the respondents 
form their attitude indirectly, on the basis of shifts in other 
societies close to them, for example in Austria, Germany, or 
Italy. 
<H5>  Foreign Brothers </H5>
  Increased ethnic oversensitivity is being manifested in two 
forms: as aggressive nationalism (the group that supports such 
views represents about 10 percent of the population), and as 
distrust on the part of a majority of Slovenes toward the 
neighboring Yugoslav peoples, until yesterday "fraternal" ones, 
toward whom a majority of the respondents today express great 
coolness. In some cases, that deliberate emphasis on difference 
goes to ridiculous extremes. For example, in response to the 
question "How much are the peoples listed similar to Slovenes?" 
the respondents ranked the Germans in first place as closest to 
themselves, then the Austrians, and then, in order, the Swiss, 
the Czechs and Slovaks, the Croats, the Italians, the Americans, 
the Hungarians, the Russians, the Bosnians, and at the very 
end--the Serbs and Turks. On the other hand, in response to the 
question "Which languages do you use or understand?" the 
respondents answered that almost 90 percent of them spoke or 
understood Serbo-Croatian, 45.1 percent German, 37.3 percent 
English, 17.2 percent Italian, 6.2 percent French, and so forth. 
The irony is that thus, the vast majority of Slovenes, because 
of linguistic closeness and coexistence for many years in the 
same state, speak well and understand the languages of the 
peoples whom they view as the most foreign to them of all the 
peoples on the face of the earth. What lies behind such radical 
responses is an expression of sympathy or antipathy toward the 
actions of different peoples and states when Slovenia became 
independent, and a critical view of the causes of the war in 
Bosnia. 
  The coolness that Slovenes express toward their "brothers to 
the south" is also apparent in connection with the answers to 
the question "Who is threatening Slovenia?" According to the 
majority's opinion, Slovenia is still most threatened by Croatia 
(50.2 percent), immediately followed by Serbia (46.6 percent). 
The third big and serious threat to Slovenia consists of the 
refugees (30.2 percent of the respondents), then Russia (27.3 
percent of the respondents), and only then Italy (16.2 percent), 
with which Slovenia has a dispute over the Osimo accords, and 
Austria (5 percent), which has not yet fulfilled (and probably 
never will) its obligations from article 7 of the state treaty 
on the protection of the Slovene minority in Austria. 
  Finally, after several years of critical reactions from the 
respondents, some positive vibrations can be observed only in 
the area of living conditions. Most of the respondents 
optimistically expect an improvement in living conditions in the 
future, even though no one expects dramatically rapid jumps. 
Such views are even partly confirmed by the data on the growth 
of exports, the halt in the growth of unemployment, and 
increases in direct foreign investments last year in Slovenia, 
which is trying right now to compensate finally for the loss of 
the former Yugoslav markets through free trade agreements with 
the members of the Visegrad group of countries. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|What Should Be the Condition for Receiving Slovene Citizenship?              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Knowledge of the Slovene language     |91| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Living for a long time in Slovenia    |88| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Familiarity with Slovene culture      |70| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Slovene descent                       |60| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Born in Slovenia                      |45| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Christian religion                    |28| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Who Is Threatening Slovenia?                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Refugees                              |30.2| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minorities                            |20| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Japan                                 |3| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|United States                         |4| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Germany                               |4| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Russia                                |27.3| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Serbia                                |46.6| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Croatia                               |50.2| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hungary                               |3| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Austria                               |5| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Italy                                 |16.2| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31716 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_y_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Simic Receives Head of Croatian Bureau </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Simic Receives Head of Croatian Bureau </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406170494 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1549 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406170494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, June 14 (TANJUG) -- Yugoslav Deputy Prime 
Minister Zeljko Simic and head of the Croatian Bureau in 
Belgrade Zvonimir Markovic agreed on Tuesday it was necessary to 
restore communications and economic and other ties between 
Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro) and Croatia, which they said 
would pave the way to resolving vital problems in Serbo-Croatian 
relations. 
  The Yugoslav Information Ministry said in a statement that 
Markovic briefed Simic about the Croatian Bureau's activities 
and handed him a letter from Mate Granic, Croatian deputy prime 
minister and foreign minister. 
  The two sides agreed that Simic's visit to Zagreb on 
February 
12, was a step towards resuming negotiations aimed at 
normalizing mutual relations and stabilizing the overall 
political situation in the region. They also said they hoped 
that Simic and Granic would meet soon and that outstanding 
problems would be resolved on an equal footing and in the spirit 
of tolerance which had so far prevailed in the talks between 
Yugoslavia and Croatia. Croatia violently seceded from the 
former Yugoslav federation in mid-1991. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31717 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_y_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Explosions Continue Following Lightning Strike </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Explosions Continue Following Lightning Strike </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406160194 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1506 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406160194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, June 14 (TANJUG) -- Sporadic explosions 
could still be heard at Tuesday noon from an army ammunition 
dump in Lisicji Potok in Belgrade which was struck by a 
lightning while a thunderstorm was raging over Belgrade on 
Monday night. Military sources say that no one was killed in 
the explosion, that the situation is "under control" and that 
there is "no danger of the explosion spreading and endangering 
civilian facilities." 
  Early on Tuesday, reporters and photographers were denied 
access for security reasons to the underground ammunition dump 
where explosives for military exercises are kept. A team of 
TANJUG's reporters who managed to come near the dump situated in 
the popular Belgrade picnic site of Kosutnjak say the explosions 
occur at approximately 40-minute intervals. The whole area 
smells of gunpowder and is covered by a cloud of whitish smoke. 
  The road to the dump is heavily guarded by army and [word 
indistinct] forces who have advised the residents of Kosutnjak 
to avoid walking in the woods for fear that some explosives 
might have been blown onto the grass. 
  Teams of military experts who are clearing up the terrain 
say 
that the rain is helping them prevent the fire from spreading. 
  A part of the residential area near the dump was evacuated 
in 
the night between Monday and Tuesday. Widow of the late Yugoslav 
president Josip Broz Tito, Jovanka Broz, whose residence is 
located near the ammunition dump, was among them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31718 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   General Staff Issues Statement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    General Staff Issues Statement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406162294 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406162294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] We have just received an announcement from the 
Information Service of the General Staff of the Yugoslav Army 
that says the following: 
  On the occasion of the explosion in the depot of training 
and 
instructive explosive equipment in Lisicji Potok on 13 June at 
2330, the Information Service of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav Army points out the following facts: 
  The public has already been told that Jelena Djordjevic was 
injured in the explosion, that she has been hospitalized at the 
Army Medical Academy, and that she is successfully recovering. 
Nobody was injured among the officers and soldiers. 
  A commission of the head of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav 
Army has been on the site of the accident since the explosion to 
establish all the circumstances under which the explosion took 
place. It was indubitably ascertained that the explosion was 
caused by lightning and that any possibility of a diversion, 
sabotage, or any other cause is excluded. 
  The fire has been localized and is expected to be completely 
extinguished soon. The site of the accident is under control 
and there is no possibility of any further explosions or the 
spreading of the fire. There is no danger to the population and 
there are no reasons for alarm or fear of the incident repeating. 
  Further on, the report says the following: Expert teams of 
the Yugoslav Army and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Serbia 
have been clearing the site and removing all objects that can 
present a danger to people's life or health. In this respect, 
citizens are expected to show cooperation. 
  The General Staff of the Yugoslav Army expresses thanks to 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Serbia, the Belgrade 
fire-fighting teams, and the citizens for their cooperation, 
constructivity, calmness, and vigilance and asks them to 
eliminate rumors among themselves about nonexistent causes for 
explosion. The moment conditions for secure work are created, 
access to the site of the explosion and contact with 
eyewitnesses of the explosion and officers who can provide 
expert explanation will be made available to journalists. 
  The General Staff of the Yugoslav Army points out that as a 
consequences of the explosion, a certain quantity of material 
that may be dangerous was scattered and therefore it asks 
citizens not to touch any objects that seem to them to be 
suspicious, but to report any such case to the General Staff 
Commission, the military authorities, or the bodies of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, it is said in the announcement of 
the Information Service of the General Staff of the Yugoslav 
Army. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31719 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_y_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   DSK Admits Albania Guiding Movement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    DSK Admits Albania Guiding Movement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1006190394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1725 GMT 10 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1006190394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pristina, June 10 (TANJUG) -- Fehmi Agani, second in 
command in the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo (DSK) party of the 
Albanian separatists in the southern Serbian province of 
Kosovo-Metohija (Kosmet), openly admitted on Friday that the 
Republic of Albania was guiding the activities of the political 
movement of the Albanians in the province. 
  The DSK vice-chairman told a press conference that "identity 
of stands between the DSK and Albania" was reaffirmed on 
Thursday during the talk between DSK Chairman Ibrahim Rugova and 
Albanian President Sali Berisha. 
  Agani said that "consultations and coordination of DSK 
activities with Albania were one of the major results of the 
political movement of the Albanians in Kosovo-Metohija." Agani 
admitted that Albania's "strong support" was the major factor of 
success of the struggle for the fulfillment of DSK demands. 
  The Albanian separatists have been trying for decades to 
secede Kosovo-Metohija from Serbia, i.e. the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (F.R.Y.), using conventional terrorist methods and 
attacking members of the police and the army. The F.R.Y.'s 
attempts to develop good-neighbourly relations with neighbouring 
Republic of Albania remain unsuccessful because Tirana is 
persistently and openly supporting the separatist movement in 
Kosmet, thus meddling with the F.R.Y.'s internal affairs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31720 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian President Tudjman Visits </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian President Tudjman Visits </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    News Conference With Izetbegovic </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406155894 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406155894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mladen Bosnjak on news conference by Croatian </F>
President Franjo Tudjman and Alija Izetbegovic, president of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, with unidentified correspondents 
in Sarajevo on 14 June; live, with portions recorded] 
  [Text] [Studio announcer] Some 10 minutes ago, Presidents 
of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina [as received] Alija 
Izetbegovic and Dr. Franjo Tudjman held a news conference at the 
end of Mr. Tudjman's visit to Sarajevo. Croatian President 
Franjo Tudjman's visit to Bosnia-Herzegovina will continue with 
a tour of several places. We now go to our correspondent Mladen 
Bosnjak at the Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency [words indistinct]. 
Good day. 
  [Bosnjak] Good day. The news conference was very brief and 
actually consisted of two parts. In the first part, Mr. Kemal 
Muftic, adviser in the Presidency, read out the joint statement 
signed by both presidents, Croatian President Franjo Tudjman and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency President Alija Izetbegovic. 
Following this, Mr. Tudjman answered a mere one or two 
questions and that is how this meeting with the press corps 
ended. I suggest we listen to both; first the joint statement 
of the two presidents, and then the part, the two brief answers 
given in response to the correspondents' brief questions. Let 
us listen. 
  [Begin recording] [Muftic] Ladies and gentlemen, state 
delegations of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina [as heard], headed by Croatian President Dr. 
Franjo Tudjman and President of the Presidency Alija 
Izetbegovic, [words indistinct] on 14 June, today in Sarajevo 
(?held) official talks on furthering relations and areas of 
possible cooperation between the two neighboring countries, 
particularly in the area of defense from the mutual aggressor, 
and several [words indistinct] issues pertaining to the 
economic, traffic, humanitarian [words indistinct] the process 
of establishing the Bosnia-Herzegovina Federation, and the 
establishment of the future confederation with the Republic of 
Croatia. The two presidents held long talks behind closed 
doors, and were later joined by the president and vice president 
of the Federation, Messrs. Kresimir Zubak and Ejup Ganic. The 
official talks between the delegations were attended on the 
Croatian side by Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Dr. 
Mate Granic, Deputy Prime Minister Borislav Skegro, Defense 
Minister Gojko Susak, the president's National Security adviser, 
Hrvoje Sarinic, presidential advisers Ivic Pasalic and Slobodan 
Lang, and the Republic of Croatia's ambassador to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Mr. Zdravko Sancevic. For the host country, 
the delegation was comprised of Prime Minister Dr. Haris 
Silajdzic, Deputy Prime Minister Edib Bukvic, Defense Minister 
Hamdija Hadzihasanovic, Foreign Minister Dr. Irfan Ljubijankic, 
Minister for Industry Faruk Smajlbegovic, Minister for Refugees 
and Social Welfare Dr. Arif Smajkic, Justice Minister Dr. Kasim 
Trnka, and Information Minister Ivo Knezevic. 
  In the spirit of friendship, mutual understanding, and 
respect, and keeping in mind the wider international 
implications of the aggression on both countries, the two 
presidents expressed the belief that the mutual recognition of 
all the states created after the disintegration of Yugoslavia 
and the international monitoring of Serbian and Montenegrin 
borders toward Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina in accordance with 
UN Security Council Resolutions 787 and 838 [Muftic is 
interrupted by an unidentified voice that says 769] and 769, 
(?is) a necessary step for establishing lasting peace in this 
part of the republic. On this occasion, the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia again confirmed 
their commitment to peace and a negotiated solution to all 
conflicts, but their highest representatives consider it 
necessary that the international community should provide clear 
guarantees for the cessation of the aggression and occupation, 
and the full observation of human rights and the territorial 
integrity of both countries in order to further the relations 
between the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  In this sense, they agreed that the following be 
accomplished through the work of joint commissions: 
  a) The liberalization of the transit of the citizens of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina as well as the transit of goods 
through the Republic of Croatia, according to the laws of the 
Republic of Croatia. 
  b) Joint [words indistinct] the return of the refugees and 
displaced persons according to the principle of all to their 
homes. 
  c) The opening up of all communications and 
telecommunication links, particularly (?between) Split, Mostar, 
Sarajevo, Zenica, and Tuzla. 
  The Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina supports the Republic of 
Croatia in all its legitimate efforts and attempts aimed at a 
peaceful reintegration of the temporarily occupied territories 
into its state, legal, and economic system. The Republic of 
Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina will jointly 
build two bridges on the Sarajevo-Ploce railroad. The money, 
project, and supervision will be provided by Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
while the work will be carried out by construction companies 
from Croatia. The stands on the use of the Ploce port have been 
agreed on in principle. 
  Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia will agree on the joint 
strategy of approach in the talks on the succession with the 
Islamic countries, especially Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and 
the United Arab Emirates. 
  An agreement was also reached on the joint appearance in 
third countries through mixed commissions. In order to 
rationalize the diplomatic network, the embassies of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in some countries will represent the 
interests of the Republic of Croatia and vice versa, where this 
is proves to be useful. 
  It was also agreed that the problems of the property of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in the Republic of Croatia and vice verse be 
solved without delay, in accordance with the interstate 
agreement. The two presidents agreed that [words indistinct] 
the individuals who are against the spirit and practice of the 
established federation and the future confederation be removed. 
  The talks between the highest state delegations of the 
Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina were 
held with the intention to remove all misunderstandings through 
the constant and direct cooperation of official representatives 
of the two countries. 
  Franjo Tudjman, president of the Republic of Croatia, has 
invited Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Kresimir Zubak, president of 
the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, to visit the Republic of 
Croatia. The invitations have been accepted with pleasure. The 
visits will be arranged through the usual diplomatic channels. 
  This was the joint statement by the two delegations (?led 
by) 
Presidents Izetbegovic and Tudjman. 
  [Izetbegovic] Ladies and gentlemen, we do not have much time 
considering that President Tudjman should (?travel further) and 
that we spent a bit more time on agreeing this statement. 
Before we start with questions and answers, I would 
particularly like to draw your attention to the part of this 
statement that represents the message of President Tudjman and 
me, a message that consists of two proposals, namely that of all 
states that emerged on the territory of the former Yugoslavia 
start recognizing one another. This is our first message. The 
second message is that the control of borders be secured, of 
course, [words indistinct] the Croatian-Serbian border, up in 
the north, then the Serbian-Bosnian border, and the 
Montenegrin-Bosnian border. This is what I particularly wanted 
to draw your attention to. This is our message to the world. 
The rest more or less concerns our [words indistinct]. This is 
all. We are ready to answer your questions. Of course, we will 
not spend (?much time). 
  [Tudjman] I would like to say that the Croatian delegation 
came to Sarajevo, and not only to Sarajevo as we are, our 
delegation will continue journey through Bosnia-Herzegovina, in 
order to contribute to the realization of the Washington 
agreement on the creation of the Federation and confederation. 
  [Unidentified speaker] We have five minutes. 
  [Correspondent] (?I would like to ask) Mr. Tudjman. Does 
the Croatian community of Herceg-Bosna exist? 
  [Tudjman] It exists. Since the Croatian community of 
Herceg-Bosna was created during the resistance against Serbian 
aggression, it will exist until the Federation comes into life 
and until the foundations have been laid for the confederation. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Tudjman. What is the first [word 
indistinct] Will you go to Kiseljak and (?on from there)? 
  [Tudjman] Leave that for subsequent reporting. 
  [Correspondent] Is there a chance of you visiting some other 
places, like Mostar [word indistinct] try to help the 
implementation of the [word indistinct] federation. 
  [Tudjman] Herceg-Bosna does not need to die, but it must be 
incorporated into the Federation as an essential basis for (?the 
Federation) and the confederation. 
  [Izetbegovic] The question that you asked has been regulated 
by the constitutional law very clearly, namely, that the 
existing authorities continue functioning until the federal 
authorities are set up. This is the so-called temporary 
arrangement and that is how it is regulated. 
  [Muftic] (?If there is nothing else) [words indistinct] 
Thank you for your time. [end recording] 
  [Studio announcer] We have our reporter Mladen Bosnjak 
with us. Therefore, Mladen, what else was included in the 
program of the visit by Dr. Tudjman? 
  [Bosnjak] As we have already reported, Croatian President 
Mr. Franjo Tudjman arrived at Sarajevo Airport at approximately 
0930. At approximately 1000 he entered the Presidency building, 
where we was received by his hosts -- Mr. Izetbegovic, President 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina Federation Zubak, Vice President of the 
Federation Ejup Ganic, the Bosnia-Herzegovina prime minister and 
several ministers in the government, and the Sarajevo mayor. 
After the ceremonial welcome, the official talks started, which 
resulted, as we have just heard, in an announcement, that is to 
say, a statement of the two (?presidents) and also this 
impromptu news conference. 
  To the surprise of, I would say, his security service, Mr. 
Tudjman decided to stroll through the streets of Sarajevo from 
[words indistinct] to the Embassy of the Republic of Croatia, 
which was ceremonially opened today. On that occasion he met 
with several Sarajevo residents. It seems to me that these 
contacts have surprised the Sarajevo residents themselves, 
however, a certain intimacy and happiness about these contacts 
could also be sensed, because this is also one of the signs that 
the Bosnia-Herzegovina Federation, the federation of the Croats 
and the Muslims-Bosniaks, is springing into life. 
  After his stay in the embassy building, Mr. Tudjman [word 
indistinct] the Presidency building where Bosnia-Herzegovina 
President Alija Izetbegovic held a ceremonial lunch in his 
honor, and afterward they held the news conference -- we have 
already heard the recording that we have broadcast unedited to 
be able to report promptly about the most important event in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina today. 
  That's it from the Presidency building about Mr. Tudjman's 
visit in Sarajevo. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31721 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian President Tudjman Visits </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian President Tudjman Visits </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Tudjman Opens Croatian Embassy </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406162094 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406162094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] At the opening of the Croatian Embassy in Sarajevo, 
Dr. Franjo Tudjman said, among other things, that he was 
convinced that we were at the end of the tragedy that this town 
and the Muslim and Croatian people in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
Croatia have had to endure. We can be proud of the fact that 
the Croatian people have contributed greatly to the preservation 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina. [Words indistinct], he said, so that we 
can pick the fruit of the permanent unity between 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. 
  Today's official opening of the Croatian Embassy in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is a sign that we are implementing resolutely 
the Washington agreement on the creation of the federation of 
the Bosniaks and the Croats and the confederation with Croatia, 
Dr. Tudjman said. He emphasized that this was a proof that, in 
search of friendship with the Bosniak-Muslim people, a certain 
level has been reached with the realization of the agreement on 
the federation and that the future confederation is paving the 
way to the end of the war, the aggression, and the tragedy of 
Sarajevo and Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31722 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian President Tudjman Visits </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian President Tudjman Visits </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Tudjman Hails Bosnian Croats </H4>

<F P=102> LD1406220094 Zagreb HTV Television in Serbo-Croatian 1830 
GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406220094 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb HTV Television </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by Croatian President Franjo Tudjman to local </F>
Croats at Franciscan hospital in Nova Bila, central Bosnia, on 
14 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] On my visit to Bosnia-Herzegovina, Sarajevo and 
other places, I could, naturally, not avoid visiting Nova Bila, 
that is, I had to visit Nova Bila first. Nova Bila is first 
because it has become a symbol of Croatian resistance, of the 
Croatian survival, of the determination on the part of the Croat 
people of the Lasva valley -- as well as of the whole of the 
Croatian homeland, and not only Croats in the homeland, but also 
those in the diaspora -- to survive here and everywhere else 
where Croats live. 
  Someone said that this used to be a marginal area. The 
entire Croatian nation used to be marginal. At that critical, 
historic moment of the disintegration of the Yugoslav dungeon 
and the socialist hell, no one wanted an independent, sovereign, 
and autonomous Croatian state. Consequently, the Croat identity 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina itself was in jeopardy. 
  Despite this, due to the unity of all Croats, we have 
managed 
to establish a democratic and sovereign Croatia because the 
Croats from Herceg-Bosna, from this Lasva valley, from all over 
Bosnia, fought first to establish and defend the Croatian 
republic, the Croatian state. This is why later we could offer 
assistance to you -- humanitarian and other kinds of assistance 
-- and prevent the whole of Bosnia-Herzegovina from falling into 
the hands of greater Serbia. This is why we supported the 
creation of the Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna, so we could take 
part, take decisive part in resolving the destiny of the entire 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This is why we managed -- to the surprise 
and awe of the world -- to defend the Croatian state. There was 
even this miracle that took place here in Nova Bila where 
doctors, you, defended the Lasva valley from those who wanted to 
conquer the Croatian areas. 
  Consequently, the doctors performed miracles in God's temple 
by operating on even the most serious cases. Thanks to such 
miracles, relying only on our own strength and on our own 
wisdom, the world had to recognize us. Today, not only do we 
have an internationally recognized Croatia but we have allies 
and friends, too, including the United States, the world's 
biggest superpower, and all over the world, all the way up to 
China and Europe. 
  The Washington agreement on the Croat-Muslim federation and 
the confederation of this Bosnia-Herzegovina federation with 
Croatia has made it possible for you to no longer remain on the 
sidelines, so the Croat man here in Bosnia-Herzegovina no longer 
has to be oppressed and subjugated. He can be sovereign in this 
federation. By relying on Croatia, Bosnia can remain and become 
ever more Croatian. [applause] 
  Rest assured, what we have achieved is in the interest of 
all 
Croats in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Rest assured, this is in the 
interest of the Croatian state which will now survive. We have 
not allowed, we will never allow new Bleiburgs to take place 
[reference to massacre of Serbs and Croats by Tito's partisans 
in 1945]. Croatia is today a recognized country in the world 
and has powerful friends and allies. The sole problem rests 
with the fact that even here in Bosnia-Herzegovina we should get 
used to a situation in which Bosnia-Herzegovina is now a 
Croatian country, too, in which the Croatian man is entitled to 
sovereignty in it. 
  Consequently, we have secured the survival of the Croatian 
state. We have secured the survival of the Croatian sphere in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the sovereignty of the Croatian sphere in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We are going to restore what has been 
destroyed. I promise, we are going to build a new modern 
hospital in Nova Bila in the interest of the Croat people 
because this area deserves it. Likewise, we are going to build 
schools and cultural and economic facilities in the interest of 
the Croat man. No one is going to chase us away, all the way up 
to remote Canada, America and Australia, any longer. We are 
everywhere, from the South to the North Pole. We are going to 
turn our Croatia into a country to which people will return; 
they are already returning. 
  This has been accomplished by you, by us all. We can be 
proud of this miracle performed by the grace of God. Our fate 
here in Bosnia-Herzegovina is in our hands. Trust yourselves, 
trust the leadership that made this possible. Greetings. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31723 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Izetbegovic, de Mello, Rose Discuss Accords </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Izetbegovic, de Mello, Rose Discuss Accords </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406183294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406183294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Alija Izetbegovic, president of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, received Sergio de Mello, chief 
of the civilian sector of the UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] 
for the former Yugoslavia, and General Michael Rose, commander 
of the UNPROFOR forces for Bosnia-Herzegovina, today. During 
the meeting they examined the implementation of the Geneva 
cease-fire agreement and the agreement on the exchange of 
prisoners, and the development of the situation in Gorazde. 
  We have concluded that the agreement of the countries is 
being observed, de Mello said for the B-H PRESS agency after the 
talks, even though there have been cases of cease-fire 
violations. We hope that in the course of the coming week a new 
meeting of the warring sides will take place in order to promote 
this agreement and prolong it by at least another month, he 
added. 
  Speaking about the meeting at Sarajevo Airport, where the 
fate of prisoners and the missing persons was discussed, de 
Mello expressed optimism, emphasizing that the two sides were 
interested in making progress in this sphere, too. Regarding 
Gorazde, it was agreed which steps must still be undertaken to 
allow the residents return to their homes in the areas [words 
indistinct] around the town. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31724 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Minister Views Situation, Peace Prospects </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Minister Views Situation, Peace Prospects </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   NC1406113694 Cairo AL-AHRAM AL-MASA'I in Arabic 11 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> NC1406113694 </F>
<F P=104>  Cairo AL-AHRAM AL-MASA'I </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bosnian Foreign Minister Irfan Ljubijankic </F>
by Ashraf al-'Ishari; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Al-'Ishari] First, what about 
current developments in Bosnia in light of the international 
efforts to solve the crisis? 
  [Ljubijankic] The situation is getting worse every day. The 
Serbian forces have never respected their pledges, despite the 
international pressure on them. Acts of genocide are continuing 
intensively every day as well as the ethnic cleansing and the 
organized rape of Bosnian women in violation of all 
international norms and charters. The Serbs' siege of our 
people is continuing while the international community refuses 
to lift the arms embargo imposed on us so that we can defend 
ourselves. 
  There are still innumerable excesses despite the efforts of 
the UN peacekeeping forces in Sarajevo. The UN forces have not 
succeeded yet in stopping the bloody battles waged by the Serbs 
or the violations being perpetrated against us, especially the 
massacres and the killing and displacement of children, women, 
and old people. 
  [Al-'Ishari] Are you satisfied with the role and performance 
of the Islamic and Arab countries in support of the Bosnian 
people? What is your assessment of the role of the Egyptian 
forces in Sarajevo as part of the UN forces? 
  [Ljubijankic] Yes. We have been completely satisfied with 
the Islamic and Arab countries' role and their support and 
backing for our people and our cause from the first day that the 
battles and events erupted here. Some Islamic countries and 
organizations, led by the Islamic Conference Organization, have 
played a major role in supporting our cause and exposing the 
Serbs' crimes and violations before world public opinion. 
Moreover, some Islamic countries hastened to give material and 
humanitarian aid to our forces and people. Foremost among these 
countries is Egypt, whose forces are participating with the UN 
forces. As to the Egyptian forces' role in Sarajevo, it is much 
admired and appreciated by the Bosnian people, who are proud of 
having these troops among the UN forces. [passage omitted] 
  [Al-'Ishari] What are the reasons for your country's 
hesitant 
acceptance of the cease-fire agreements, particularly the recent 
ones, as demanded by the United Nations? 
  [Ljubijankic] We have never hesitated or rejected a UN 
demand 
for a cease-fire but have always had reservations about such 
demands. We feared that the Serbs would legitimize their 
occupation of territories in Bosnia and impose the fait accompli 
by force through our acceptance of the recently announced truce. 
We rejected this and conveyed our stand to the two 
international meditators and the UN envoy to Sarajevo. We 
frankly said that our acceptance of the European peace plan is 
contingent on confirmation of the return of all the Bosnian 
refugees who have fled from their cities and houses under the 
pressure of Serbian attacks. The refugees' return represents 
one of our most important conditions for accepting the peace 
plan. If the refugees return, then this would mean rejection of 
the seizure of the territories of others by force and 
recognition of the Bosnians' right to their territories and 
cities. The problem will be solved when this is done. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Al-'Ishari] Are you expecting to see peace established in 
Bosnia in 1994? 
  [Ljubijankic] [passage omitted] I personally do not expect 
to 
see the peace that we are seeking achieved in 1994 so quickly 
and for several reasons. There are so far no clear bases or an 
influential power that can convince the Serbs to respond to the 
voice of reason and peace and sign the comprehensive peace 
agreement. We in Bosnia would be happy if the Serbs abandoned 
the notion of establishing their expansionist state by force or 
if a Serbian figure convinced of the need for a dialogue with 
the Bosnian leaders were to emerge. At the same time, we 
categorically reject any conditions imposed on us by force. 
Such a policy has proved to be a failure and will not bear 
fruit as some quarters believe. On the contrary, it will only 
stiffen our stand because right is on our side and we have not 
usurped the territories of others by force. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31725 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sarajevo Radio: Serbian Army Shelled Funeral </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sarajevo Radio: Serbian Army Shelled Funeral </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506090094 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 0800 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506090094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mirza Sadikovic from Bihac] </F>
  [Text] The fierce attacks by the united aggressors 
[Serbian army, western Bosnian leader Fikret Abdic's forces] 
have continued on the free Bihac region. Yesterday afternoon 
[Bosnian Serb leader Radovan] Karadzic's chetniks from their 
stronghold in Veliki Radic fired several howitzer shells at a 
funeral in Jezersko, and then continued shelling the other free 
parts of the Bosanska Krupa municipality. They have been 
shelling Buzim from the territory of the so-called Serbian 
autonomous region of Krajina, and all night and this morning 
they have been shelling the outskirts of Cazin, Krivaja, 
(Pljanici), [words indistinct], (Spahici), (Gornje Srbljane), 
and [word indistinct]. This is obvious proof of their 
collaboration with Abdic's traitorous phalanx, and yet another 
open aggression on Bosnia-Herzegovina, as they skillfully use 
Abdic as a smokescreen for their attacks. 
  The Kladusa rebels and mercenaries have also continued with 
their bestial attacks along the entire front line. Their 
artillery and infantry attacks never ceased throughout the 
night, and have even intensified this morning. 
  Another appeal has been sent to the international 
organizations to try and save the families that are being 
prosecuted in Velika Kladusa. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31726 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Fierce Clashes' Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Fierce Clashes' Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406150494 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1345 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406150494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Petrovac, 14 Jun (TANJUG) -- Inter-Muslim clashes 
in Cazin Krajina [western Bosnia] have resumed for the fourth 
day running, local Muslim media have reported. Radio Velkaton 
in Velika Kladusa reports that fierce clashes continued 
throughout the night on almost all parts of the front. The 
fiercest attacks by Izetbegovic's 5th Corps were registered in 
the Trzac, Pecigrad, Liskovac, and Todorovo areas. According to 
the same source, both sides suffered a large number of wounded, 
killed, captured, and missing soldiers. 
  Muslim Radio Bihac reports, and Radio Cazin and Muslim radio 
Sarajevo have confirmed, that Fikret Abdic's units launched 
fierce attacks over the past 24 hours, targeting Pecigrad and 
Todorovo with artillery weapons. Muslim Radio Bihac reports 
that Abdic's forces attacked a bus in the Cazin municipality and 
injured a number of passengers. Radio Bihac also reports that a 
large number of people have been injured, killed, or captured. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31727 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Bosnian Serbs Report Continued Muslim Attacks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Bosnian Serbs Report Continued Muslim Attacks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406195294 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1716 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406195294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zvornik, June 14 (TANJUG) -- Attacks on the Bosnian 
Serb republic (RS) are continuing since last Friday when a 
U.N.-brokered four-week ceasefire in Bosnia came into force. 
Bosnian Serb military sources told TANJUG on Tuesday that 
Moslem troops loyal to Alija Izetbegovic shelled Teslic (central 
Bosnia) injuring two civilians and causing considerable material 
damage. 
  The Moslems opened combined infantry and artillery fire on 
Bosnian Serb army positions southeast of Teslic. After the 
Bosnian Serb troops returned fire, the attacks stopped. In the 
region of Orasje (Bosanska Posavina), units of the local Bosnian 
Croat Defence Council (HVO) and troops of the regular Croatian 
Army carried out joint infantry and mortar attacks along the 
entire lines of separation with the Serbs. So far there are no 
reports about the effects of the Croat attacks, and Bosnian Serb 
military sources mention the destruction of civilian facilities. 
  Troops loyal to Izetbegovic continued provoking the Serbs in 
the region of Srbobran (formerly called Donji Vakuf), in central 
Bosnia, and in the area of Mts. Vlasic and Ozren. In the 
Bihac-Krupa front, in northwest Bosnia, the Moslems opened 
infantry fire. They also renewed attacks on the 
Kalinovik-Konjic fronts, northern Herzegovina. 
  According to the Bosnian Serb military sources, the Moslems 
also launched provocative actions from Gorazde, Moslem enclave 
in eastern Bosnia and a U.N. `safe area.' In Sarajevo 
Izetbegovic's troops opened sporadic infantry fire on Serb 
positions in Liljas and Hadzici. Moslem snipers shot at the 
Serb suburbs of Grbavica and Lildza. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31728 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_i_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs: Muslims `Violated' Cease-Fire Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs: Muslims `Violated' Cease-Fire Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406220394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2022 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406220394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Doboj, June 14 (TANJUG) -- Moslem formations on all 
fronts in the wider region of Doboj, northern Bosnia, violated 
the ceasefire agreement by bringing in reinforcements and 
opening strong small arms and artillery fire at Serb (?defence) 
positions and villages, the information service of the First 
Krajina Corps of the Bosnian Serb Army said on Tuesday evening 
[14 June]. 
  The Moslems were especially aggressive on the eastern sector 
of the Teslic front, where they are threatening Serb positions 
by constant artillery barrage and small arms fire. Serb units 
are forced to return equally strong fire in order to protect 
their positions and defend their lives, the statement said. 
  Moslems also stepped up small arms and mortar attacks on the 
Doboj front, especially under cover of the night. After the 
Serb side returned fire, the Moslems stopped attacking. Strong 
movements by the Moslems' motorized vehicles have been 
registered on this front, around Doboj. The Moslems are 
believed to be bringing in reinforcements from Tesanj and 
amassing these troops near Serb defense positions southwest of 
Doboj. 
  Moslems also attacked Serb positions and villages with small 
arms fire on the northeastern slopes of Mt. Ozren in northern 
Bosnia, and on the left bank of the River Spreca. Serb units 
did not return fire. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31729 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_m_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Troops Said To Take `Strategic Points' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Troops Said To Take `Strategic Points' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406174094 Skopje MIC in English 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406174094 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MIC </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Serbian Soldiers at Macedonian Point"] </F>
  [Text] At yesterday's session, the members of the Kriva 
Palanka local assembly asked the Interior Ministry to inform 
them about the situation on the northeastern part of the 
Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- 
FYROM]-Serb border. The session concentrated on the disturbing 
news that Serbian soldiers had taken over an observation point 
on the tip Sraza, 250 meters inside Macedonian territory. 
  According to the unofficial data tabled at the session, 
10-15 
Serbian soldiers set up tents near the border villages Luka and 
Podrizikonj about a month ago, and took over the most important 
strategic points for observation of the Macedonian territory. 
The [words indistinct] noticed that trenches were being dug 
next to the tents, as well as movements of transport vehicles 
and material. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31730 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_m_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Minister Views Balkan Relations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Minister Views Balkan Relations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506112194 Skopje PULS in Macedonian 10 Jun 94 pp 12-13 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506112194 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje PULS </F>
<F P=105>  Macedonian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Stevo Crvenkovski, foreign minister for The </F>
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, by Eleonora 
Karanfilovska; place and date not given: "Approaching the 
Positions"] 
  [Text] [Karanfilovska] We are having these discussions 
just after your discussions with the U.S. special envoy Matthew 
Nemitz. What is your opinion about these discussions and your 
impression of Mr. Nemitz's discussions in Athens? 
  [Crvenkovski] We had very useful meetings and very extensive 
discussions for two days, encompassing the general picture of 
the situation in the whole region, and not only relations 
between Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- 
FYROM] and Greece, which is Mr. Nemitz's mandate. We had 
expanded discussions because these relations are affected by the 
situation in the whole region. I have not been informed about 
the course of his discussions in Athens. I think that Mr. 
Nemitz's stay here will be of great importance for the meetings 
scheduled for New York next week. It is also very important 
that during his stay in Ohrid Mr. Nemitz had the opportunity of 
becoming acquainted with the culture and traditions of the 
Macedonian nation, which will help him obtain a fuller picture 
of the Republic of Macedonia. 
  [Karanfilovska] Was that the reason why you invited Mr. 
Nemitz to Ohrid? There has been some speculation about this in 
the media. 
  [Crvenkovski] I think that it was useful to hold the 
discussions in a more relaxed atmosphere, as well as to take the 
opportunity of introducing him to the historical values of Ohrid 
and Macedonia. 
  [Karanfilovska] Mr. Nemitz stated that both sides had agreed 
not to reveal the course and the results of the discussions. 
Therefore, we shall refrain from asking such a question.... 
  [Crvenkovski] Nevertheless, I shall avail myself of this 
opportunity to remind you that I have been continually repeating 
this during these months of discussions, for which I was exposed 
to a series of attacks by journalists. Mr. Nemitz's statement 
at least helped me to explain my conduct in public. 
  [Karanfilovska] A number of these attacks appeared in our 
weekly, too, which also mentioned on several occasions the 
"Irish formula" as a possible solution for the dispute. We are 
not asking you whether there are negotiations about that, but 
what is your opinion, and do you find it acceptable? 
  [Crvenkovski] The reason why I cannot comment on any formula 
is because our stance is that there can be no separate solutions 
for any of the disputed questions, and that is something that we 
have explicitly advocated since the beginning. What we are 
prepared to discuss are the entire relations with Greece. If we 
reach a solution, it should be regulated in a satisfactory way, 
be acceptable for Europe, and encompass all aspects of mutual 
relations. In that context we can discuss separate solutions. 
It is not our goal to solve some transient problems in 
communications between the two countries, but to find lasting 
solutions for long-lasting relations. 
  [Karanfilovska] Now that you have announced a new meeting in 
New York, probably at the ministerial level, does it mean that 
such a stance for discussions in a package is acceptable for the 
other side? 
  [Crvenkovski] From the statements made by the other side 
during the past few weeks you could see that such a position has 
been accepted. Even I know that from their public statements, 
since we have not had any direct contacts. I think that this is 
a position that is more broadly accepted by the international 
community. That is a point that we have persistently insisted 
upon since the beginning of the dispute and I think that our 
positions are beginning to converge. 
  [Karanfilovska] Is Greece a priority in your work? 
  [Crvenkovski] Basically, what we are trying to do is to 
conduct a normal foreign policy, and we have been working on 
"driving that policy" on several tracks from the outset, in 
order to avoid the trap that Greece fell into when a single 
problem, regardless of its importance, dominated its entire 
foreign policy. This is not predominant in our work, neither in 
terms of the time that we are devoting to it, nor in its 
essence. It is a huge problem and we discuss it continually 
with all our partners, but we are also engaged in what a foreign 
policy should normally do -- not concentrate on one direction 
and one problem. 
  [Karanfilovska] We are asking this because of the time that 
you yourself are spending on the negotiations! 
  [Crvenkovski] It is true that I am spending a lot of time in 
New York, but that is principally out of respect for Mr. Cyrus 
Vance's invitations. They are sent to foreign ministers and I 
think that it would be impolite to respond at a lower level to 
invitations from a mediator whom we highly appreciate, and we 
think it is important to communicate with him properly. It is 
up to the other side to evaluate its own conduct. Second, the 
stay there, although linked with the discussions with Mr. Vance, 
provides a good opportunity for discussing other matters not 
connected with the dispute. There are a number of countries 
with which we still have not established contacts, or are having 
difficulties in establishing them, because we cannot find a 
suitable place to do this. On the other hand, the United 
Nations is an excellent place in which all countries have active 
missions. Therefore, a great deal of work on bilateral 
questions is carried out there, too. 
  [Karanfilovska] You did not mention Washington, and you 
often have meetings with senior U.S. officials during your 
visits to the United States. You have met Secretary of State 
Christopher a couple of times. How prominent is the subject of 
Macedonia-Greece in these discussions, and how bilateral are 
these relations? 
  [Crvenkovski] Concerning the level of our relations with the 
United States and the level of our cooperation, such meetings 
are normal during every stay there. The subject of 
Macedonia-Greece arises in all the bilateral meetings, and not 
only with U.S. officials, because everybody is interested in 
this. However, the discussions in Washington principally 
concentrate on bilateral questions and regional problems of 
interest to ourselves and to our partners, who want to hear our 
opinions and evaluations. 
  [Karanfilovska] It looks as if the United States is choosing 
the more southern part of the Balkans for its presence, from 
where it will be able to achieve its interests. 
  [Crvenkovski] I am not in favor of the idea that it has to 
do with some presence in the region, with some interests, at 
least not in the prevailing sense, as this is an idea that 
belongs to the first half of the 20th century and even before 
that, about spheres of interest and strategic positions in the 
classic sense. The interest is, first of all, in giving support 
to models of state development that promise longer stability. 
The strategic interest of the United States and the European 
Union in Macedonia is to see the success of the political model 
that we are applying, which can serve as an example for solving 
a whole complex of questions that generate severe crises in 
other places since they are not approached correctly. 
  [Karanfilovska] Could that be the reason why after 
Washington was "meandering" from Greece, via Albania and 
Bulgaria, Macedonia was "selected" as a kind of a partner in the 
Balkans? 
  [Crvenkovski] The ties with Macedonia have become closer 
simply because of the political model, and first of all the 
internal one, that we have chosen, and they consider that it is 
in their strategic interest to support it for the sake of 
stability in Europe, for open borders, with prospects for more 
intensive development. 
  [Karanfilovska] Are the present relations in the Balkans, 
and principally the problems with Greece and the closure of the 
border, affecting the construction of a different policy toward 
the other neighbors, and would it have been different if 
relations with Greece had been different? 
  [Crvenkovski] I think that the policy would have been the 
same, but the understanding and the support for that policy 
might have been different. What is crucial to Macedonia's 
position in the Balkans is to be open in all directions -- 
transportation and communications -- and to take the role that 
naturally belongs to it, that is to be the crossroads for all 
movement in the region. That is why it is of the utmost 
importance to establish normal relations and links with our 
neighbors. Therefore, the priority is to establish road, 
railroad, and communications links wherever they existed before. 
Thus, the east-west corridor was not imposed by the dispute 
with Greece or the Greek embargo. It was imposed by the natural 
role of the Republic of Macedonia that it is entitled to in the 
region. The fact that this corridor is now gaining importance 
and support from the international community is to a certain 
extent a result of Greece's conduct and the embargo, and in that 
context it has helped us. However, the bases of this policy of 
communications are independent of the dispute, and that should 
normally be the orientation, as should the development of the 
north-south route the moment the problems have been overcome. 
Macedonia cannot play any role, and principally economic, if it 
does not have both directions. The fact that it is a crossroads 
is a great advantage for Macedonia. It will lose it if it 
neglects either of the two directions. 
  [Karanfilovska] It is paradoxical, but no matter how 
intractable the problem with Greece might look now, it is, in a 
way, smaller than the problems, first of all political, that 
Macedonia is having with the other neighboring countries, with 
which it still has political and economic cooperation. Why can 
this cooperation not be achieved with Greece? 
  [Crvenkovski] We have offered this as a model with Greece 
from the outset and we have been insisting on it. Everywhere 
there are problems between neighboring countries. The question 
is what the attitude of those countries is toward such problems 
-- whether there is an open channel for dialogue, and whether 
there is good will for finding solutions. We are in favor of 
these kinds of relations, because they turned out to be 
successful in Europe. That is why the relations with Albania 
and Bulgaria, regardless of a number of questions that are 
burdening them, are normal relations between European countries. 
That is how we approach them, and to a great extent that is 
their conduct toward us, too. Therefore, Europe's relationship 
toward ourselves and these countries is different. 
  [Karanfilovska] You said that after the situation is 
normalized, the Republic of Macedonia will go on developing the 
north-south route as a road to Europe. However, it looks as if 
Greece has been redirected on this road via Bulgaria and Romania. 
  [Crvenkovski] I do not know how they can look for other 
directions knowing that they are creating problems on all sides 
and in all possible directions. I do not want to get into their 
motives for that. For our part, even in relations with Greece, 
the basis of our foreign policy is dominant, and that is the 
principle of equal distance with our neighbors. 
  [Karanfilovska] Do you here also include the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia? 
  [Crvenkovski] Absolutely, speaking in the long term, 
regardless of their situation now. 
  [Karanfilovska] Nevertheless, at this moment there is no 
attempt for a dialogue with Belgrade, although this neighbor is 
still under the regime of the international community's 
sanctions? 
  [Crvenkovski] There are no diplomatic contacts because the 
other side still refuses formally to recognize the Republic of 
Macedonia. At this moment the question of succession is an open 
problem. We think that it should be settled where it was agreed 
-- in the Contact Group in Geneva. 
  [Karanfilovska] Your Yugoslav counterpart does not share 
this opinion. He thinks that Skopje-Belgrade relations will 
depend on Skopje-Athens relations. 
  [Crvenkovski] That is their problem. However, a normal 
foreign policy should not limit itself to that. I would not 
accept a foreign policy that would be in one part dictated by 
someone else or be dependent on third countries. 
  [Karanfilovska] The Yugoslav Government ordered its Foreign 
Ministry to start preparations for a dialogue with Albania. In 
your opinion, is it related to the latest events in the far 
south of the Balkans? 
  [Crvenkovski] It certainly is an initiative that deserves 
congratulations, because it ultimately leads to the acceptance 
of our basic orientation -- that relations in the Balkans can 
only be solved through dialogue. The greater the number of 
countries that support it, and the greater the number of 
bilateral channels for dialogues among Balkan countries that are 
opened, the faster it will lead toward EU and U.S. strategic 
interest in supporting our model. 
  [Karanfilovska] There are certain reservations among part of 
the opposition and among a number of self-proclaimed independent 
intellectuals in Macedonia, who have recently appeared in 
public, saying that the conduct of the Macedonian Government 
toward Bulgaria is not equal to other countries and that it 
still has some reservations inherited from the past. 
  [Crvenkovski] The basic determination of our foreign policy 
is the principle of equal distance between our neighbors, 
because that is the only way in which the Republic of Macedonia 
can conduct a consistent policy even though at this moment it 
does not actually have a real dialogue with some of its 
neighbors. Relations with all our neighbors should be put on an 
equal footing and there can be no more or less privileged 
relations toward any of our neighbors. This naturally applies 
to the Republic of Bulgaria, too. Overall, we are trying to 
develop relations in a rapid and general way, by applying the 
principle of equal distance and by thoroughly insisting on equal 
relations in which it will be impossible to place or impose 
conditions burdened with the past. 
  [Karanfilovska] Within the framework of stability in the 
Balkans there certainly stands security. Macedonia still has 
the open problem of its inclusion in the collective system of 
the CSCE, although Albania, in staying neutral, abstained, while 
Greece and Cyprus still oppose it. Another question connected 
to the security system is the "Partnership for Peace" project in 
which Macedonia has demonstrated a great interest, and it was 
even announced as one of the topics for the recent discussions 
with Mrs. Lin Davis [name as transliterated]. 
  [Crvenkovski] As far as Albania's position on the CSCE is 
concerned, the meeting of President Gligorov and Mr. Berisha 
gives us the hope that there will not only be no problems from 
Albania, but that we can expect active support for the Republic 
of Macedonia, which indicates a very important step in 
relations. Concerning the "Partnership for Peace" project, we 
have shown our interest, as well as in cooperation with NATO. 
We have had several official contacts, which raised clearly 
defined interests in cooperation from both sides. We have had 
intensive discussions on all the possible forms of cooperation 
with the Western European Union. However, concerning the formal 
participation of Macedonia in the "Partnership for Peace," at 
this moment there is one obstacle -- membership of the CSCE. We 
discussed this with Mrs. Davis, and we shall continue the 
discussions, with the possibility of starting broader contacts 
before joining the project. 
  [Karanfilovska] Are there any discussions with the United 
States about bilateral cooperation on a military plan? 
  [Crvenkovski] At this stage we think our cooperation should 
be carried out within the framework of the multilateral 
organizations, first of all because they have already developed 
good channels of cooperation with the Republic of Macedonia. A 
process of adjustment is necessary in the sense of the military 
educational system, in order to achieve a cooperation on a 
compatible level. 
  [Karanfilovska] Relations in the Balkans are also burdened 
by some far away partners; we have in mind principally 
Australia, not only relating to the decision to call the 
Macedonians Slav Macedonians, but even more because of the 
division of the Macedonian community in that country into those 
from Vardar Macedonia and the "others." Is there a danger that 
this may be accepted as a model for other countries where there 
are such large communities of Macedonians? 
  [Crvenkovski] That action of the Australian Government 
caused a series of consequences that have deeply complicated 
relations inside Australia, where all the citizens, regardless 
of their origin, had equal treatment and made the country an 
example of a multiethnic community. This action, to which we 
immediately reacted very strongly, sets a precedent that can 
have consequences not only for the Macedonian community there, 
but also for others. We know of no country that has renamed its 
own citizens who have always had the right to declare their 
national affiliation. I hope that the Australian Government 
will soon reexamine this action. We were encouraged by the 
explicit reaction of the media and of some provincial 
governments. What came as a result of this in Australia is not 
division, but much stronger cohesion. In this extremely 
unpleasant situation there has been created greater cohesion and 
coordination among the Macedonians in Australia. I do not think 
that this will affect other countries in the sense of limiting 
the rights of their citizens. 
  [Karanfilovska] When your name is publicly mentioned, it is 
usually linked with relations with the Republic of Greece. The 
journalists' "pursuit" of you usually takes place just at the 
time negotiations and discussions are carried out about this. 
There is little talk about the other aspects of your work. 
What does the minister do in his ministry? 
  [Crvenkovski] Owing to the growing interest in relations 
with Greece, there are some very important events from the 
foreign policy area that remain unnoticed or uncovered. I shall 
point out the example of the visit to Holland. That was the 
first official visit to a European country after the 
establishment of diplomatic relations, to which the Dutch side 
devoted great importance -- a meeting was scheduled with the 
prime minister, there were separate discussions with five 
ministers, there was an address in parliament... it was an 
extremely important event for our foreign policy. 
  As far as the work here is concerned, we were heavily 
engaged 
in organizing the ministry itself and its equipment, and in 
setting up embassies within a very short period of time. If we 
just have a look at this, together with the international 
meetings and conferences that we have attended and where we have 
achieved results, only then can we see the job that has been 
done here in the ministry. 
  [Karanfilovska] The public often operates with wrong images. 
There prevails the opinion that you are a recluse, an 
uncommunicative minister, who rarely makes statements, who is 
often absent... however, on the other hand, people who have had 
official meetings with you have a different impression. We hear 
that you have established private contacts with them, that you 
often meet your partners, talk with them, and solve diplomatic 
problems in a different way, not only in your office.... 
  [Crvenkovski] The impression that I rarely make statements, 
I would say, arises from the interest in the discussions with 
Greece. If you look at all my statements, I think that I may 
even appear too often. At one time I was even attacked by some 
opposition politicians for being too great a presence in public. 
As for the impression that people from the outside have, those 
who I have contacts with, it is true that it is much easier to 
establish official contacts with a state if you establish 
friendly links. That is normal in the work of every foreign 
minister if he wants to be successful. Private contacts are 
important first of all for the official part of the work, 
because they enable you to address a partner in the world at any 
time, asking for advice, an opinion, or support. 
  [Karanfilovska] It is evident that, in spite of all your 
engagement, you will retain the image of "minister for Greece." 
Do you think that at the end of your mandate it will have a 
positive or negative connotation? 
  [Minister] I cannot make evaluations about the final 
impression on my work. Nevertheless, it is true that what I am 
doing is far from being subordinated to relations with Greece. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31731 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_m_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   MIC Reports `Provocations' by Serbian Church </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MIC Reports `Provocations' by Serbian Church </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506085194 Skopje MIC in English 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506085194 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MIC </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "New Provocations by SOC -- </F>
Three-Month Ultimatum"] 
  [Text] The Serbian Orthodox Church [SOC] is continuing with 
provocations of the Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] Orthodox Church [MOC]. As it is known, the 
SOC has given the MOC a "three-month deadline to return to the 
canonic order, and if not, an appropriate church procedure would 
be initiated." 
  Last Friday [10 June], the Macedonian authorities from the 
border near Tabanovce, escorted the Vranje bishop of the SOC 
Pahomie back to Serb territory, who was recently appointed 
"administrator of the eparchies in Macedonia" by the SOC. His 
intention was to submit the decision of the Holy Synod of the 
SOC to the "Skopje and Macedonia metropolitan Mr. Mihail." He 
also carried a request to the Macedonian border organs to enable 
the interrupted entrance of the Serbian priests into Macedonia 
and the uninterrupted execution of their mission and intention 
-- holding religious services in Serbian language in the 
Macedonian churches. 
  The decision of the Macedonian authorities not to allow 
Pahomie to enter Macedonia, created an outburst in Serbia. The 
media mainly operates with the arguments such as violation of 
human rights, deprivation of rights, brutal use of force, 
insulting priests who have come in a "mission of God," etc. 
  A representative of the MOC stated yesterday that the Holy 
Synod of the MOC did not receive an official announcement from 
the SOC regarding the arrival of the Vranje bishop Pahomie, nor 
the message which was supposed to be sent to the Archbishop of 
Macedonia and Ohrid Mr. Mihail. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31732 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Opposition Invites Iliescu To Explain Actions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Opposition Invites Iliescu To Explain Actions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406162194 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1300 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406162194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Representatives of the parliamentary parties of the 
Democratic Convention of Romania [CDR] and the Democratic Party 
[PD] held a meeting at the Nastase Club this morning. Following 
the meeting they issued a communique which says that the 
signatory parties -- the PNTCD [National Peasant 
Christian-Democratic Party], the PAC [Civic Alliance Party], the 
PSDR [Romanian Socialist Democratic Party], the PER [Romanian 
Ecology Party], the PL-93 [Liberal Party-1993], the UDMR 
[Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania], and the PD -- 
representing the entire opposition in parliament, after having 
discussed the current political situation, including certain 
statements and actions by Romanian President Ion Iliescu that 
are unworthy of his presidential office and contradict the 
spirit of Constitution, have agreed to invite President Ion 
Iliescu to give the necessary explanations in front of a joint 
session of the chambers of Parliament before the end of the 
current session. 
  The communique also says that, depending on the president's 
answer to the invitation, the signatory parties reserve their 
right to further act according to stipulations of the 
Constitution. The communique also says that the signatory 
parties reached agreement regarding certain joint political 
actions they will carry out over the coming period of time. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31733 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Presidency Rejects Opposition Communique </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Presidency Rejects Opposition Communique </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506110694 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
0400 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506110694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A press communique sent to us last night by the 
Presidency spokesman states that Romania's president, 
acknowledging the communique issued by the Democratic Convention 
of Romania [CDR] and the Democratic Party [PD], rejects -- 
because there is no basis for them -- the assertions that the 
head of state's actions and statements are unworthy of the 
presidential office and contradict the spirit of the 
Constitution. 
  After describing as surprising the frivolity with which 
representatives of certain parliamentary parties made such 
assertions, which are, quote, offensive to the head of the state 
as they lack any real foundation, unquote, the communique argues 
-- using as evidence the transcription of the magnetic tape 
recording of Ion Iliescu's statements during his visit to Satu 
Mare in connection with nationalized housing -- that every time 
Romania's president expressed his stance, he actually never did 
anything but insist that the Constitution and laws of the 
country need to be observed in such a controversial issue. 
Besides, the aforementioned stances were expressed because of 
the citizens' numerous grievances and complaints. They had been 
cruelly dislodged from their residences on the basis of court 
rulings, ignoring the law that stipulates that currently valid 
rental contracts are automatically prolonged for the next five 
years, until the legal status of nationalized housing is 
regulated by law. 
  As a consequence of all this, states the presidential 
spokesman's communique, there is nothing the president can 
retract from the things he said during the meeting in the Satu 
Mare County Prefect's office, in reply to a question he had been 
asked. The communique concludes by saying that, quote, if that 
answer, its context, and spirit are examined honestly, it 
becomes obvious that those things asserted by the president 
fully comply with the Constitution and with his resonsibilities 
as guarantor of the observance of the Constitution's 
stipulations, unquote. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31734 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Trade Unions Demonstrate in Bucharest </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Trade Unions Demonstrate in Bucharest </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406112194 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1000 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406112194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Groups of protesters, members of the Alfa Cartel 
Trade Union Confederation, CNSLR [National Confederation of Free 
Unions in Romania]-Fratia, and the National Trade Union Bloc 
[BNS], began gathering in Aviatorilor Square in Bucharest this 
morning . Among the protesters our correspondents also spotted a 
group of miners who had come from Hunedoara. Also represented 
are the trade unions of Copsa Mica and others from the counties 
of Mehedinti, Galati, and other regions. 
  From the makeshift rostrum in Aviatorilor Square the crowd 
was addressed by Alfa Cartel Chairman Bogdan Hossu, CNSLR-Fratia 
Chairman Victor Ciorbea, [CNSLR-Fratia] Executive Chairman Miron 
Mitrea, and other trade union leaders. They all criticized the 
Vacaroiu government, considering it solely responsible for the 
economic and social disaster currently facing Romania's citizens. 
  At about 1200 the participants in the rally left Aviatorilor 
Square to march on the Victoriei Square-Romana Square-Revolutiei 
Square route. They are to return to Victoriei Square where -- 
in accordance with the alterations in the program arranged by 
the organizers of today's protests -- another rally is to take 
place. 
  Both during the rally held in Aviatorilor Square and the 
march, the participants chanted antigovernment, 
antipresidential, and anticommunist slogans, our correspondents 
report. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31735 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Alfa Cartel Protests `Intimidation' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Alfa Cartel Protests `Intimidation' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406200794 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1700 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406200794 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] On behalf of the organization committee of the Alfa 
Cartel National Trade Union Confederation, this evening we 
received the following communique: 
  On the pretext of the uncertain nature of the dialogue, 
considering that the government team is including fewer people 
than the trade union team, the executive rejects a meeting with 
the trade union members who have been designated by the assembly 
of representatives who are holding a rally in Victoria Square. 
  The representatives of the government want the number of 
trade union members who are included in the team not to exceed 
15 people, while the trade unions wish to participate in the 
dialogue with a team that includes 40 people. 
  A psychological war has started in front of the government 
headquarters. The first demand voiced at Victoria Palace 
[government headquarters] is that the outside yard in front of 
the government building should be cleared, or the government 
will be compelled to resort to shield bearers. We protest such 
methods of intimidation, the more so since the bilateral 
dialogue has not even started yet, the communique we received 
from the organization committee of the Alfa Cartel National 
Trade Union Confederation says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31736 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Issues Communique </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Issues Communique </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406202694 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1700 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406202694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A few minutes ago we received the following 
communique from the Romanian Government: 
  In connection with the Alfa Cartel Trade Union Confederation 
rally that took place in front of Victoria Palace today, the 
government spokesman is empowered to state the following: 
  Although negotiations with government were not included in 
the program of trade union demonstrations, nevertheless the 
government showed from the very first moment its willingness to 
hold a dialogue and, together with a trade union delegation, to 
look at all the claims brought up by demonstrators. It was 
established that the team of negotiators should include State 
Ministers Mircea Dan Popescu and Florin Georgescu, Government 
General Secretary Viorel Hrebenciuc, and Octavian Partenie, 
state secretary and government representative for relations with 
employers associations and trade unions. 
  It was also decided that discussions should take place in 
the 
presence of mass media representatives. Unfortunately, the 
government offer was not honored because the demonstrators did 
not display the same willingness as the government in 
establishing a reasonable number of trade union leaders to form 
their group of negotiators. At the time of this broadcast, 
Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu, together with Mircea Dan 
Popescu, Florin Georgescu, Viorel Hrebenciuc, and Octavian 
Partenie, are holding talks with a trade union delegation that 
includes Bogdan Hosu, Victor Ciorbea, and Florin Diaconescu and 
are trying to reach a solution regarding the number of members 
to be included in the trade union delegation. 
  The government proposal that the trade union group should 
include 15 people, considered to be sufficiently representative 
for the entire trade union spectrum participating in the 
demonstration, has been rejected by trade union leaders, who 
propose a delegation that includes no less than 40 people. 
However, the Romanian Government continues to maintain its 
willingness for a sincere and constructive dialogue with trade 
unions for a thorough examination of all real problems facing 
them, certainly in accordance with the real possibilities that 
the national economy can currently offer. 
  As a matter of fact, as is known, the claims of trade unions 
have been discussed on several occasions. Most of those claims 
are specific to a controlled, directed, and centralized economy 
that is no longer in line with the current stage in Romania's 
development, the communique sent to us by the spokesman of the 
Romanian Government reads in conclusion. 
  A few minutes before the start of our broadcast, our 
correspondent at the Government Headquarters informed us that 
the two sides have not reached a joint accord on the major issue 
under discussion, namely the number of participants in the 
negotiations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31737 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudor on Death of `Adversary' Rabbi Rosen </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudor on Death of `Adversary' Rabbi Rosen </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20803A Bucharest ROMANIA MARE in Romanian 13 May 94 p 16 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20803A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMANIA MARE </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Corneliu Vadim Tudor: "On the Death of Moses </F>
Rosen"] 
  [Excerpts] Motto: "De mortuis nil nisi bene [bonum]" (Let 
nothing be said of the dead but good) -- Chilo of Sparta. 
  I received the news of the passing into eternity of Rabbi 
Moses Rosen on Friday, at 1900. I was in Iasi, in a spring 
garden under a dried-out oak tree upon which some thoughtful 
farmer had placed a sign: "A tree which is well-cared for has 
388 years of life". I did not see any signs of life but, 
nevertheless, no one dared to cut it down. [passage omitted] 
  Almost all the members of the leadership of the Greater 
Romania Party [PRM] were in Iasi -- for a news conference. At 
dawn, after the plane landed, we went to the Church of the Three 
Hierarchs to lay a wreath with a tricolor ribbon at the tombs of 
the glorious voivodes Dimitrie Cantemir and Alexandru Ioan Cuza. 
Of course, Romanian Television did not show any part of it, not 
a word. Then, there was a dialogue with trade union leaders, 
which I could not attend since I had had only three hours of 
sleep in three days and three nights and I was exhausted. 
Professor Mircea Musat represented me. Finally, from 1430 to 
1330, there was the much-awaited news conference before a packed 
hall. Many people said that it was a triumph for us, but the 
mouths of some impostors in the county press could not be shut 
up even by the earth from Eternity Cemetery. I hope that I can 
publish the entire discussion soon. 
  I do not know how it happened, but in the whirlpool of the 
dialogue with the press and the people in the hall, the name of 
Moses Rosen came up. Of course, at that time no one knew that he 
had died. To the surprise of many people, I was very restrained. 
Indeed, I even praised him for his participation, during very 
frosty weather, in the Alba Iulia festivities on 1 December 
1993. "Do you want Vadim to say that I am not a good Romanian?" 
-- the rabbi responded to presidential counsellor Victor 
Opaschi, who asked why he, an 81-year old man, did not stay 
home, in a warm place, that day. And I said, in Iasi, that 
indeed. at least on that occasion, the rabbi was a good 
Romanian, humiliating our political opposition which had 
boycotted the National Day celebrating the 75th anniversary of 
the Great and Eternal Union. 
  The rabbi also went into the Orthodox Church (which he had 
never done before) and wore a tricolor rosette with the picture 
of Avram Iancu. At that time, I realized that we can never know 
the depths of the human soul. For the first time in my life, I 
had fond feelings for that old man who had traveled over 
snow-covered mountains, while those who claim to be "national", 
"Christian", and "democratic" and who live off the corpse of the 
great Iuliu Maniu insulted the National Day. I said this to 
President Ion Iliescu. Then I spoke, publicly, at a PRM press 
conference on that paradoxical December. A few weeks later, when 
I had collected two pages of material critical of the rabbi, I 
had a change of heart and I remembered the little man with the 
teary eyes and frosty beard, on the stage decorated with fir 
trees, and I did not publish any of it. Indeed, I even sent the 
galleys to Ion Iliescu (something I never do) and I wrote him a 
few words, saying that I could not see any merit in carrying a 
fight to the absurd, especially when the adversary is old, 
powerless, and sick. 
  "Moses Rosen is dead!" a friend announced to me that Friday, 
near Iasi. There were a number of guests, besides me, including 
Iasi professor Gheorghe Buzatu, who had just returned from 
Israel, as well as Professor Mircea Musat, our parliamentarians 
Iuliu Furo, Anghel Stanciu, Ion Marinescu, Ion Carciumaru, 
Theodor Constantinescu, Viorel Burlacu, Marcel Moldovan, Dan 
Cristian Popovici, Generals Traian Bandila and Theodor 
Paraschiv, and other members of the PRM leadership such as 
Mircea Hamza, Dan Mirescu, Cornel Ciontu, Sever Mesca, and 
Alexandru Mica. The news passed quickly through the small garden 
where we were eating, from parliamentarians to newsmen, from 
newsmen to the leaders of the local prefecture. Then, I 
experienced a strange feeling: Instead of rejoicing (as someone 
who said to me: "I have some good news for you!" would have 
thought) -- I was sad. My greatest enemy had died and I was 
suffering as one would after the death of a friend. I still did 
not know the human soul. I read in history books that, after 
their enemies died, our great voivodes made merry and feasted 
and even gave donations to the church. Since I am not a voivode 
and since I am animated by somewhat more Christian charity, I 
cannot do this. With the death of Moses Rosen, 15 years of my 
life become more barren. He began to denounce me to the 
leadership of the Romanian Communist Party and in the world 
press in 1979. 
  In 1980, after the publication of the famous article 
entitled 
"Ideals" [Idealuri], he denounced me once again. I was visiting 
him, accompanied by a Jewish photo-reporter Armand Rosenthal 
(one of my colleagues at AGERPRES, a particularly fine man), and 
I tried to give him a dignified explanation. But the rabbi told 
the world press that I had become a fascist and he told me to 
leave. This was not true and I do not know what made him falsify 
the truth. 
  In September 1980, he made the biggest mistake of his life: 
He sent a terrible letter to the Romanian Academy demanding that 
Volume IX of the complete works of Mihai Eminescu be taken off 
the market, calling the National Poet a fascist, Iron Guard 
supporter, hooligan, fool, and pornographer. This was a bit too 
much, a bit above the level of tolerance of the Romanian people. 
Three people protested this move: Alexandru Oprea, Pompiliu 
Marcea, and myself. The first two died under mysterious 
circumstances. One had a cardiac arrest while bathing (at 50 
years of age!) and the other drowned, in broad daylight, in Lake 
Herestrau. I did not die because God loved me, even though the 
rabbi said to one of his fellow Jews, in reference to the rumor 
that I would be receiving a grant to go to Italy: "If Vadim goes 
abroad, he might find himself with a knife in his back!" I did 
not go. I stayed home to see how my book of verses, "Saturnalia" 
[Saturnalii], was taken out of bookstores and libraries, also by 
the rabbi. 
  From April to November 1984, I was banned from the press and 
the radio. I did not appear on television, which, at that time, 
was controlled by Jews, from April 1984 to September 1990. These 
were hellish times for me. I was dragged into lawsuits. I 
received death threats on the telephone. There was ferocious 
psychological pressure. I was pursued. Most of the people 
regarded me as if I had the plague. Elena Ceausescu decided that 
I should receive severe sanctions from the party, after a 
memorial session and after Emil Bobu, instigated by her, put me 
at wit's end! Isn't that right, Ion Traian Stefanescu and 
Constantin Radu? You were there. My beloved parents prayed daily 
for me. My mother wept and her health became frail. She took 
everything to heart. But the wounds began to heal. It was hard 
for me but I did not die of hunger. 
  In 1990, after these events, the rabbi defamed Eminescu once 
again, calling him a fascist and Iron Guard supporter, in an 
Iasi review. Then he criticized a number of Romanian writers, 
from Fanus Neagu and Al. Calinescu to Eugen Barbu and Cezar 
Ivanescu. This was too much. The man did not know any bounds. He 
was convulsed by the tremors of a strange malady; dismembering 
Romanian culture. In 1957 he had denounced Mihail Sadoveanu's 
novel "The Axe" [Baltagul], at all forums. Later on, he 
criticized Vasile Alecsandri and Octavian Goga, threatening 
that, if he is not satisfied, we would not receive 
most-favored-nation treatment from the Americans, which was an 
exaggeration on his part, since the United States also had very 
great strategic interests in the area. 
  But, in 1990, he was in for a definite reaction. Romanians 
could respond to him since the press was free. Immediately, he 
disseminated throughout the world press the scare that "there is 
the scent of a pogrom in Romania." No one believed him. His time 
had passed. What pogrom? Who has anything against the Jews? At 
about the same time, in front of Coral Temple in Bucharest, he 
installed a sort of monument on which it is written that Romania 
was, allegedly, one of the centers of the world Holocaust and 
that we killed 400,000 Jews by terrible tortures. These were all 
lies, but I think that they were not originated by him but by 
the leaders of world Zionism who would like to blame the 
Romanian people to demand $50 billion in damages, as a greedy 
person revealed, in Tel Aviv. 
  The same holds true for the whole saraband of lies about the 
army and Marshal Antonescu. The televised appearances of the 
rabbi were scandalous, especially the one at the beginning of 
1994 when, for 30 minutes, in prime time, he levied unimaginable 
insults against the Romanian people. Intentionally, I did not 
publish anything on the part of ROMANIA MARE which would 
escalate a useless scandal. As you probably remember, I 
presented the opinions of some disgusted Romanians, which had 
been published in EVENIMENTUL ZILEI and ORA. Probably His 
Eminence, if he was still lucid at that time, was shaken by the 
lightning bolts and agitation of the people's rage. It exceeded 
all limits. Later, two patriotic historians, professors Gheorghe 
Buzatu and Florin Constantiniu, went to the television studio 
seeking the right to reply and to restore some of the sullied 
honor of the army and the Romanian people. They were not allowed 
to do so. The rabbi was stronger. He acted like a head of state. 
  However, there is someone even stronger: God, who cut short 
the thread of his life. Some say that the curses of the war 
invalids who were mutilated at the battlefront, while the Jews 
swept the snow on the streets and drank hot cinnamon wine, got 
to him; others say that the anathemas of the Orthodox priests 
got to him; finally, someone telephoned me to tell me that he 
took along with him another great man who had been defamed by 
the rabbi, Eugen Barbu [founder of ROMANIA MARE], both dying in 
the same intensive care room in the Elias Hospital. I will not 
make any statement on this. There is a fatality, a 
predestination which is beyond us. 
  This is not the time or the place to judge the sins which 
Moses Rosen committed against the Romanian people. Who knows, 
perhaps they can be compensated for by his very great service to 
his people Israel, helping about 400,000 Jews to leave Romania 
for the Promised Land, the land of their ancestors, which is 
quite admirable, and to his credit! As for me, I have the 
courage and honesty to forgive him for the days and nights of 
nightmares which he caused for my parents and me. To forgive and 
forget in the Christian way. This is the difference between 
Christianity and Zionism, which does not forgive, does not 
forget, and even invents, constantly, other plagues, other 
holocausts, and other hunters of men. 
  I prefer to remember the rabbi as I saw him, in the flesh, 
for the last time, on that unforgettable day of 1 December 1993. 
At that time, a large part of his sins was washed away. I 
recognize this but I would have every reason to ignore such a 
thing. I am not an anti-Semite. I cannot be inherently against 
any people. And I cannot persecute the people who wrote the 
Bible. This is why I was saddened in my soul at the death of 
this old man. Perhaps I was reliving the sorrow of King David 
who had fought with his unyielding son, Absalom. But, when he 
found out that soldiers had killed him in an olive grove, he, 
the King of the Psalms, cried his heart out and ripped up his 
clothes. What strange alchemy is in the Romanian soul! 
  As for the funeral ceremony, which was broadcast live on 
Radio Bucharest, for two hours on Sunday evening, I believe that 
this was too much and it exasperated many citizens. I am 
relaying only a few of the telephone messages which we received: 
"It's a wonder that Iliescu did not proclaim a national day of 
mourning!"; "Is it possible that Nicolae Ceausescu's 
gravedigger, the sinister Gelu Voican, was not there?"; "Rabbi 
Neuman of Timisoara screamed hysterically and insulted the 
Romanians; he claimed that Moses Rosen fought against the 
Communists but he forgot to say that Rosen was a close friend of 
Ana Pauker [former Foreign Minister, a Jew] and that he was a 
deputy in the Grand National Assembly for 40 years."; "A week 
ago, the great bishop of Tomis and the lower Danube, the 80-year 
old scholar Antim Nica, died but Iliescu did not go to his 
funeral and Radiotelevision reported 1,000 times less about the 
bishop than it did about the death of the rabbi"; "Where did the 
American rabbi get the term "great genius" for Moses Rosen?"; 
"The richest man in Romania has died. Who got his money?"; "Did 
you read ORA on Saturday? On page 1, Nicolae Cristache has given 
the amazing title: "An Outstanding Personality of the World Has 
Died," as if the rabbi from Moinesti were an "outstanding 
personality" like Jesus Christ. Moses, Alexander of Macedonia, 
Julius Caesar, Dante Alighieri, Shakespeare, Leonardo da Vinci, 
Napoleon Bonaparte, Beethoven, or Brancusi!"; "Moses Rosen died 
but we still have the new Israeli ambassador who recently 
insulted Eminescu, calling him anti-Semitic and slaughtered 
Marshal Antonescu, once again, calling him a war criminal, even 
though, when you were in Iasi, you called for his expulsion from 
the country"; "When will Iliescu get out of the clutches of 
Eugen Preda-Glotter, director general of Radio? In the past four 
years, a number of great national cultural figures died, such as 
Edgar Papu, Ion Lancranjan, Eugen Barbu, Geo Bogza, Eugen 
Ionescu, Academician David Prodan, Petre Tutea, Father Dumitru 
Staniloae, Gina Patrichi, Gheorghe Cozorici, George Constantin, 
Theofil Valcu, Jean Georgescu, and Cella Delavrancea, and there 
was not a single minute of direct radio coverage of their 
funerals"; "Who is paying for the charter flight to Israel 
[where Rosen was buried]?" 
  We reproduced only a few of the indignant telephone calls 
from ordinary Romanians who could not understand how their 
Sunday and Monday evening radio programs could be replaced by 
the two live broadcasts, from Bucharest and Jerusalem. We 
reproduced these opinions because this is the democratic way. 
Radio subscriptions are paid for by Romanian contributors and 
they have the right to know what is being done with their money, 
their nerves, and their time. But, it is all over now. Let us 
accept the idea that it was a more special funeral of a more 
special clergyman, representing a special tribe of people. Let 
us not be evil and do what we criticize others for doing. 
  The rabbi desired my death but I did not desire his death. 
The rabbi made judgements about me but I did not make judgements 
about him. The rabbi banned me in my country but I did not ban 
him. I could not and I did not want to. After December 1989, the 
rabbi derided his great benefactor, Nicolae Ceausescu, which I 
did not do, although the former head of state punished me 
because of the rabbi. Also, Jews in Israel and the United States 
criticized Moses Rosen unsparingly for 40 years, but he did not 
accuse any of them of anti-Semitism. 
  "Moses Rosen is dead!" -- the silent trumpet of that voice 
which gave me the news that the enemy of my home and of Romanian 
culture had crossed the threshhold to eternity still resounds. I 
was as sad as if my best friend had died. Undoubtedly, he was a 
person of international caliber, an educated man, a brilliant 
scholar of the Bible and the Torah, a character from a novel, a 
devoted husband, a distinguished pastor of Jewish souls. I think 
that all these qualities will carry a lot of weight at the Last 
Judgement. May God forgive him his sins, value his merits, and 
give rest to his tormented soul. Lord, have mercy on him! I 
forgave him long ago. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31738 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Talks on European Security Structures </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Talks on European Security Structures </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406203694 Bratislava Rozhlasova Stanica Slovensko Network 
in Slovak 1630 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406203694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava Rozhlasova Stanica Slovensko Network 
in Slovak 1630 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=105> Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] General M.J. Wilmink, commander of Allied Land 
Forces in Central Europe, has arrived in Slovakia for a four-day 
visit. He was welcomed at the Bratislava Milan Rastislav 
Stefanik Airport by the Slovak Army's Emil Vestenicky. Our 
collegue Peter Toman reports on General Wilmink's agenda today. 
  [Toman] General Wilmink was welcomed by the Slovak Army's 
Lieutenant General Julius Humaj in Trencin this afternoon. He 
briefed the NATO representatives about the tasks being currently 
fulfilled by the Slovak Army and also on the transformation in 
the Army and its command to structures comparable to those of 
the NATO armies. In the course of their talks, both 
representatives agreed that the conditions stipulated in the 
Partnership for Peace program offer a realistic basis for the 
incorporation of the Slovak Army into the European security 
structures and thereby, into NATO. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31739 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reaction to `Strategy for Poland' Program </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reaction to `Strategy for Poland' Program </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Business Representatives Comment </H4>

<F P=102> WS1406131994 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 14 Jun 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> WS1406131994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by S.A., J.S.: "Businessmen and Experts on `Strategy </F>
for Poland'; Not at Any Cost"] 
  [Text] So far, privatization has brought uncertainty 
to mind. In order to gain social approval for ownership 
transformations, privatization must be done with society in 
mind. So "Strategy for Poland" also envisages the establishment 
of social protection for the workforce of those enterprises 
being sold to foreign investors, said Professor Jan 
Monkiewicz, a secretary of state in the Office of the Council of 
Ministers, and an associate of Deputy Prime Minister Grzegorz 
Kolodko. According to a statement issued at a press conference, 
the Polish Business Council [PRB] has received with satisfaction 
the governmental Strategy for Poland program. Its provisions are 
largely in agreement with the views of PRB which has demanded 
such a document for two years now. 
  One cannot strive at privatization at any cost, by 
applying the principle of the state getting rid of a burden. 
Investors must have the financial means for investment and 
development. In addition, Jan Monkiewicz added, we 
want to maintain the workforces' influence over the fate of the 
companies where they work. 
  Placing the private and state-owned sectors on an equal 
footing in terms of their rights is an equally important issue 
relative to the functioning of enterprises. This is to 
facilitate transforming state-owned enterprises into companies 
based on Commercial Law. The transformation will have yet 
another dimension, as well: At the point that Commercial Law 
companies are established, employee boards will disappear since 
the Code of Commerce does not provide for such boards in 
enterprises. So there will be a clear division of 
authority between trade unions, and the companies' governing 
boards, J.Monkiewicz explained. 
  When asked how fighting inflation will be reconciled with 
fighting unemployment, Dr. Jerzy Hausner replied that according 
to the Strategy, the inflation level will be decreasing faster 
than the unemployment rate. The program envisages that 
unemployment will continue to rise both this year and next. 
According to J. Monkiewicz, high employment would not increase 
inflation, providing the work week is cut short and salaries are 
reduced in accordance with the work done. Such methods 
have been applied in Germany among others. But for that, one 
needs first of all social consent, said Professor J. 
Monkiewicz. 
  The lifting of popiwek [enterprise tax on above-normative 
pay] is to serve the goal of changing the situation of 
enterprises. In the view of experts, popiwek does not guard 
against anything but only serves as a bargaining chip. Salary 
negotiations should be conducted at the level of individual 
enterprises while the state may just be an umpire. Some 
method of salary regulation is applied everywhere, said 
Professor Danuta Hibner. In Poland, one receives a penalty 
for raising salaries. The new element will be the possibility 
of awarding enterprises for observing rules, instead of applying 
punishment. 
  The establishment of a Treasury Ministry has already been 
decided. It will take over ownership supervision over 
state-owned enterprises. Work on a new law on the State 
Treasury is taking place in several different places. The 
discussions are about the functions and powers of the future 
Treasury Ministry, Professor J. Monkiewicz stated. We 
still do not know at this stage when the law will become 
effective. 
  PRB has noted with satisfaction the governmental Strategy 
for 
Poland program. Its basic assumptions are largely in agreement 
with the views of PRB which has demanded such a document for two 
years now. 
  In our view, the Strategy identifies the problems that 
our economy is facing very well, both in the microscale and the 
macroscale. When we hear views that the program is unrealistic, 
we disagree. The problem is whether we know how to consolidate 
all the means in order to implement the program, said PRB 
Chairman Jan Wejchert. 
  According to PRB, the program's success will depend on the 
speedy implementation of the detailed provisions that will 
enable a speeding up of the rate of privatization, and the 
development of the capital market. The program's success will 
also depend on making bold changes in the tax system which would 
render the system clearly investment-oriented and 
exports-oriented. There must be a system of installment-based 
privatization procedure, a consolidated balance of payments for 
holdings, and a Guarantee Privatization and Development Fund. 
PRB is also preparing a proposal to introduce a system of 
breaks using investments as their legal basis; it would also 
include establishing new jobs and exports measures. According 
to PRB, implementing the measures being proposed by it, along 
with other measures mentioned in the Strategy, would result in 
establishing over 500,000 new jobs over four years. 
Maintaining existing jobs is as important as the 
establishment of new ones. The constantly changing legal 
provisions concerning taxes and customs, are a reason behind the 
fall in the number of jobs, says PRB Deputy Chairman 
Zbigniew Niemczycki. 
  In his view, Poland still does not have the kind of 
investment dynamism that businessmen would like to see. Capital 
is being invested only in those places where there is a 
motivation for doing so. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31740 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP-SZDSZ Coalition Talks Continue </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    MSZP's Szekeres Comments </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406101694 Budapest MAGYAR NEMZET in Hungarian 11 Jun 94 p 
13 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406101694 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MAGYAR NEMZET </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Imre Szekeres, deputy executive chairman of </F>
the Hungarian Socialist Party, by Tibor Moldovanyi; place and 
date not given: "We Are Striving for Long-Term Political 
Activity"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Moldovanyi] The Alliance of 
Free Democrats [SZDSZ] repeatedly stressed that they would ask 
for guarantees from the Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP] for the 
implementation of equal governing. What guarantees can you give 
them without risking the implementation of your own program? 
  [Szekeres] Negotiations about these issues have just begun 
and, obviously, both sides will modify their concepts in the 
course of the negotiations. At the talks held on 9 June, 80-85 
percent of the two parties' positions were identical. In the 
course of practical implementation, I think the most important 
thing is to create a joint government. This could create 
confidence which, together with the guarantees, will assure an 
effective government. We must work out the mechanism of seeking 
a consensus on both economic and political levels. Cooperation 
between parties, factions, and officials involved in government 
must be assured. 
  [Moldovanyi] You are heading the MSZP negotiating group in 
the committee of experts dealing with the government structure. 
What basic principles do you want to focus on in the course of 
the agreement with the SZDSZ? 
  [Szekeres] First of all, I would like to stress that I can 
only mention concrete things after the decision of the 
committee, because the negotiating partners agreed on the fact 
that they should not learn about each other's views from the 
press. The starting point of the MSZP is that the government 
should be smaller in size. This means a government of 12-14 
persons, with one minister without portfolio at most. Of 
course, we would also like to reduce the number of national 
offices. According to our plans, the Office of the Prime 
Minister will be the government coordination body. This will 
guarantee internal coordination within the government. A 
considerable ministerial independence and responsibility would 
be asserted in this system. Efficiency and cooperation between 
various ministries are the main goals. [passage omitted] 
  [Moldovanyi] Will prime minister Gyula Horn have a veto 
right over the ministerial candidates of the SZDSZ? 
  [Szekeres] The mechanism of coalition cooperation has not 
yet been clarified. It is certain, however, that it is the 
right of the prime minister to appoint ministers. The 
Constitution guarantees him this right, but a lot depends on the 
agreement of coalition partners. [passage omitted] 
  [Moldovanyi] In the course of the election campaign, the 
MSZP stressed the expertise. In several election forums, Gyula 
Horn pointed out that he would welcome in the new government 
persons who used to be ministers in the former Nemeth-cabinet or 
before that. However, the end of the Nemeth-cabinet did not only 
mean a change in the regime but also the departure of those 
whose policy failed. Will they now come back? 
  [Szekeres] I think it is a mistake to compare the former 
regime with the Nemeth cabinet, because the latter prepared the 
transition. The decisions on appointing ministers are still to 
be made, and we will also have to take into account the 
government structure. I am sure, however, that there will be 
ministers who were also members of the Nemeth cabinet, but a 
younger generation will also emerge. We are striving for a 
long-term political activity, and people who have been in the 
background will have to obtain governing experience at the level 
of state secretaries for example. It is obvious, however, that 
we are not talking about the restoration of the Nemeth cabinet. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31741 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK Minister: Galbraith Visit `Dangerous' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK Minister: Galbraith Visit `Dangerous' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406204994 Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 14 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406204994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade BORBA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Galbraith's Visit to RSK `Extremely </F>
Dangerous'"] 
  [Text] Knin -- Borivoj Rasuo, information minister in the 
government of the republic of Serbian Krajina [RSK], yesterday 
sent a letter to RSK president Milan Martic in which he put 
forward his personal views regarding President Martic's demand 
that his ministry organizes a meeting with the U.S. Ambassador 
to Croatia Peter Galbraith. In his letter, Minister Rasuo says: 
  ``The meeting with the U.S. ambassador to Croatia on the RSK 
territory, in the circumstances in which the RSK finds itself -- 
of which the most important one is that the RSK has not been 
internationally recognized yet -- is extremely dangerous because 
the visit of Mr. Peter Galbraith to the RSK could be interpreted 
as extending Croatia's sovereignty over the territory of our 
state, which is in any case unacceptable. Furthermore, because 
Mr. Peter Galbraith is continuously putting forward a view that 
the RSK is an integral part of Croatia. 
  ``For this reason, Mr. Martic, I will not be able to 
participate in any aspect or any form in the organization of a 
meeting with the U.S. ambassador to Croatia, a country with whom 
the state in whose government I am a minister is on hostile 
terms through no will and blame of its own. 
  ``Second, for the duration of the unscrupulous media war 
that 
the Croatian journalists have been waging against the Serbian 
people as a whole and thus also against the Serbian people in 
Krajina -- a media war that threatens to grow into a real armed 
aggression by Croatia against the Serbian Krajina, as the 
Croatian leaders are announcing -- I believe that Croatian 
reporters must not be granted permission to enter our state 
territory. The Information Ministry will not issue them with 
press passes. Bearing in mind such a stance, it is thus 
understandable that there is no need for the organization of a 
reception for the Croatian reporters in the RSK. 
  "Beside this, I inform you, Mr. Martic, that I am not 
willing 
to share the responsibility for the decisions that I do not make 
and in the passing of which I make no contribution. On any 
other occasion, when my consent and consent of the government 
whose member I am will exist regarding decisions to be passed 
and whenever we agree something in advance without the need for 
persuasion, you can count on my assistance and cooperation." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31742 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_y_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  21 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yugoslav Revolutionary Youth Organization Founded </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Yugoslav Revolutionary Youth Organization Founded </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0303C Maribor VECER in Slovene 21 May 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0303C </F>
<F P=104>  Maribor VECER </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zarko Rakovic: "From Vardar to Triglav?"] </F>
  [Text] The communists in Yugoslavia have obtained 
successors; they founded the Yugoslav Revolutionary Youth 
Organization in Belgrade; by "Yugoslavia," they mean the one of 
Tito's time. 
  Belgrade (from our associate)--Communism in Yugoslavia has 
not yet died; it has only turned into a vampire. In the building 
of the former Central Committee of the League of Communists of 
Yugoslavia [CC LCY], at the confluence of the Sava and the 
Danube, the Yugoslav Revolutionary Youth Organization [JRM], or, 
as its leaders call it, the Communist Youth of Yugoslavia, held 
its founding assembly. By "Yugoslavia" they do not mean the 
present mini-Yugoslavia, but rather the one from Broz's time, 
which reached from Triglav to Vardar. The JRM's first activities 
have already begun. Fourteen years after Tito's death, one can 
see on Belgrade streets posters saying "We are Tito's--Tito is 
ours," and one can hear the anthem "Hey, Slavs." 
  That circus of communist offspring would not merit any 
attention if it did not have its base in the building of the 
former CC LCY, which is controlled and managed by Milosevic's 
Socialist Party of Serbia. The JRM has guaranteed spaces there 
and the best opportunities to operate, which means that the 
ruling Serbian regime is backing it. Who are those young people 
and where are they from (actually they are not really young, 
since none of them is under 25) is hard to find out. It is even 
harder to explain their harsh slogans, uttered with a fist 
raised high: "We will restore Yugoslavia," "Hope is on the 
left," "Fraternity and unity again," "Socialism is democracy," 
"The five-pointed star is our shrine...." 
  The residents of Belgrade who have seen that communist 
offspring of Yugoslavia did not realize immediately what was 
going on. At first they thought that some sort of film was being 
taped. Recently, in fact, a splendid impersonator of Josip Broz, 
known as Micko, on instructions from director Zelimir Zilnik, 
walked along Belgrade streets and spoke with astonished 
bystanders. Skillfully disguised and dressed in a marshal's 
uniform, he asked Belgrade residents whether they missed him at 
all. Most of them answered that they regretted that he was no 
longer with them, and that he was in their hearts forever. 
  Forever? 
  The establishment of the JRM obviously indicates that people 
in the present Yugoslavia also think so. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31743 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_r_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   PL-93 Backs Initiative To Suspend Iliescu </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PL-93 Backs Initiative To Suspend Iliescu </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406115094 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1000 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406115094 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The Liberal Party-1993 [PL-93] seconds the 
initiative of its partners within the Democratic Convention of 
Romania [CDR] to initiate procedures to suspend President Ion 
Iliescu, says a political statement signed by the PL-93 Steering 
Committee, which was presented during today's news conference by 
Professor Balaceanu-Stolnici, chairman of the PL-93 Senate. 
  After emphasizing that the president and the government are 
conducting an antinational policy, the statement points out that 
PL-93 considers it mandatory that the procedures to suspend the 
president should be accompanied by a censure motion to withdraw 
the confidence granted to the Vacaroiu government. 
  Talking about other issues, PL-93 Senator Alexandru Popovici 
referred to the issue of nationalized dwellings, assessing that 
the way in which that subject has been approached could make one 
conclude that what they want is a definite nationalization. 
  During the news conference they also announced that PL-93 
will request that the agenda of the next meeting of the CDR 
Standing Bureau should also include the issue of withdrawing the 
political support granted to Crin Halaicu, general mayor of 
Bucharest, who is guilty of having violated the law, as Ludovic 
Orban [member of the PL-93 Steering Committee] put it. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31744 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Bank Officer Cited on Clearing Account </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Bank Officer Cited on Clearing Account </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406154794 Bratislava SME in Slovak 11 Jun 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406154794 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SME </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["(is)"-signed report: "Abolishing Clearing Is, Perhaps, </F>
More To Be Expected From the Czech Side"] 
  [Text] Bratislava -- According to CTK, Economy Minister P. 
Magvasi has expressed himself in favor of abolishing clearing 
between Slovakia and the Czech Republic [CR]. He based his 
statement, among other things, on the positive increase in the 
two states' foreign currency reserves. In that connection, 
Deputy Prime Minister B. Schmognerova told CTK that, in a 
memorandum to the IMF, the Slovak Government committed itself to 
rendering accounts in convertible currencies in trade with the 
Czech Republic by the end of 1995 at the latest. 
  Slovak National Bank (NBS) Deputy Governor M. Jusko has told 
SME that, officially, the Slovak Republic only declared that it 
is interested in abolishing the so-called clearing account 
old-block. Unfortunately, in this context, the two governments 
have adopted resolutions that are not consistent with each 
other. M. Jusko sees three possible alternatives. First, that 
the governments will agree upon an acceptable compromise. 
Second, that one of the sides will make concessions. The third 
alternative would be if one of the sides, in harmony with its 
interests, were to make a sovereign decision and withdraw 
unilaterally from the payments agreement. According to M. Jusko, 
the fact that the CR is striving to introduce a fully 
convertible currency quickly means that interest in abolishing 
the payments agreement will come more from the Czech side. On 
the other hand, in view of the fact that the foreign currency 
reserves are increasing and that measures to liberalize foreign 
currency relations may be expected, "we also must consider 
certain steps that do not have to be in harmony with the 
payments agreement," added M. Jusko. 
  According to M. Jusko, the situation in clearing is 
favorable 
for the NBS at the moment. The overall balance recently 
amounted to around 44 million ECU in Slovakia's favor. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31745 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_d_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Council Allocates Sk140 Million for Minorities </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Council Allocates Sk140 Million for Minorities </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406174294 Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 11 Jun 94 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406174294 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by B. Olach: "The Minorities Will Receive 140 </F>
Million for Culture"] 
  [Text] Bratislava -- The Government Council for Ethnic 
Minorities [RVN] convened yesterday for the first time since the 
formation of the new government three months ago. It dealt with 
the financial and organizational provisions for culture and 
education from the point of view of the ethnic minorities. 
  One result of the meeting was that the ethnic minorities 
will 
receive 140 million korunas [Sk] from the state budget this year 
to promote culture. This is Sk10 million more than last year, 
while a further Sk10 million has been kept in reserve. 
  The Council supported all the materials submitted, apart 
from 
the Organizational Provisions for Ethnic Minority Education, 
because they contained some imprecise information. The Council 
also agreed with optional tuition in Czech as of the next school 
year. According to the Council's chairman, R. Kovac, it has thus 
met the demands of the Czech minority, which lives mainly in 
Bratislava, Trencin, and Kosice. The Ruthenian minority is also 
demanding that tuition in the Ruthenian language and culture be 
introduced in the schools attended by ethnic Ruthenian children. 
According to R. Kovac, deputy prime minister and RVN chairman, 
the Ruthenians and the Romanies have -- apparently --already 
prepared their languages for codification. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31746 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_d_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Trade Figures for Jan-Apr Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Trade Figures for Jan-Apr Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406093794 Bratislava SLOVENSKY DENNIK in Slovak 10 Jun 94 
p 8 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406093794 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SLOVENSKY DENNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [TA SR report: "Exports Are Increasing Disproportionately To </F>
Imports"] 
  [Text] The Slovak Republic's foreign trade turnover in the 
first four months of this year amounted to 121.876 billion 
korunas [Sk] and, compared with the same period last year, was 
16.1 percent higher. The Slovak Republic's foreign trade 
balance during this period returned a deficit of Sk3.368 billion 
in trading parity (OP). According to the analysis made 
available by the Slovak Statistical Office, Slovak exports 
amounted to Sk59.254 billion and, compared with the first four 
months of 1993, they have increased by 13.8 percent. Slovak 
imports amounted to Sk62.622 billion, which is an increase of 
18.5 percent compared with the same period last year. 
<H5>  Germany After the Czech Republic </H5>
  Exports to the Czech Republic accounted for 38 percent of 
overall Slovak exports. The figure for the Federal Republic of 
Germany was 17.4 percent; for the Hungarian Republic, 5.6 
percent; and for Austria, 5.2 percent. Slovakia's other foreign 
customers were Italy -- 4.1 percent; the Russian Federation -- 
3.8 percent; Poland -- 2.4 percent; France -- 1.9 percent; 
Ukraine and the United States -- 1.8 percent each; and the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands -- 1.7 percent. 
  Compared with the same period last year, exports to the FRG 
rose by 46.3 percent; to Austria by 29.9 percent; and to Italy 
by 91 percent. Exports to the Russian Federation increased by 
10 percent; to the Polish Republic by 13 percent; to France by 
44.4 percent; and to the United States by 121.4 percent. On the 
other hand, exports from the Slovak Republic to the Czech 
Republic declined by 6.3 percent; to Ukraine by 36.5 percent; to 
China by 86.6 percent; to Romania by 41.4 percent; and to 
Bulgaria by 49.8 percent. 
  As in exports from Slovakia, the Czech Republic also had the 
largest share in Slovak imports -- 30.6 percent; the Russian 
Federation -- 20.6 percent; the Federal Republic of Germany -- 
11.9 percent; the Republic of Austria -- 5.6 percent; the 
Republic of Italy -- 3.8 percent; the United States -- 2.8 
percent; the Republic of France -- 2.4 percent; the Polish 
Republic 2.3 percent; and Ukraine -- 2.0 percent. 
<H5>  Imports From the United States Have Increased </H5>
  Compared with the same period last year, imports from the 
Russian Federation were higher -- by 22.7 percent; from the 
Federal Republic of Germany -- by 47.3 percent; and from the 
Republic of Italy -- by 70.5 percent. Compared with the first 
four months of last year, imports from the United States also 
increased -- by 147.5 percent; from France -- by 136.4 percent; 
from Japan -- by 67 percent; from Poland -- by 44.8 percent; 
from Hungary -- by 45.7 percent; and from Holland -- by 3.8 
percent. On the other hand, imports from the Czech Republic 
declined by 9.1 percent; from Ukraine -- by 10.2 percent; from 
Austria -- by 0.6 percent; and from Romania -- by 34.5 percent. 
  The Slovak Republic achieved a deficit balance with 
individual economic groupings, especially in relation to the 
states of the European Free Trade Association -- Sk1.33 billion 
(OP), Sk390 million (OP) of which was with the Republic of 
Austria. Slovakia had a deficit balance of Sk10.702 billion 
(OP) with the Russian Federation and of Sk190 million (OP) with 
Ukraine. 
  On the other hand, during this period, the Slovak Republic 
had a surplus balance with European Union -- of Sk2.276 billion 
(OP). The Slovak Republic had a surplus balance of Sk5.558 
billion (OP) with regard to the CEFTA [Central European Free 
Trade Agreement] states. Of this, it had a surplus balance of 
Sk3.363 billion with the Czech Republic and of Sk2.369 billion 
(OP) with Hungary. 
<H5>  Select Categories of Products </H5>
  Mineral fuels, mineral oils, resinous materials and wax, and 
also boilers, machinery, equipment and parts for nuclear 
reactors, electronic audio-visual recording and reproduction 
equipment, motorized vehicles, tractors, motorcycles and 
equipment, iron and steel products, optical instruments, 
photographic equipment, measuring and medical instruments, iron 
and steel, plastics and plastic products, pharmaceutical and 
organic chemical products, metallic ores, slag and clinker, 
paper, cartons, and adhesives were predominant in Slovak 
imports. These select categories of products accounted for 66.9 
percent of Slovak imports. 
  Iron, steel, boilers, machinery, equipment and parts for 
nuclear reactors, motorized vehicles, tractors, motorcycles and 
equipment, plastics and plastic products, mineral fuels, mineral 
oils, resinous materials, waxes, electronic audio-visual 
recording and reproduction equipment, iron and steel products, 
wood, wooden products, charcoal, chemical, synthetic, and 
man-made fabrics, organic chemical products, paper, cartons, 
furniture, bedding textiles, lighting fittings, and modular 
structures were predominant in Slovak exports. These select 
categories of products also accounted for 66.9 percent of 
overall exports from Slovakia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31747 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Olechowski Interviewed on EU, NATO </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Olechowski Interviewed on EU, NATO </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BR1406121594 Paris LE FIGARO in French 14 Jun 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> BR1406121594 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris LE FIGARO </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski </F>
by Charles Lambroschini in Paris; date not given: "For Poland, 
Europe Is the Best Guarantee of Security"] 
  [Text] [Lambroschini] Poland wants to become a member of 
the European Union [EU]. What is your main motive: trade or 
security? 
  [Olechowski] Staying outside the EU today means being 
condemned to economic isolation and being sidelined politically. 
There is another very important reason for our candidacy: We 
want to take as our model the process of reconciliation between 
France and Germany. With that in mind, there is no better 
framework than the EU. Poland and Germany have become very good 
and very strong neighbors. Our current relations with Germany 
are better than they have been at any time in our history. But 
to move from this situation of good-neighborly relations to 
friendship, we need a framework that goes beyond that of our 
bilateral relations. 
  [Lambroschini] Since German unification, some French 
politicians have been worried by Germany's growing power. Do 
you share that anxiety? 
  [Olechowski] I have noticed Germany's growing power. But, 
in my view, it will not be a danger as long as Germany remains a 
democratic country, and we have no reason to doubt that. And as 
long as Germany remains a member of the EU. In our view, the 
bloc formed by Germany and France is an extremely important 
factor. Now, let us take the speculation a little further and 
imagine that Germany wished to increase its independence. If we 
then started to think that this development was likely to have 
bad consequences both for the EU and for the Franco-German 
strategic alliance, the creation of a triangle with Poland could 
have a beneficial effect. Poland's involvement with the 
Franco-German duo would make it possible to counterbalance 
Germany's growing power and to make the EU stronger. 
  [Lambroschini] Is the power of Russia, your other big 
neighbor, not also a reason for your interest in the EU? Are 
you not worried by the idea that Russia, with which your 
relations have often been difficult, could return to its 
imperialist tradition? 
  [Olechowski] On the subject of Russia, a Polish foreign 
minister must necessarily be optimistic. Otherwise, he would be 
doomed to paralysis. Poland must participate in the 
construction of a Europe which absolutely must include Russia. 
We must insist on Russia becoming an integral part of the 
Western world: with its value system and its habits of 
behavior. If we had to resign ourselves to the fact that Russia 
could never become part of the West because it is anxious to 
recreate its own world, or conversely because the West rejects 
it, a Polish foreign minister would face only the sorriest of 
options. Like Moses, he would have to lead his people far away, 
because Central Europe would then be a very dangerous place. We 
want to join the EU for reasons of security, not simply economic 
reasons. However, we are convinced that Poland's security will 
never be guaranteed if it has to remain a front line country. 
  [Lambroschini] Do you not see the development in Russia of a 
nationalism which would compensate for poverty and humiliation? 
  [Olechowski] These periodic surges in nationalist and 
imperialist fever surely represent the biggest danger in Eastern 
Europe. But I also note that the political movements which 
defend these ideas did not succeed in securing a majority in the 
Russian elections. Today, there are two major currents running 
through Russia. The privatization of the economy enables the 
people to have a better understanding of the notion of private 
ownership. Therefore the demarcation line -- which has 
traditionally been blurred in Russia -- between reason of state 
and individual interest is being more clearly defined. The 
second current is Moscow's tendency to want to reintegrate the 
republics of the former USSR in one entity. But, for instance, 
on the occasion of the negotiations between Moscow and Belarus, 
we see that the Russians are now aware of the price to be paid 
for this integration. They realize that they would have to take 
bread from Russian citizens and give it to the poorest 
republics. This twofold development makes me optimistic about 
Russia's future. 
  [Lambroschini] Can Poland therefore make a contribution to 
Russia's European education? 
  [Olechowski] There is no question of Poland serving as a 
bridge between East and West or between the EU and Russia. None 
of those involved needs our country to play that role. Instead, 
Poland should serve as an example. Showing the Russians that, 
if we were capable of adapting to the West's values and 
principles, Russia can too. There is nothing genetic separating 
the Russians from the other Europeans. 
  [Lambroschini] In June 1991, Francois Mitterrand, 
defending in Prague a plan for a European Confederation, stated 
that the new democracies of Central Europe would have to wait 
decades before being able to rejoin the European Community. 
With Edouard Balladur as prime minister and Alain Juppe as 
foreign minister, do you think that France has changed its view? 
  [Olechowski] I hope so. June 1991 was well before Poland 
had demonstrated, in the 1993 elections, that its democratic 
institutions were strong enough to enable political alternation. 
It was well before our GDP had experienced an annual growth of 
4.5 percent, well before we could show a private sector which 
now represents 60 percent of employment and totals 2 million 
enterprises. 
  [Lambroschini] But Francois Mitterrand's remark was also 
explained by the fear that too rapid an integration of the 
Central European countries might condemn them to economic 
bankruptcy. 
  [Olechowski] There is certainly an enormous economic 
difference between Germany and Poland. There is the same 
difference between Germany and Greece. But there is not such a 
great difference between Poland and Greece or between Poland and 
Portugal. In other words, we are as ready for membership as 
Greece and Portugal were when they were accepted into the 
European Community. The second observation was that in the 
foreign policy sphere, nothing would prevent Poland's immediate 
membership. The time has come for the EU to consider Poland's 
rapid integration in some spheres and to give it periods of 
adjustment or exemptions in other spheres. 
  [Lambroschini] Does Poland still want to join NATO? 
  [Olechowski] We want to join NATO and we say so frequently. 
We think that membership in NATO would be another means by 
which Poland could build a united Europe. NATO ought to be 
understood as the heart of European security, and this system of 
security ought to be open to all countries which correspond to 
the criteria of democracy. 
  [Lambroschini] If NATO is to be the means of European 
security, are you in favor of its expansion to include Russia? 
  [Olechowski] We think that Russia ought to form part of the 
European security system. What we advocate is a strategic 
partnership between Russia and NATO. 
  [Lambroschini] Does the fact that Europe has demonstrated 
such impotence in face of the conflict in Yugoslavia not leave 
you skeptical about the security guarantees which you could 
secure from the EU? 
  [Olechowski] That is why we are not talking of guarantees. 
We do not like this word, because Poland had all kinds of 
guarantees before the war and that served no purpose. We are 
arguing for the European countries to work together in the 
security sphere. 
  [Lambroschini] You therefore think that, in Yugoslavia's 
case, it would have been easier to prevent the war than to stop 
it once it had started? 
  [Olechowski] Well, I would answer you in this way: If 
Yugoslavia had been a NATO member, there would have been no 
conflict. 
  [Lambroschini] Do you agree with the Balladur plan for 
stability in Europe, which stipulates as a precondition for 
entry into the EU, that the Central European candidates should 
first settle their minority and border problems? 
  [Olechowski] Our region certainly needs the Balladur plan. 
But we do not like the idea that its implementation could be a 
precondition for Poland's entry into the EU. We have made great 
efforts. We have signed treaties of good neighborly relations 
with our seven neighbors. This shows our desire for compromise. 
But if this desire was lacking in one or two of our neighbors, 
I do not see why Poland's entry into the EU should be called 
into question. 
  [Lambroschini] Now that the former Communists have returned 
to power in Warsaw, what guarantees can you give the EU that 
they will remain faithful to democracy and to the market economy? 
  [Olechowski] There are no guarantees, there are only facts. 
For the eight months since the Social Democrats joined the 
government coalition, the observation has been clear. The 
market economy has been maintained and there is no sign of the 
government considering a return to a centralized system. 
Privatization is continuing -- one could even say: as badly as 
under the previous governments -- and I hope that it will be 
speeded up between now and the fall with a massive new 
privatization program. Finally, there has been no attack on 
democratic principles. 
  [Lambroschini] Has Western Europe, which for so long 
encouraged you to break with Communism, not disappointed you by 
the timidity of its support since the fall of the Berlin Wall? 
  [Olechowski] We have not been disappointed in monetary 
terms. The West's aid has been generous. Especially with regard 
to Poland, which has benefited from a large amount of direct aid 
and a reduction in its debt. We are very grateful for that. 
But what has disappointed us is the inertia and conservatism of 
the Western institutions. We are worried by the West's lack of 
vision. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31748 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia's Shumeyko Comments on Relations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Russia's Shumeyko Comments on Relations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406200494 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1719 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406200494 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 14 Jun -- Russian Federation Council 
Chairman Vladimir Shumeyko told journalists after his meeting 
today with Senate Speaker Adam Struzik: "We have common views on 
almost all issues." He did not explain what "almost" meant. 
  He also avoided replying to questions on when Russia will 
join the Partnership for Peace and why President Yeltsin decided 
not to participate in festivities marking the 50th anniversary 
of the Warsaw Uprising. He expressed the view that the 
development of Polish-Russian economic relations depends, above 
all, on creating a legislative basis naturally conducive to 
direct cooperation between companies of both countries. 
"Political resolve will then no longer matter," he said. 
  Adam Struzik said the talks focused on general issues and 
also on concrete matters such as a future meeting of 
parliamentarians of the Kaliningrad oblast and Polish border 
regions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31749 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Approves Budget, `Open Sky' Pact </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Approves Budget, `Open Sky' Pact </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1506100194 Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 15 Jun 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> WS1506100194 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by MM: "Government; Poland Under `Open Sky'; Budget </F>
Revenue and Expenditures Line Up Very Nicely"] 
  [Text] The Council of Ministers yesterday approved a 
report by the Finance Ministry concerning the implementation of 
the budget for January to May 1994, and it also approved a draft 
law to ratify the "Open Sky" treaty. 
  The report on budget implementation presented by the Finance 
Ministry states that after five months, 38.3 percent of planned 
revenue expenditures has been implemented, which is more than 
last year (37.5 percent). Budget expenditures are also higher 
than last year -- 36.2 and 35.6 percent, respectively. The 
ministry reports that there were no problems in financing the 
budget deficit. 
  The "Open Sky" treaty was signed by the foreign ministers of 
25 countries as early as March 1992. It pertains to the issue 
of permission for mutual observation of terrain by aircraft of 
countries which are parties to the treaty. The convention will 
take effect after it is ratified by 20 countries. Up to now, 
only 16 countries have done so. At the beginning of each year, 
countries which want to conduct aerial observations, present the 
numbers of their planned flights. Countries over which the 
observations will be conducted (these are military and economic 
observations), will be notified 24 hours before the set date. 
The authorities of the countries, however, will not know the 
exact route of the flight until the very last moment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31750 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Steel Workers Stage Demonstration in Warsaw </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Steel Workers Stage Demonstration in Warsaw </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406130194 Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network in 
Polish 1000 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406130194 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Relayed by Warsaw TV Polonia Network] </F>
  [Text] The workers on strike from the Warsaw Luchini 
Steelworks are staging a demonstration in front of the Council 
of Ministers' building. The demonstrators intend to hand in a 
petition demanding implementation by the government of the 
undertakings included in the agreement on the take-over of the 
Warsaw Steelworks by the Luchini Italian industrial group. Jan 
Szul is in front of the Council of Ministers building: 
  [Szul] About 3,000 steel workers are taking part in the 
demonstration. They have marched 10 km from the steelworks gate 
to the Council of Ministers building. Apart from the fact that 
they want to hand in a petition to a government representative, 
the steel workers also want to point out the fact that in the 
process of negotiating the agreement by the Ministry of Industry 
and the Ministry of Ownership Transformations employee interests 
have not been taken into account. Trade unionists are prevented 
from taking part in such negotiations. They usually learn what 
the agreement entails when it becomes a fait accompli. 
  The government claims that it should not be the addressee of 
the steel workers' demands. It believes that they should 
approach the steelworks board, because the steelworks is a 
private company now. The Italians own 51 percent of the shares. 
The steelworks board, however, claims that it is unable to meet 
the workers' pay demands because this would undermine the 
plant's financial situation. It does not want to launch any 
large investment projects either because, according to the 
board, the legal position involving the ownership of the land 
where the steelworks is located has not been properly sorted out. 
  At this time the demonstration is ending. In a few minutes 
the steel workers will set off on their way back to the plant. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31751 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Solidarity Commission Criticizes Walesa </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Solidarity Commission Criticizes Walesa </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1506115294 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 15 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS1506115294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Piotr Adamowicz: "`S' Appeals to Lech Walesa"] </F>
  [Text] The Presidium of the National Commission [KK] of 
"Solidarity" ["S"], which held a session on 14 June in Gdansk, 
appealed to Lech Walesa not to sign the new law on neopopiwek 
[the enterprise tax on above-normative pay]. Discussed was also 
the behavior of "S" Parliamentary Club Head Zbigniew 
Romaszewski, who supported the competition's candidate in 
supplementary elections to the Senate. 
  The unionists believe that the president should officially 
ask the Constitutional Tribunal whether the neopopiwek law is in 
accordance with the Constitution. They recall that "S" demands 
that the administrative control of wages be abandoned. Wages 
should be regulated through collective agreements; we are 
worried by the president's statements; he says that he is 
prepared to sign the neopopiwek law, due to the strikes and wage 
demands. The economic results of the last two months prove that 
despite the fact that there was no neopopiwek, inflation did not 
increase, said "S" Spokesman Piotr Zak. 
  "S," which did not submit its own lists of candidates, 
appealed to its members to take part in the 19 June 
self-government elections. "Unionists should back their 
colleagues or lists of oppositional groupings," Zak explained. 
  It was recalled that the only "S" candidate in the 
supplementary elections to the Senate in the Elblag Voivodship 
is Waclaw Bielecki. The teacher from Sztum was also supported by 
seven opposition parties, from the Union of Freedom to the 
Center Accord and the Movement for the Republic. In the 
meantime, Senator Zbigniew Romaszewski, head of the "S" 
Parliamentary Club, became involved in the election campaign of 
a competitor -- Edmund Krasowski of Gdansk, who currently does 
not belong to any party. Romaszewski's behavior encountered 
protests from almost 30 plant commissions. 
  "I would like to recall that the National Commission fielded 
Waclaw Bielecki. The involvement of an "S" senator in the 
campaign of another candidate is a violation of the union's 
procedures." Romaszewski was reprimanded by KK Deputy Chairman 
Leszek Szwec last week. Although he was asked to withdraw his 
support, Romaszewski took part in the campaign of a competitor. 
The unionists criticized the Sejm for amending the law on the 
protection of conceived life. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31752 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reaction to `Strategy for Poland' Program </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reaction to `Strategy for Poland' Program </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Implications for MON, MSW </H4>

<F P=102> WS1406130994 Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA in Polish 14 Jun 94 pp 1, 
2 </F>

<F P=103> WS1406130994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ryszard Choroszy: "`Strategy for Poland'; One </F>
Move Forward"] 
  [Excerpt] According to Deputy Prime Minister Grzegorz 
Kolodko, over the next three years there will be more money for 
public security or for the national defense than there is now. 
How much? It will be decided by the parliament. 
  The author of the "Strategy for Poland" does not conceal 
that 
the expectations of the "uniform" ministries should be 
realistic. The plans for the socioeconomic policy until 1997 
envisions an increase in the expenditures primarily in 
education, culture, and health protection. This year it takes 
approximately 11.4 percent of the GDP. If the expenditures in 
that sphere continue to increase, the "short blanket" will not 
satisfy the needs of other ministries. 
<H5>  Pressure on Expenditures </H5>
  The deputy prime minister is not an advocate of defining 
permanent indexes of the share of the expenditures in the 
various areas of the state's total expenditures. The Ministry 
of National Defense [MON], however, expects that its budget will 
amount to at least 3 percent of the GDP. Only such expenditures 
make it possible to modernize the Army, which is a condition for 
adjusting the Army's structures, equipment, and armament to the 
requirements of the Western states. The sum in question is more 
than 10 trillion zlotys. 
  Similar expectations are held by the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs [MSW]. Not long ago Minister Andrzej Milcznowski 
revealed that he would like substantive expenditures to be the 
same as personal expenditures (currently they constitute 35 
percent of the MSW budget). At the same time, at a government 
session devoted to public security, he demanded raising the 
wages of the functionaries of special services to the level 
found in MON. 
  The government's stand is that the expenditures in MON and 
MSW will increase at a rate close to the increase in the GDP. 
It plans that the GDP will be 22.5 percent higher in 1997 than 
it is now. Therefore, the expenditure on MON and MSW should 
increase 5 percent faster than inflation. 
  Will that really happen? It seems difficult to accomplish, 
if for only one reason: the "Strategy for Poland" also envisions 
the gradual limiting of the budget deficit to 2 percent of the 
GDP. Deputy Prime Minister Kolodko told POLSKA ZBROJNA that the 
balancing of public expenditures calls for discipline and 
"thrift spending of resources" that the ministries have. 
However, the ministers demand an increase in expenditures, 
which can be seen at every session of the government. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31753 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Budapest Police Release Further Details </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Budapest Police Release Further Details </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306100294 Budapest MTI in English 0920 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306100294 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 13 June (MTI) -- Budapest Police 
Headquarters (BRFK) on Monday [13 June] issued further details 
about the Saturday dawn (2.40 A.M.) [0040 GMT] explosion at 
Budapest's Parliament. 
  The two Dutch university students stopped by the police near 
the spot before the explosion had been at an international 
computer science conference, which had ended late at night. The 
students decided to do some sightseeing. At around 22.40, they 
wanted to take closer photos of the Parliament columns, so they 
climbed the fence. That was when police noticed them and asked 
for their passports. They were finally allowed to go. 
  On Sunday [12 June], they were taken in by police to be 
questioned about what they had seen on Friday night. They have 
been released, having said they did not see anything related to 
the explosion. 
  Police are conducting a major investigation. Latest analysis 
suggests the bomb was not detonated remotely, but by a 
factory-made timing device, so is unlikely to be the work of an 
amateur. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31754 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   National Security Office Communique </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    National Security Office Communique </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306165394 Budapest MTI in English 1540 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306165394 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 13 June (MTI) -- The Hungarian National 
Security Office (HNSO) has asked MTI to publish the following 
communique on Monday [13 June]: 
  "The National Security Office, in cooperation with the 
police, is carrying out intensive investigations to discover the 
perpetrators and any possible motivation for the explosion that 
shook the Hungarian Parliament at dawn on June 11, 1994. 
  "HNSO Specialists are participating in the experts' 
exploration of the technical circumstances of the explosion. 
  "So far, investigations carried out along several lines have 
not led to results. In case of well-founded suspicions or 
concrete information, the National Security Office will 
immediately inform the public." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31755 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   MSZP, SZDSZ Chairmen Discuss Coalition </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    MSZP, SZDSZ Chairmen Discuss Coalition </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306190594 Budapest MTI in English 1743 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306190594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, June 13 (MTI) -- Hungarian Socialist 
Party (MSZP) Chairman Gyula Horn and Alliance of Free Democrats 
(SZDSZ) Chairman Ivan Peto held an hour-long meeting at MSZP 
headquarters on Monday in Budapest. Following the meeting, Horn 
told journalists the MSZP presented a compromise proposal 
regarding the guarantees of the coalition agreement which is to 
be worked out. He said they had exchanged views on the 
distribution of government offices and ministries, but no 
concrete persons were mentioned in this context. 
  These issues will be discussed by the general negotiating 
delegations of the two parties on Tuesday. The MSZP naturally 
has ideas as regards personnel, but that is a topic for the 
general committee talks, Horn said. 
  As regards the post of deputy prime minister, Peto said the 
main point was not the introduction of the post itself, but 
rather that the smaller coalition-partner will have a person 
alongside the prime minister to represent it in the course of 
coordinations. The name of the function -- deputy prime 
minister or coalition deputy prime minister -- is a technical 
matter to be decided. At the same time, it is obvious that the 
SZDSZ's representative will not fill in for the prime minister 
in a case of his absence, Peto added. 
  Both chairmen said the guarantees imply only the first step 
towards a coalition agreement. The concrete issues are to be 
discussed by the expert committees, and reaching agreements in 
these will not be an easy task. Peto said they wanted to govern 
jointly, but this does not mean they can quickly agree on the 
details. 
  Horn and Peto also said they consider the first session of 
the new parliament on June 28 to be a determining factor with 
respect to the timetable for coalition talks. Their goal is to 
complete negotiations by then, although the concrete 
establishment of the new government is not bound to the opening 
of Parliament. 
  According to the two chairmen, an agreement should be 
concluded by around June 24, in order for the MSZP Congress and 
the SZDSZ delegate assembly to be able to ratify the document 
before the founding session of parliament. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31756 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Draft Proposal Discussed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Draft Proposal Discussed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306201294 Budapest MTI in English 1926 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306201294 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, June 13 (MTI) -- Acting Hungarian 
Socialist Party [MSZP] Deputy Chairman Imre Szekeres and 
Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] executive Balint Magyar 
discussed the operation of a joint government and cooperation 
guarantees during their meeting on Monday. The negotiators 
worked out a draft text of a joint proposal which will be 
submitted to the two parties" general political coordination 
forum on Tuesday for approval. 
  The draft extends to the cooperation of the coalition 
partners within government, the working order of the cabinet, 
cooperation between the parliamentary groups, appointment 
rights, and the coordination mechanism between the two parties. 
  Speaking to journalists after the talks, Szekeres said 
discussion between the two parties about these issues could 
possibly be completed on Tuesday. These issues received special 
emphasis in the course of the talks because this is the first 
time that the basic principles of the coalition cooperation are 
to be set down in writing. 
  The MSZP politician did not wish to provide further details 
about his talks with the SZDSZ official. However, journalists 
were told that personnel issues were not discussed, as the 
general political negotiating forum and the party chairmen are 
the ones who coordinate such matters. 
  The Socialists and the Free Democrats are not forced to 
conclude a coalition, but they are negotiating in the interest 
of the country, Szekeres said in answer to a question from the 
press. As regards the chances of a coalition government, 
Szekeres said the likelihood of the two parties reaching 
agreement in the course of their talks is quite good. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31757 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   President Meets With Peto, Comments on Bomb </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    President Meets With Peto, Comments on Bomb </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306144494 Budapest MTI in English 1231 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306144494 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 13 Jun (MTI) -- President Arpad Goncz, in 
the course of successive meetings with party leaders, today met 
Ivan Peto, chairman of the Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ). 
They discussed the Saturday explosion damaging a Parliament 
door and agreed that although such incidents are worrying, they 
occasionally occur in almost every democratic society. There is 
no nead for general anxiety, Goncz said. 
  Peto outlined the present stage of the SZDSZ's coalition 
talks with the Hungarian Socialist Party, although not in 
detail. Goncz had ealier said he would not get involved in the 
negotiations. Peto saw the talks on joint Socialist-liberal 
rule as encouraging. A good atmosphere ensures effective work, 
he said. "Socialists and Free Democrats feel it is vital to 
improve government-opposition relations in the future," Peto 
said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31758 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   President Meets With FKGP Chairman </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    President Meets With FKGP Chairman </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006144294 Budapest MTI in English 1310 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006144294 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 10 Jun (MTI) -- Hungarian President Arpad 
Goncz on Friday continued his meetings with the leaders of the 
parliamentary parties, and received the chairman of the 
Independent Smallholders' Party (FKGP), Jozsef Torgyan. At a 
press conference following the meeting, Torgyan said he mainly 
called the president's attention to the fact that the dominance 
of executive power could make parliamentary democracy, which is 
based on a system of brakes and counter-weights represented by 
the opposition, illusory. 
  In this context Torgyan said the executive power had waged a 
campaign against his party over the last four years, accusing 
the FKGP with various charges, freezing its state support, and 
making efforts to break it up through smallholders created by 
the power. The FKGP chairman also said his family was exposed 
to harassment. 
  Torgyan said he considered it necessary to relate this to 
the 
president because, in principle, there is a danger that an even 
stronger parliamentary dictatorship will come about alongside 
the ever more powerful executive power, in the wake of the 
election results. The danger of a one-party like system is 
further increased by the fact that, according to Torgyan, the 
revival of middle-level cadres of the former state party, the 
Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party, can be experienced 
nationwide. 
  Although the Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP], which won the 
elections, and the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ], which 
came in second, are endeavouring to work out a system of 
guarantees, Torgyan said neither the Hungarian Democratic Forum 
[MDF], nor the Christian Democratic People's party can be a 
genuine opposition force under the current circumstances. As 
regards the Federation of Young Democrats, Torgyan said the 
future will decide whether the party will be a liberal, or a 
popular-national force. Thus there is no other prominent 
opposition force apart from the Independent Smallholders' Party. 
  The FKGP chairman also said his party would ensure a greater 
role for the president of the Republic, in order to 
counter-balance the executive power. For instance, as regards 
the media, the FKGP would empower the president with the 
appointment right of media leaders that would not require 
counter-initialling by the prime minister. 
  Another element that would, according to the FKGP's intents, 
intensify the president's position would be his direct election 
by the people. According to the FKGP, it cannot be allowed that 
the media be subordinated to the government. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31759 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Election Disagreement Sent to Supreme Court </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Election Disagreement Sent to Supreme Court </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306201494 Budapest MTI in English 1851 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306201494 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, June 13 (MTI) -- Contrary to original 
plans, the National Election Committee could not declare the 
final official result of the parliamentary elections today, as 
Mayor Gyula Varga of Kapuvar (W Hungary), a candidate of the 
Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ), has turned to the Supreme 
Court to request a repeated re-count of valid and invalid votes 
cast in the sixth constituency -- west Hungarian 
Gyor-Moson-Sopron county. 
  As was reported earlier, Varga won the mandate in the May 29 
elections by 10 votes, ahead of the Hungarian Democratic Forum 
[MDF] candidate Gyorgy Rasko, who subsequently asked for a 
re-count by the National Election Committee. Based on this 
re-count, in which the committee re-classified several invalid 
votes as valid, and invalidated several valid votes, Rasko ended 
up in first place. 
  According to Varga's information, there were many ballots 
among those examined by the committee and classified valid which 
should be invalid under the electoral law. 
  If the Supreme Court decides on the matter this Thursday, 
the 
National Election Committee will declare the final official 
result of the elections that evening. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31760 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hungarist Party `Concerned' About Arrests </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hungarist Party `Concerned' About Arrests </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006195994 Budapest MTI in English 1829 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006195994 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 10 June (MTI) -- "The Hungarist Movement 
(HM) is concerned about the arrest of more and more of its 
members for political reasons. Some have disappeared without a 
trace, and there is no information as to their whereabouts," 
Gyorgy Kemal Ekrem, the only co-chairman of the organization not 
currently detained, told a news conference at his flat on Friday 
[10 June]. The two other HM leaders, Istvan Gyorkos and Albert 
Szabo, were taken into police custody on April 28 on the 
suspicion of having committed a crime of incitement against a 
community. 
  The HM was founded in Budapest on April 12, 1994. At a news 
conference in late April, Ekrem, Gyorkos and Szabo said they 
identified partly with the ideas of Ferenc Szalasi's Arrow-Cross 
Party. (Szalasi -- 1897-1946 -- led the Hungarian Arrow-Cross 
Party-Hungarist Movement. Hitler helped him to power on October 
15, 1944, and he introduced a reign of fascist terror in the 
country. The Hungarian people's court sentenced him to death as 
a war-criminal in 1946.) 
  At today's press conference, Ekrem said one of their members 
was arrested by the police at the demonstration against 
Hungarian Socialist Party Chairman Gyula Horn for carrying a 
poster saying "Never Again the Jewish Terror of Rakosi and 
Gero." (Matyas Rakosi was general secretary of the Communist 
Party after the war until 1956, and Erno Gero was the second 
strong man. Gero headed the party at the outbreak of the 1956 
revolution.) 
  Ekrem said that another Hungarist went on hunger strike 
outside parliament for the release of Gyorkos and his 
associates, and is also believed to have been arrested, because 
he disappeared with the deck-chair and blanket he received from 
Ekrem. According to Ekrem, Gyorkos and Szabo were arrested at 
the personal instructions of Prime Minister Peter Boross. Ekrem 
said the HM was gaining in strength despite harassment by the 
authorities: Hungarian emigration entrusted it with the task of 
bringing national forces into one camp. 
  The movement mainly seeks the support of young people, 
primarily approaching the "uninfected 17-18-year-olds." Ekrem 
said one of their recent meetings was attended by university 
students who have quit the Federation of Young Democrats. He 
added that they conceive the movement as a nation-building, 
cultural, and tradition-fostering organization, and that he 
personally rejects racism. In this point, his views differ 
somewhat from those of the arrested HM leaders, he admitted. 
  The prime minister has no involvement in the legal 
proceedings against Albert Szabo and Istvan Gyorkos, government 
spokeswoman Judit Juhasz told MTI in connection with Ekrem's 
remarks. National Police Command spokesman Laszlo Garamvolgyi 
termed Ekrem's words as "wandering." There is no case of, nor 
has there ever been any precedent of somebody being held in 
custody without any information as to their whereabouts, he 
added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31761 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pawlak Denies `Conflict' With Walesa </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pawlak Denies `Conflict' With Walesa </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1006160694 Warsaw PAP in English 1453 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1006160694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Plock, June 10 -- Asked by journalists whether 
President Lech Walesa's positive assessment of the "Strategy for 
Poland" programme means that the conflict between the government 
and the president came to an end, Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak 
said that never there was such a conflict but there were only 
differences of opinion. The prime minister told journalists 
during his visit to the Plock petrochemical combine SA that the 
"Strategy for Poland" document was an example of agreement. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31762 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kolodko's Aides Explain `Strategy for Poland' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kolodko's Aides Explain `Strategy for Poland' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306172694 Warsaw PAP in English 1652 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1306172694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 13 -- Deputy Prime Minister and Finance 
Minister Grzegorz Kolodko's aides on Monday explained the 
"Strategy for Poland" economic plan to newsmen. 
  The experts said the relations between Poland's unemployment 
rate and an inflation rate are in great part a political and not 
only an economic choice. They explained that the keeping of 
high employment would not increase inflation if the number of 
weekly working hours were cut and wages were decreased 
accordingly. 
  Secretary of State at the Cabinet Office Jan Monkiewicz and 
Director General at the Cabinet Office Jerzy Hausner said such 
methods have been applied in Germany. They argued that it is 
necessary that society and, most of all, trade unions are aware 
of such solutions. 
  The experts agreed that the "Strategy for Poland" targets in 
agriculture go beyond the period of four years the document 
covers. The creation of jobs in the countryside and the changes 
in financing agriculture are important in the first phase of the 
plan's implementation. 
  Also on Monday, Chairman of the Polish Business Council Jan 
Wejchert said the organisation is satisfied with the programme 
and stressed that its provisions are in great degree consistent 
with the council's opinions and demands. The council presented 
its opinions on the government-prepared programme to Prime 
Minister Waldemar Pawlak during its general assembly meeting 
last week. 
  Council Deputy Chairman Zbigniew Niemczycki stated the 
council is ready to work on detailed issues included in 
"Strategy for Poland." The council members agree that the 
success of the programme will hinge on a rapid implementation of 
concrete solutions. The council argued that if implemented, the 
solutions would help accelerate privatisation and development of 
equity market as well as the introduction of export- and 
investment-minded changes in the tax system. 
  The council announced again its measures aimed at 
encouraging 
investments and giving Polish entrepreneurs bigger say in a 
rapid privatisation of the economy, including the introduction 
of privatisation by instalments, a consolidated balance sheet 
for holdings and the setting up of a guarantee fund for 
privatisation and development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31763 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Minister Stresses Desire To Join NATO </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Minister Stresses Desire To Join NATO </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306161494 Warsaw PAP in English 1602 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1306161494 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 13 -- Defence Minister Piotr 
Kolodziejczyk made it clear that Poland would not agree to the 
privileged treatment of any country in the "Partnership for 
Peace" programme. "There must be the same rules for all," he 
said. Kolodziejczyk opened Monday a three-day international 
seminar on "Civilian and Democratic Control over the Armed 
Forces" attended by representatives of 38 countries, the North 
Atlantic Cooperation Council and the supreme command of NATO 
allied armed forces. 
  According to Poland's defence minister, the "Partnership for 
Peace" is a step towards western security structures although 
"it fails to secure full NATO membership and gives no full 
security guarantees." 
  Kolodziejczyk emphasized that full membership of the Western 
European Union and NATO was Poland's "strategic choice." Poland 
wants to participate in the work of the two organizations, in 
NATO manoeuvres and peace-keeping missions. "We are ready to 
meet the "Partnership for Peace" obligations although it will 
not be easy because of Poland's economic situation," he said. 
  "The to-date pro-east political orientation, conditioned by 
the subjection to the USSR and anti-NATO security policy, does 
not meet the expectations of Polish society, nor our 
geostrategic situation," he stressed. According to him, Poland 
faces the opportunity of "independently choosing an optimal 
political option." The turn to the western democracy does not 
mean, however, "breaking the to-date links with the east," said 
the minister. 
  Kolodziejczyk stressed Poland's advantages, including good 
relations with neighbours, no ethnic conflicts, many-year 
experience in UN peace-keeping missions, military potential, and 
the defence system. 
  He also admitted that Poland's "system of control over the 
army is far from being perfect" and is still in the making. In 
his opinion the seminar will help better tailor Polish solutions 
to west European standards. The civilian control over the army 
is a significant element of breaking away from the old 
totalitarian structures and dependencies, said Kolodziejczyk. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31764 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Deputies Protest Article by Defense Spokesman </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Deputies Protest Article by Defense Spokesman </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1106193994 Warsaw PAP in English 1914 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1106193994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 11 -- The presidium of the Sejm Defence 
Committee in a statement made public Saturday charged spokesman 
for the Defence Ministry Wieslaw Rozbicki with incompetence, 
disrespect for civilian politicians and lack of understanding of 
the fundamental principle of full control of the state 
authorities over the Armed Forces. The statement came as a 
response to an article published by Rozbicki in the Thursday 
issue of the "GAZETA WYBORCZA" daily. 
  The deputies are expecting an explanation from the defence 
minister whether the contents of the article is compatible with 
a respective official stand of the ministry. 
  The Defence Committee's presidium stated that it is highly 
inappropriate that the official spokesman for the ministry put 
in doubt the advisability of Poland having signed international 
disarmament agreements. According to the presidium, the 
suggestion that these agreements should be renegotiated is 
inconsistent with the official position of the Polish Government. 
  Authors of the statement recalled also that the disarmament 
agreements had been signed at the time when the present Defence 
Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk had been serving his first term in 
office. in the opinion of the deputies, the suggestion that in 
result of these agreements poland has diminished the combat 
readiness of its army in comparison with its neighbours is 
completely false and attests to the spokesman's incompetence. 
The deputies expect the defence minister to address the issue. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31765 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Spokesman Recalled From Post </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Spokesman Recalled From Post </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306143494 Warsaw PAP in English 1344 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1306143494 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 13 -- Spokesman for the Defence 
Ministry Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki has been recalled from the 
post, PAP learnt unofficially Monday. The reason behind 
Rozbicki's dismissal was his article published in the Thursday 
issue of "GAZETA WYBORCZA" in which he argued that Poland's 
signing arms reduction agreements was unjustified. 
  He also argued that shifting the military information 
service 
WSI (intelligence and counterintelligence) from the ministry's 
civilian structures and making it subordinate to the General 
Staff may bring positive results as, according to him, for the 
sake of state security it would be better if a civilian minister 
would not have full access to information delivered by the WSI. 
  In response to the article the Presidium of the Sejm Defence 
Committee charged Rozbicki with "incompetence," "disrespect for 
civilian politicians" and "lack of understanding of the 
fundamental principle of full control of the state authorities 
over the armed forces." Defence Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk 
also distanced himself from the text of the article. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31766 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1995 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Minister Expresses `Regret' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Minister Expresses `Regret' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1306165894 Warsaw PAP in English 1634 GMT 13 Jun 95 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1306165894 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 13 -- Defence Minister Piotr 
Kolodziejczyk Monday recalled Spokesman for the Defence Ministry 
Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki from the post. At the same time 
Kolodziejczyk distanced himself from the text of Rozbicki's 
article published in the Thursday issue of GAZETA WYBORCZA. 
  According to Kolodziejczyk, Rozbicki's putting the signature 
of "The Defence Ministry's Press Spokesman" under the article 
without permission, was an abuse of his official post and a 
violation of journalistic ethics by using the post of the 
spokesman to express his personal opinions. 
  In the article "We Have Disarmed Ourselves" Rozbicki argued 
that Poland's signing arms reduction agreements was unjustified. 
He also claimed that shifting the military information service 
WSI (Intelligence and Counterintelligence) from the ministry's 
civilian structures and making it subordinate to the general 
staff may bring positive results as, according to him, for the 
sake of state security it would be better if a civilian minister 
would not have full access to information delivered by the WSI. 
  Kolodziejczyk expressed regret at the "incident." The 
spokesman's opinions attest to the fact that "he does not 
understand the principle of a full control of the state 
authorities, including parliament, over the armed forces, the 
principle obeyed in democratic countries," the defence minister 
wrote in a letter to Head of the Sejm Defence Committee Jerzy 
Szmajdzinski. 
  The committee Saturday charged Rozbicki with "incompetence," 
"disrespect for civilian politicians" and "lack of understanding 
of the fundamental principle of full control of the state 
authorities over the armed forces." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31767 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Official Views Security Issues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Official Views Security Issues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306144394 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0933 GMT 13 Jun 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306144394 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest, ROMPRES, 13/6/1994 -- The transition 
process has inevitably diminished Romania's capacity to ensure 
its own security. Romania does not have, as at now, allies and 
firm security guarantees. The main danger lies in having its 
own domestic weaknesses exploited. There is a direct 
relationship between the reform and the national security. 
These are some of the main ideas Ioan Mircea Pascu, secretary 
of state in the Romanian Ministry of National Defense, 
elaborated on in the comprehensive interview for the CURIERUL 
NATIONAL of 13 June. 
  Speaking of the integrated concept of Romania's national 
security, a recently issued document, Pascu says the study ends 
with the basic conclusion that for now and for a while to come, 
"Romania cannot rely on allies and firm security guarantees." 
Besides, the transition from one type of society to another has 
diminished its capacity to ensure security by its own means, 
"particularly as we are located in an area characterized by a 
high degree of conflict potential." 
  In Mr. Pascu's opinion, the most important sign of Romania's 
insecurity since December 1989 is the very fact that threats are 
no longer mostly external, and that "the main danger is posed by 
the possibility of having its domestic weaknesses exploited." 
And among the main internal risk factors he listed the economic 
situation, the social costs required by the changes brought 
about by the transition period, a diminished social cohesion etc. 
  To face the domestic risk factors this country needs to 
ensure the continuity of the reform process: "the success of the 
reform, however cannot be obtained in the absence of security, 
and to have security, we need to take the reform to the end 
successfully." 
  The defense official also mentioned some of the external 
risk 
factors for Romania's security, such as the appearance and 
worsening of certain conflicts, the existence of zones with a 
high potential of political and military instability close to 
Romania. 
  As directly concerning Romania's security, Secretary of 
State 
Mircea Pascu names international developments like the recent 
stability plan adopted in Paris, the agreement for the reduction 
of the conventional armaments and troops in Europe, the 
Partnership for Peace plan, Romania's geopolitical position, the 
relations with Russia. 
  Concluding, the dignitary predicted about the future of 
Romania's security in the following terms: "If we ignore the 
unpredictable, which, unfortunately, will continue to be there 
both in the near and medium future, I think we can be optimistic 
about Romania's long- term chances of integration in the 
European and Euro-Atlantic security systems." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31768 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   PNTCD Official on `Danger' of President </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PNTCD Official on `Danger' of President </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306180594 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1512 GMT 13 Jun 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306180594 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 13/6/1994 -- The National 
Peasant Christian-Democratic Party [PNTCD] started to collect 
signatures necessary to trigger the procedure of suspension 
against Romanian President Ion Iliescu, said Chamber of Deputies 
member Razvan Dobrescu at a press conference on Monday, 13 June. 
  Reiterating the PNTCD's belief that President Iliescu has 
breached the "independence of the judges" through his statements 
made during a visit in Satu Mare, northern Romania, referring to 
the issue of the nationalized houses, the PNTCD deputy drew 
attention upon the serious consequences of any interference with 
judges' rulings. The PNTCD deputy emphasized the fact that his 
party considered as a "real danger" the maintaining in office of 
a president who "does not watch for the good functioning of the 
state authorities." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31769 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   PDSR Rejects PNTCD Impeachment Plan </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PDSR Rejects PNTCD Impeachment Plan </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1106183094 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1546 GMT 11 Jun 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1106183094 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 11/6/1994 -- "The Central 
Executive Bureau of the Social Democracy Party of Romania [PDSR] 
has learned with surprise of the recent statement of the 
leadership of the National Peasant Christian-Democratic Party 
[PNTCD] regarding the decision to trigger in parliament the 
procedure of suspending Mr. Ion Iliescu from his office as 
Romania's president, speculating on an imaginary `attempt' by 
the head of the state upon the independence of the judiciary in 
the matter of nationalized houses," reads a release from the 
ruling PDSR's Central Executive Bureau, signed by PDSR Executive 
President Adrian Nastase. 
  "This has to be associated also with the PNTCD leader 
Corneliu Coposu's stands taken on a possible amendment of the 
Constitution, to the effect of restoring the monarchy in 
Romania," the release reads. "As a matter of fact, it is 
strange to see justice protected by the leaders of a party that 
has so far accused systematically the justice of `obedience to 
the power,' while President Ion Iliescu has never uttered such 
accusations, his only preoccupation being to see to the 
observance of law and human rights, as established by the 
Constitution." 
  "The PDSR assesses that by the above statement the PNTCD is 
trying to accumulate political capital in the context of the 
street events announced for the period ahead, being also an 
attempt of the PNTCD to strengthen its shaken position and 
monopoly in the Democratic Convention of Romania [CDR]." 
  According to the PDSR, "the statement of the PNTCD's 
leadership discredits its own party, the more so as it is a 
parliamentary party with a certain weight in the political life." 
  "Under the circumstances created by the statement of the 
Steering, Coordination, and Control Bureau of the PNTCD and by 
Mr. Corneliu Coposu's statement, the Central Executive Bureau of 
the PDSR expresses its hope that the PNTCD will reconsider its 
own political strategy and its representatives will focus their 
efforts in parliament on the problems under debate, on the major 
issues marking now the country's political life." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31770 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   PSM Statement Rejects `Violence, Extremism' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PSM Statement Rejects `Violence, Extremism' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1106182994 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1648 GMT 11 Jun 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1106182994 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 11/6/1994 -- The Steering 
Committee and Council of Delegates of the Socialist Party of 
Labor [PSM] released an extensive document entitled "June 1994 
Statement" comprising its creed: "The Socialist Party of Labor 
was born out of love and obligation for the truth." 
  The PSM refuses in the document to analyze the current state 
of affairs in Romania, which it terms as "the responsibility of 
those who took over the power from the Romanian people," "whom 
they have deceived and confused," but it rather declares its 
discontent, which however "has not turned into confrontation, 
blind passion, and street riots," because the PSM does not 
believe "that a social state of law can be built through 
violence, be it even explainable, by the tendency to seize (by 
making noise and use force and terror) the political stage and 
the power, in the last analysis." 
  "Indignant" about the tendency of some political parties and 
personalities "to shift the political struggle to the streets," 
the PSM warns the "right" and "the anarchist forces" about what 
can result from this: "...We are witnessing in this June 1994 a 
new attempt at destabilizing the Romanian state's institutions. 
Some try to browbeat and eliminate from activity, in 
undemocratic ways, the inconvenient personalities, from 
parliamentarians to the country's president." The PSM considers 
this is because "certain parties" "have no patience for 
democracy," trying instead "to eliminate the political 
opponents." 
  Rejecting violence, extremism and terror, the PSM declares 
its "confidence in the democratic values and the respect for the 
state of law," inviting its members and supporters "not to react 
violently to any provocation and not to allow the escalation of 
violence and terror," and addresses this appeal to all fellow 
countrymen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31771 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Magazine Links UDMR's Tokes to Securitate </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Magazine Links UDMR's Tokes to Securitate </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006142294 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1213 GMT 10 Jun 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006142294 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 10/6/1994 -- The weekly TINERAMA 
published in its Friday issue a facsimile of an engagement paper 
for cooperation with Securitate signed by Ladislau Tokes, better 
known by the public opinion under the name of Laszlo Tokes. 
  Bishop Tokes, who -- the weekly says -- had chosen by 
himself 
the cover name of Laszlo Kolozsvari, was committing himself: "To 
cooperate with the state security organs of the Interior 
Ministry in order to provide information concerning the 
concepts, behaviour and actions of the persons with whom I get 
in contact and which (information) have specific importance. At 
the same time, I will supply information regarding the behaviour 
and actions of other countries' citizens who are visiting the 
country and who, under that coverage, are operating activities 
hostile to our country." 
  TINERAMA journalist Ioan Itu who signs the article claims 
the 
document was made available to him a long time ago by a former 
securitate officer. The journalist motivates his silence until 
now: 
  "We kept discretion on this issue because of a very simple 
reason: We were aware of the existence of a receipt signed by 
Laszlo Tokes in October 1989 for the sum of 20,000 lei -- which 
he has never denied -- receipt given to an officer of the 
Hungarian Intelligence Service, so that, at least for us, it is 
not very clear the role he played then, nor the service whose 
orders he was following: the Romanian or the Hungarian." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31772 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Weiss: Meciar Trying To `Corrupt' Coalition </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Weiss: Meciar Trying To `Corrupt' Coalition </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306131294 Prague CTK in English 1056 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306131294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Kosice, East Slovakia June 13 (CTK) -- Vladimir 
Meciar is very disappointed that he has not succeeded in 
corrupting the Democratic Left Party (SDL) and is currently 
seeking to corrupt the election left coalition, SDL Chairman 
Peter Weiss says in the daily SLOVENSKY VYCHOD today. Meciar's 
people pay visits to Slovak Social Democratic Party Democratic 
(SDSS) [as received] leaders and try to create an impression 
among the general public that the Green Party is also breaking 
down because its leadership has entered into a coalition with 
the SDL, Weiss says, adding that these are "rumours." 
  The isolation of Meciar and his Movement for a Democratic 
Slovakia (HZDS), and not only internationally but currently also 
on the internal political scene is growing, Weiss says. "HZDS 
leader has done everything in human strength to insult the other 
politicians, other political parties. He has interfered in 
their internal affairs and has thus broken down the basis for 
serious cooperation," Weiss says. "Our problem is not our 
relation towards the HZDS and least so towards the person of the 
HZDS chairman but rather our relationship with the Christian 
Democratic Movement (KDH), Weiss says. He stressed that the KDH 
unlike the HZDS is a transparent partner with whom the SDL has 
managed to come to an agreement on fundamental principles such 
as respecting democratic principles, the stability of the 
constitutional system and further steps in the economic reform 
process. "We do not cherish illusions about the KDH since it is 
a right-orientated party while we are a left-wing one. But we 
both are capable of respecting each other and of complying with 
agreements," Weiss says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31773 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94036" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   HZDS To Sue President for Constitution Breach </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    HZDS To Sue President for Constitution Breach </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306183094 Prague CTK in English 1753 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306183094 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 13 (CTK) -- Former Premier 
Vladimir Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) will 
lodge a complaint with the Constitutional Court against 
President Michal Kovac because he allegedly breached his 
constitutional duty to call referendum, Tibor Cabaj, chairman of 
the HZDS deputies group, said today. The Slovak Constitution 
stipulates that the president can be dismissed if he fails to 
observe his constitutional duties. 
  In February the HZDS organized a petition campaign in 
support 
of a referendum through which they wanted to resolve the 
political crisis. The citizens had to decide on three issues: 
calling early elections, exclusion of the "renegade deputies" 
from parliament (Meciar's cabinet fell because some of the HZDS 
deputies had left the party which lost the majority in 
parliament), and explanation of the origin of money used in 
privatization. However, in March Kovac refused to call the 
referendum because the 350,000 signatures, required by the 
Constitution, had not been collected, as the Presidential Office 
had found. 
  In the meantime, the parliament has dismissed Meciar's 
cabinet and set the early elections for this autumn. The HZDS 
has checked again the collected signatures and found out that 
out of 422,054, 372,054 were valid so that Kovac ought to have 
called the referendum, Cabaj said. 
  Katarina Tothova, the justice minister in Meciar's cabinet, 
pointed to a contradiction in the statement by the Presidential 
Office which had said in March that only 232,957 were authentic, 
while at present it acknowledged validity of almost 325,000 
signatures. She noted that law which had been in force in 
February, did not stipulate that exact address and 
identification number were necessary, as required now by the 
amended law on referendum which had been passed last week. 
Tothova also denied an allegation by Peter Weiss, chairman of 
the Democratic Left Party (SDL), that the HZDS was preparing 
another referendum which would shorten Kovac's five-year term. 
Kovac was elected last year. "I do not know anything about 
another petition committee," she added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31774 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94037" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   SNS Chiefs Outline Cooperation Possibilities </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SNS Chiefs Outline Cooperation Possibilities </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006132694 Prague CTK in English 1110 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006132694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava June 10 (CTK) -- Although deciding at 
its recent congress in Komarno, South Slovakia, to enter the 
autumn general elections independently, the Slovak National 
Party (SNS) does not reject cooperation with nationally and 
Christian oriented parties, SNS Deputy Chairwoman Eva Slavkovska 
told journalists today. However, SNS Chairman Jan Slota ruled 
out cooperation with the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) led 
by Jan Carnogursky, with ethnic Hungarian parties or the 
Democratic Left Party (SDL) of Peter Weiss. 
  "I intentionally did not name Cernak's followers," Slota 
stressed, referring to the National Democratic Party (NDS) of 
Ludovit Cernak. According to Slota, the NDS, a faction which 
split from the SNS, "is not a political entity." 
  Reacting to NDS representatives' participation in the KDH's 
open election list of candidates, Slota stated that this was the 
"alliance between the devil and the angel". "The strength of 
freemasons is immense and whole of Western Europe is in their 
grip," he added, referring to the KDH. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31775 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94038" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik on Ethnic Minorities, Law on Signs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik on Ethnic Minorities, Law on Signs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006154094 Prague CTK in English 1221 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006154094 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava June 10 (CTK) -- Premier Jozef Moravcik 
told Slovak Radio today he was convinced that Hungarian and 
Slovak positions regarding their ethnic minorities would come 
closer. "We cannot be indifferent to Slovaks abroad, as the 
Hungarian Government cannot be indifferent to Hungarians living 
outside Hungary," Moravcik added. The ethnic Hungarians in 
Slovakia number about 560,000 people, or 11 percent of 
Slovakia's population. 
  The ethnic minorities issues should be involved in the 
Hungarian-Slovak agreement, Moravcik said. This was agreed upon 
during his recent meeting with executive deputy chairman of the 
Hungarian Socialist Party Imre Szekeres, he added. 
  Moravcik noted that the present government was ready to 
settle the "signpost" law on the bilingual names for towns and 
villages in the ethnic language, rejected last week for the 
second time in parliament. This time the signpost law should be 
submitted as a private member's bill, only on condition that it 
will be submitted by a simple majority of Slovak deputies, 
Moravcik explained. If the law were rejected for the third 
times, it would not be "pleasant" because of domestic and 
international situation, he said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31776 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94039" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Schmognerova Views Significance of IMF Accord </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Schmognerova Views Significance of IMF Accord </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306165694 Prague CTK in English 1438 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306165694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 13 (CTK) -- Representatives of the 
government and of the central bank today signed a protocol on a 
line of credit from the International Monetary Fund and sent it 
to IMF director Michel Camdessus. By providing the credit line, 
the IMF expressed confidence in the economic policy of 
Moravcik's cabinet, Deputy Premier Brigita Schmognerova said. 
The IMF thus also made it possible to take out other advance 
loans, which would not be possible without a recommendation from 
the most significant international financial institution, she 
emphasized. She refuted former Premier Vladimir Meciar's 
statement made last week that the importance of the IMF loan is 
exaggerated. He said that the BB-rating given to the central 
bank last year had opened up more opportunities for Slovakia. 
He also pointed out that planned loans of over a billion 
dollars had not been issued after his resignation. 
  "The significance of the IMF loan cannot be compared to the 
rating," Schmognerova stated. Such "stamping," provided by many 
agencies, indicates only the probability that loans will be paid 
back, not the level of a country's economic policy, she said. 
  After the application for the line of credit has been 
approved by the IMF Council of Governors, Slovakia should 
receive $164 million by the end of the summer, mainly to 
reinforce its balance of payments. On the basis of the standby 
loan, the second tranche of the transition loan, $91 million, 
should also be made available. The amount of money on 
Slovakia's credit line corresponds to its quota in the IMF. The 
IMF reserves the right to make three corrections during the loan 
provision period. The loan will have to be repaid after twenty 
months. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31777 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94040" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhirinovskiy To Arrive for Private Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhirinovskiy To Arrive for Private Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306165594 Prague CTK in English 1540 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306165594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 13 (CTK) -- Chairman of the 
Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Vladimir Zhirinovskiy will 
probably arrive for a four-day private visit to Slovakia on June 
25, Jozef Lauko, a lawyer and one of his hosts, told CTK today. 
As it is not possible to rule out "complications in Russia's 
domestic development or other unpredictable circumstances," as 
in May when his visit was canceled, the date of the visit is 
only preliminary, Lauko added. However, Ladislav Mojzis, the 
owner of a Bratislava restaurant and the second host, has 
received a fax confirming the arrival of a seven-member 
delegation headed by Zhirinovskiy. 
  The agenda of Zhirinovskiy's visit does not include any 
meeting with Slovak politicians. He will see the Gabcikovo 
water project and the memorial to the Soviet war dead at the 
Slavin cemetery in Bratislava. According to unofficial 
information, Zhirinovskiy has asked the Czech and Slovak 
embassies to say what they thought of his visit; while the Czech 
Republic has made it clear that his arrival is not desirable, 
the Slovak authorities have said they cannot block a private 
visit due to the agreement on visa-free relations between the 
two countries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31778 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94041" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Yugoslavia, Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Police Arrest Parliament Deputy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Police Arrest Parliament Deputy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1106174994 Tirana ATA in English 1008 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1106174994 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, June 11 (ATA) -- Dr. Fehmi Rexhepi, deputy 
of the parliament of Kosova, was arrested by Serbian police in a 
village of Gjilan (city in the centre of the republic of Kosova) 
on June 10, an ATA correspondent reports from Prishtina. 
Albanian deputy was sent to the police station of Gjilan. Mr. 
Rexhepi is also deputy chairman of the Executive Council of the 
Trade Unions of Education, Science, and Culture of the republic 
of Kosova. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31779 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94042" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Yugoslavia, Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   DLK's Agani Views Berisha-Rugova Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    DLK's Agani Views Berisha-Rugova Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006203594 Tirana ATA in English 1818 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006203594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Conference of the Democratic League of Kosova" -- </F>
ATA headline] 
  [Text] Tirana, June 10 (ATA) -- After speaking of the 
successful visit of president of Kosova, Rugova, in several 
countries of Europe, Fehmi Agani, the Democratic League of 
Kosova [DLK] deputy president, mentioned the meeting of 
President Rugova with the president of Albania, Sali Berisha. 
He said that "the affirmation of our right for consulting and 
coordinating our approaches and acts with Albania marks one of 
the greatest results of the Albanian political movement." 
  Later on, Mr. Agani commented the statement of the Serbian 
prefect of Pristina, Simovic, in his meeting with American 
diplomats, saying that the Democratic League is allegedly 
exercising its activity freely and is not being hindered. "In 
the context of the Serbian state terror, no one of the Albanian 
political parties, including the Democratic League, is not 
operating freely or being not hindered," Mr. Agani said. Agani 
mentioned the cases of blocking of the activity of the DLK 
[Democratic League of Kosova] and the ill-treatment of its 
activists. "The police has intervened into almost all the 
activities of the Democratic League, from Pristina to communes," 
he said. Dr. Agani pointed out that three chairmen of DLK 
branches of Pristina, Ferizaj, and Suhareke, are still in 
prison, as well as other activists of this party, from education 
area, and from the Chamber of Commerce of Kosova. 
  Dr. Agani rejected the statement of the General Perisic who 
have said that "some 20,000 Albanians who are not serving in the 
Serbian Army are being trained in centres abroad and come to 
Kosova for provoking incidents." Dr. Agani said that "how the 
Albanian youngsters will serve and why will they serve an army 
whose leaders has a totally hostile approach toward them?" 
  The DLK deputy president, Agani, answered the questions of 
the journalists. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31780 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Yugoslavia, Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Paper Cites Serbian Position Against Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Paper Cites Serbian Position Against Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006162394 Tirana ATA in English 1026 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006162394 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, June 10 (ATA) -- Statements by a senior 
official of the Socialist Party of Serbia, Bogdanovic, who is at 
the same time deputy chairman of the Chamber of Republics in the 
Assembly of the self-declared Yugoslavia, that there will be no 
talks with Rugova are not only discouraging but they close all 
possible ways for a dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, the 
newspaper BUJKU of Pristina writes. In one of its commentaries 
entitled "With Whom Will the Serbian Party Talk?" BUJKU stresses 
that if Bogdanovic's statements are the final say of the 
Belgrade government, then the Serbian party has nothing to do 
but to negotiate with ghosts. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31781 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94044" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Yugoslavia, Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Officer on Albania-Kosova Border Tension </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb Officer on Albania-Kosova Border Tension </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006153494 Tirana ATA in English 1022 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006153494 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, June 10 (ATA) -- The commander of Serb unit 
in Gjakove, Major Slovan Stanisic, in a recent interview with 
the Serbian TV in Prishtina, acknowledged the fact that the 
border between Albania and Kosova is turned into a 
shooting-range for the Serbian forces against the Albanians. He 
said that since 1991 and up to now, the Serbian border guards 
have killed 40 Albanians and have wounded 15 others, reports 
from Prishtina say. 
  Making a detailed analysis of the tense situation created on 
the Albanian border due to the systematic killings of the 
Albanians, the Serbian major implied that the military tension 
will be escalated. He did not mention the responsible persons 
for the tense situation, but he said that only during the last 
five months 30 incidents have occurred on the border between 
Albania and Kosova. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31782 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Albania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Paper Warns Greeks Against `Hellenization' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Paper Warns Greeks Against `Hellenization' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306133894 Tirana ATA in English 1016 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306133894 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Attempts of Athens and Greek Minority Representatives for </F>
Hellenization of the South of Albania -- According to REPUBLIKA 
Newspaper" -- ATA headline] 
  [Text] Tirana, June 13 (ATA) -- REPUBLIKA newspaper 
published yesterday a letter of the initiating commission for 
creating the Dhkoema Party in Albania, democratic party of the 
Greek minority in Albania. In this letter, the commission has 
requested from the Greek Government to ready the money, radio 
stations and arms for liberation of Vorio Epirus (northern 
Epirus). 
  Referring to the letter, REPUBLIKA writes that "It is a 
witness of the Athens' attempts and representatives of the Greek 
minority in Albania for organizing the Greek forces in Albania 
in a radical form. Those who have signed the letter request 
from Athens a more careful policy and a greater attention toward 
the Hellenization of the south of Albania. They have generous 
suggestions, and requests for technical means, arms, money, 
self-organization, headquarters in Athens, radio station in 
Vorio Epirus etc. They propose Athens that in the centre of its 
propaganda with Albanians should be stressed that Italy and 
other Western states are not friend countries of Albania. 
Intending to create an isolation climate toward Albania, the 
objective is that Albania be dependent on Greece and in order 
that it might be easier for Greece to exercise its policy of 
dictation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31783 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  12 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Albania </F>
<H3> <TI>   New FRY Envoy `Known To Be Anti-Albanian' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New FRY Envoy `Known To Be Anti-Albanian' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1206172194 Tirana ATA in English 0819 GMT 12 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1206172194 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pristina, June 12 (ATA) -- The Serbian Government 
removed 4 from 5 so called "District chiefs" of the Serbian 
leadership in Kosova, Behlul Jashari, ATA correspondent in 
Pristina reported today. 
  As it was reported the changes has been proposed by the 
Socialist Party of Serbia, (for Kosova). Satisfying the desire 
of Socialists, the Belgrade government nominated Zhivorad Igic 
as ambassador of the so called Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 
Albania. For public opinion in Kosova and broader, Igic is 
known to be anti-Albanian. In regard to the nomination of Igic, 
the BUJKU newspaper of Pristina reacted on June 11 with a 
commentary entitled "Fresh Belgrade Provocation Against Tirana". 
The commentary says that "the nomination of Zhivorad Igic as 
ambassador of the self-proclaimed Yugoslavia in Tirana who is 
one of the main responsible persons for the apartheid in Kosova 
is a witness of the continuation of Belgrade's anti-Albanian 
policy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31784 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bosnia-Herzegovina </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mazowiecki Accuses Serbs of `Terror' in Gorazde </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mazowiecki Accuses Serbs of `Terror' in Gorazde </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1006203394 Warsaw PAP in English 2016 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1006203394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, June 10 -- In his latest report, U.N. human 
rights commission's envoy to former Yugoslavia Tadeusz 
Mazowiecki accused Serbs of terror during their offensive on the 
Muslim enclave of Gorazde last April. The report on human 
rights in former Yugoslavia accuses Bosnian Serbs of 
deliberately directing artillery fire on hospitals, performing 
mass executions, expelling civilians, destroying houses and 
killing livestock during the month-long attack on eastern 
Bosnia. It also quotes eyewitnesses of rapes by Serbian 
soldiers. 
  Mazowiecki wrote in his report that there were also cases of 
Muslim violation of the Serbs' rights but on a much smaller 
scale. He appealed for a more significant presence of U.N. 
peace-keeping forces in the Gorazde area which would "reduce the 
risk of further Serbian assaults." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31785 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDS Council Extends Boycott of Assembly </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDS Council Extends Boycott of Assembly </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306150494 Sofia BTA in English 1432 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306150494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 13 (BTA) -- At an extraordinary meeting 
today the National Coordinating Council of the opposition Union 
of Democratic Forces (SDS) decided to continue the boycott of 
parliament, the coalition's leader Filip Dimitrov said after the 
meeting. The National Coordinating Council believes that SDS's 
participation in parliament's work would be imperative only in 
case it discusses the future of Lyuben Berov's cabinet, the 
Electoral Act, the Judiciary Organization Act, or the state 
emblem. Under the decisions of the latest national conference 
of the coalition in May, the decisions concerning its strategy 
and tactics lie with the National Coordinating Council and the 
parliamentary SDS should conform. The latter has not been 
attending the plenary sittings for two weeks now, with the only 
exception of last week's debate on the Judiciary Organization 
Bill. 
  Mr. Dimitrov said that at today's meeting the National 
Coordinating Council found the boycott had yielded results: 
"The parliamentary majority is quite confused and decisions are 
being made without the constitutionally required quorum." The 
latter fact Mr. Dimitrov described as "disgraceful" and 
"arbitrary." 
  The National Coordinating Council also decided to develop "a 
detailed scheme to make the presence of the National 
Coordinating Council, MP's and leaders of the SDS felt 
throughout the country." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31786 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   BSP Deputy Chairmen, Spokespersons Elected </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    BSP Deputy Chairmen, Spokespersons Elected </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306075694 Sofia BTA in English 1930 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306075694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Today" -- BTA lead] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sofia, June 11 (BTA) -- A plenum of the Supreme 
Council of the formerly Communist Bulgarian Socialist Party 
[BSP], elected by the 41st Party Congress, today elected 16 BSP 
top leaders. Georgi Purvanov, Doncho Konakchiev, Krasimir 
Premyanov and Yanaki Stoilov were elected deputy chairmen. 
Nikolay Kamov and Klara Marinova were reelected spokespersons. 
The plenum approved the executive bodies of the BSP Supreme 
Council, including an Election Centre, a Commission on the 
Performance of the Executive Branch, a Commission on the 
National Problem and Interethnic Relations, etc. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31787 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu115__s94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-115-S </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> "Strategy for Poland" </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Strategy for Poland' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Strategy for Poland' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1406120094 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 8, 9 Jun 94 pp 
11-14 </F>

<F P=103> WS1406120094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of "Strategy for Poland," drafted by Grzegorz Kolodko, </F>
Polish deputy prime minister and finance minister] 
  [Text] 1. The fundamental goals of the systemic 
transformation are increasingly more accepted. While it is 
opening up to the world, Poland is continuing on its road to 
democracy, toward a social market economy, and to the free 
enterprise of ownership sectors possessing equal rights. Due to 
the enormous efforts of all people, who have been supporting the 
reformatory activities of the subsequent governments of the 
Republic, in recent years certain problems have been resolved, 
whereas others have remained unresolved--particularly mass 
unemployment and the increasing internal public debt. Moreover, 
it is a common opinion that more could have been achieved and 
the reforms could have been less painful. Two things prompt 
reservations: the distribution of the cost of the 
transformation and the method of distributing its effects, which 
are still rather limited. The people expressed their views in 
the last elections in this spirit. Therefore, it is of key 
importance for the government to lower the SOCIAL COST OF 
REFORMS, to decrease their onerousness. The phase of the 
transformation that is being carried out now is supposed to make 
the transformation socially acceptable. 
  2. The center-leftist government proposes a new approach to 
the problems society is facing. It does not lie in--as it was in 
the times of central planning--illusionary attempts to include 
in the law almost everything that is to occur in the next few 
years, in establishing new bureaucratic institutions and 
inventing implementation instruments, frequently inefficient; 
nor does it lie in passively waiting for the problems to resolve 
themselves and in making abortive attempts to persuade society 
that the situation is either already good or nothing can be 
done, as has often been done in recent years. 
  Right now we need a program that would take into account the 
trends that are found in the world economy, in science, and in 
technology, trends relating to demographical processes. It must 
anticipate the challenges of a more remote future. It must also 
reinforce the positive processes started as a result of the 
reforms carried out to date. In particular, it must accelerate 
the rate of economic growth and make it permanent. This is why 
today Poland so sorely needs a wider perspective, a STRATEGIC 
CONCEPT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, which would establish three 
priorities: rapid economic growth, systemic and macroeconomic 
stabilization, and an improvement in living standards. The 
government is submitting such a program to the people and will 
be putting it into effect in its long-term interest. It is the 
Strategy for Poland, which marks a new phase of the Polish 
transformation. 
  3. Among the fundamental values upon which the Strategy for 
Poland is based are democratic principles of the DISTRIBUTION OF 
LABOR EFFECTS. Conducive to achieving this goal is the 
formulation of new labor relationships, as well as 
efficiency-oriented and just principles of shaping wages and 
social benefits. These problems were not resolved in the past, 
and they are the source of numerous social protests, which are 
frequently justified. Setting wages and social benefits on the 
basis of the warped mechanism of indexation, despite the 
advanced stage of market reforms that has been reached, results 
in many elements of chaotic bargaining. The intervention of the 
state in the relationships of distribution in enterprises, 
mainly through imperfect fiscal instruments, are in reality 
unjust and work against the market. 
  Therefore, the government is proposing solutions that would 
create a partnershiplike system of labor relationships and wage 
regulation. Giving a new shape to distribution principles, the 
government will take into account both the opinions of people 
and the calculation of economic effectiveness. At the present 
stage of the transformation of the Polish economy, fully 
justified is a decentralized negotiatory mechanism of wage 
regulation, in which the state plays the role of an arbiter that 
settles disputes concerning the conclusion of collective labor 
agreements by representatives of employers and representatives 
of employees, and disputes concerning the observance of those 
agreements. This will offer an opportunity to resolve conflicts 
of economic interests through negotiation. Conflicts of 
interests in the economy occur basically between various social 
groups, not between them and the state or the government. 
Through the system of decentralized negotiation, they must be 
alleviated, so as not to cause political conflicts. 
  4. After a massive economic collapse in the preliminary 
stages of the transformation, QUICK ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT may now 
result in increasing GDP in 1994-97 by approximately 22 
percent--that is, approximately by an average of 5 percent per 
year (in constant prices). Conducive to speeding up the positive 
trends, which have partially been found in the economy since 
mid-1992, will be the policy of mobilizing domestic savings; a 
medium-term financial strategy serves this policy. An 
additional, complementary source of financing the growth will be 
direct foreign investment. The improvement of microeconomic 
allocation efficiency, which adds momentum to economic growth, 
will be to an increasingly greater degree the result of 
structural changes, the acceleration of which is one of the main 
challenges of the present stage of reforms. 
  First of all, the management of state wealth should be made 
more efficient, among other things, through ownership 
supervision of an institutionally isolated State Treasury and 
widely used managerial contracts and agreements concluded by 
state-owned enterprises and tax offices. In addition, ownership 
transformations should be continued, including privatization and 
the National Investment Funds. These solutions serve the purpose 
of treating all of the ownership sectors in the same way. 
  Attempts have also been made to resolve the difficult 
problem 
of property restitution through a system of compensation, in the 
form of bonds exchangeable for the components of denationalized 
wealth (partial privatization). This issue should have been 
settled a few years ago. If we want to seek a social and 
political consensus for today and for the future, we must make 
final decisions and try to answer the following question: To 
what degree are the contemporary generations prepared to pay the 
costs of reprivatization? 
  Conducive to strengthening the development trends will be 
investment in human capital, especially in the improvement of 
the qualifications of management cadres, in the changing of 
employee skills to help them adjust to the altering structure of 
the economy and to the requirements of the labor market, as well 
as in scientific research and health protection. Increasing--in 
real terms--expenditures on education and culture, even though 
they are independent goods, will also result in prodevelopment 
impulses, even though this may happen after seven to nine years. 
It is a remote time; however, it must be present in the policy 
of a responsible government. An additional springboard for 
development is housing programs and investment in the 
infrastructure, especially in the construction of a network of 
super highways, which will yield multiple effects to the economy. 
  5. MACROECONOMIC AND SYSTEMIC STABILIZATION will calm down 
the expectations of economic units--both consumers and 
manufacturers; it will also increase the degree of 
predictability of changes in the economic situation. The 
achievements of the past years concerning macroeconomic 
stabilization should be appreciated, even though this process 
could have been carried out better; this makes it even more 
urgent to complete the stabilization. 
  The first element about it is the need to reduce the rate of 
increasing public debt so that it will not exceed 60 percent of 
the GDP by 2004. Such a threshold has been set by the Maastricht 
criteria, which Poland must strive to satisfy as it is aiming at 
full integration with the European Union [EU]. A rapid increase 
in the GDP enhances opportunities in this area; however, the 
most important thing is to successively limit the budget 
deficit, which dropped from over 6 percent in 1992 to 
approximately 4 percent in 1994; by 1997 it should go down to 
the level of approximately 2 or 3 percent. Toward this end, the 
primary surplus [nadwyzka pierwotna] in the budget (calculated 
without the costs of servicing public debt) will be maintained 
and consistently increased. 
  To reduce this debt, techniques will be used to exchange 
part 
of it for shares in the privatized state wealth. This new 
approach will be conducive to the simultaneous accomplishment of 
three desired goals: reduction of public debt, intensification 
of structural changes, and an influx of new foreign investment. 
Access by foreign economic units to the program of debt 
reduction through its exchange for ownership shares in Polish 
enterprises will be determined by additional financial 
investment, coming from foreign partners, both cash investments 
and commitments to make investment in the future. Thus, the 
government, in a way that is different from methods used in the 
past, will carry out a policy of symmetrical limitation of the 
scope of state wealth on the one hand, and of public debt on the 
other. It would be disastrous to continue the policy that placed 
the previous governments, and, in actual effect, future 
generations, in a situation in which the State Treasury would 
have primarily debts after it got rid of its wealth. 
  Apart from the improvement in efficiency, as the second 
criterion for the privatization policy over the next years, the 
government envisions a striving toward selling state assets in 
line with market principles; special credits supporting Polish 
capital should be provided in this operation. 
  The second element of the policy of macroeconomic 
stabilization is the decreasing of price-induced inflation under 
conditions of full price liberalization. The financial policy is 
supposed to decrease inflation to the one-digit level by 1997. 
Reduction of inflation is not the goal but, rather, a means of 
achieving other direct and indirect goals. In particular, the 
lowering of the rate of price increases and, at the same time, a 
policy of maintaining positive--in real terms--interest rates 
will: 

  -  Encourage all units, especially households, to save money. 
Therefore, revenues derived from interest on bank deposits and 
from interest on deposits in government securities will remain 
untaxed. In addition, some capital profits, even though they 
will be taxed, just as they are in mature market economies, will 
be treated in a preferential manner, similar to the way 
dividends on capital shares in companies are treated 
now. 
  -  Stimulate additional savings, which through the credit 
system and financial markets, will be earmarked for investment, 
which will be increasing faster than the GDP. At the same time, 
thanks to the increasingly more efficient banking system and the 
developing and maturing capital market, allocation efficiency 
will be further improved. 
  -  Effects of a decrease in inflation and 
an increase in investment, reinforced by structural reforms, 
will contribute to the further growth of labor efficiency, which 
will provide momentum to the growth of the GDP and, through a 
decrease in the unitary costs of production, will enhance the 
international competitiveness of the Polish economy. 
  -  Real 
profits in the enterprise sector will increase, in both 
state-owned and privately owned enterprises, which will enhance 
their accumulation capabilities. 
  -  The costs of servicing the 
public debt will decrease--both of servicing the internal debt 
(as a result of a decrease in interest rates) and of the foreign 
debt (by slowing the rate of normal inflation). 

  The third element of macroeconomic stabilization is the 
gradual balancing of the trade balance sheet and of the current 
turnover account so that, in 1997, the balance of this account, 
which is still adverse, can reach the permanent level of 
approximately 1 percent of the GDP. For this purpose, the 
government will conduct a foreign trade policy, including the 
policy of international agreements, which will aim to stabilize 
the import-intensity [importochlonnosc] of the domestic product 
and add momentum to exports. 
  However, there is more to economic stabilization than merely 
the reorganization and balancing of public finances on the path 
of lasting and rapid economic growth. The government is 
consistently stabilizing the rules of the economic game and the 
expectations of units that are participants in this game. 
Entrepreneurs need this, and we are trying to help them--in 
order to decrease their risk. The decisions of the government 
will not come as surprises; however, it will aim to stabilize 
the expectations by means of a consistent financial policy and 
budgetary discipline. Subordinated to this, among others, is the 
medium-term financial strategy of the government, prepared in 
agreement with the National Bank of Poland, concerning monetary 
policy, and discussed with international financial 
establishments--including the IMF. 
  Decisions concerning investment and allocation will then 
have 
a foundation: It will be the predictability of the government's 
activities and stability of the conditions of conducting 
economic activity, especially in the area of financial policy. 
The fiscal system was basically established by the previous 
governments. The task of this government is to complete this 
work, to make the necessary corrections, and to complement it 
(for example, taxation of certain capital income or the system 
of taxes on immovable property); however, the government first 
of all must take the best advantage of the established system to 
finance development. All of this should considerably raise the 
level of economic security of entrepreneurs, managers, and 
employees. 
  6. IMPROVEMENT OF LIVING STANDARDS is the social core of the 
Strategy for Poland. Its successful implementation will make it 
possible to increase the average wage by almost 10 percent 
between 1994 and 1997, and to moderately enhance the purchasing 
power of the average retirement, disability, and other pensions, 
after an approximately 7-percent increase--in real terms--in 
1994. The improvement in living standards will result from the 
rapid economic growth and fairer distribution of the product. 
The distribution of revenues must guarantee everyone at least an 
elementary feeling of social security, the loss of which has 
been the main reason for social frustration in recent years. For 
this reason, the government has undertaken a difficult and 
complex reform of the social security system, which has been 
postponed for several years. The implementation of the plans in 
the area of economic growth offers a chance to carry out this 
reform as effectively and painlessly as possible. Along with 
efforts to transform labor relationships and principles of 
shaping remuneration, these are undertakings of a systemic 
dimension, also aimed at stabilizing expectations. Employees 
need them to stop the forces, independent of them, which decide 
their future. Employees want to see the state establish the 
limits of social regression wherever it still is; they want 
clear conditions and prospects for improving the situation in 
the future. These values will be included in the Charter of 
Social Guarantees, which is being prepared. 
  A program of actively combating unemployment has been 
undertaken; unemployment should drop from the current level of 
almost 16 percent to less than 14 percent by the end of 1997. We 
are slowly entering a phase in which new, often internationally 
competitive jobs will be established more rapidly than the 
liquidation rate of old jobs. This process is still painful to 
people, and it varies with professional milieus. Conducive to 
the improvement of living standards is also the development of 
housing and infrastructure, countering the regional degradation, 
protecting the environment, and increasing the investment in 
human capital. 
  7. In the long run, the gauge of the economic success of the 
Polish people and the source of its cultural progress is 
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS OF THE ECONOMY. It also has 
political implications, which serve the purpose of strengthening 
Poland's place in the contemporary world. The position of the 
consumer and the manufacturer is dependent on this 
competitiveness, even though not everyone can see this relation. 
In this context, production for export--as one of the main 
levers that give momentum to the economy and as a source of 
financing imports expenditures and of efficient servicing of the 
foreign debt--will be given systemic preferences, especially 
financial ones. In the next few years, the rate of exports 
growth will be almost 50 percent higher than the growth rate of 
the domestic product. 
  One of the instruments of the policy that improves the 
competitiveness of Polish manufacturers on the domestic market 
in the medium term and that is conducive to the improvement of 
the position of the Polish industries on world markets in the 
long term will be the increasing inflow of foreign capital, 
especially the inflow of private direct investment. Stable and 
favorable conditions are being created for these investments, 
which, from a strategic point of view, is of greater importance 
than short-term fiscal licenses. Also, on this level, the 
principle of granting equal rights to sectors will be used. 
  8. Poland is and has always been part of Europe. It is only 
natural, therefore, for it to strive toward RAPID INTEGRATION 
WITH THE EU. However, despite the financial support Poland has 
been given, the integration experiences of the past three years 
have not been totally satisfactory. The association treaty 
recognized the need for asymmetry in the mutual liberalization 
of trade due to the fact that we had to face more difficult 
tasks in the area of restructurization of our economy. However, 
it was not Poland but the EU that went from a deficit to a 
surplus, especially in trade in agricultural products and 
processed food. 
  Polish manufacturers often have to deal with dishonest 
competition of subsidized West European goods on both the 
domestic and the international market. The historic decision 
made in Copenhagen in June 1993 accepting the future membership 
of Poland and other associated states in the EU has not yet been 
backed by any major steps that would encourage this integration 
and openness of those markets to our exports. The time is 
drawing near when our striving for participation in the EU must 
meet with a greater openness of the markets of the EU states. As 
for ourselves, we are intensifying adjustment activities, 
especially in agriculture. 
  9. REFORM OF THE ECONOMIC CENTER is a necessary condition 
from the standpoint of efficiency in the implementation of the 
Strategy for Poland. It is a program constructed from the 
standpoint of problems and functionality, not from the 
standpoint of the ministries. The decisionmaking center should 
be subordinated to the main policy of the government. The 
present configuration of the ministries, central offices, and 
agencies does not satisfy this requirement. Therefore, the 
economic center will soon be reorganized; this reorganization 
will lie, among others, in the establishment of a strong, 
institutionally isolated State Treasury, Ministry of Economy, 
and a Ministry of International Economic Integration. This will 
functionally strengthen and at the same time slim down the 
economic center by making it possible to take better advantage 
of the cadres and by making the steering of the economic 
processes more efficient. The management of these processes will 
be successively decentralized. 
  Ten key programs are an integral part of the Strategy for 
Poland. They are of a problem-functional nature. In addition, 
the government's packet includes a set of sector and ministerial 
programs, as well as economic and social policies, for the 
implementation of which appropriate ministries are responsible. 
The Strategy for Poland imposes certain defined tasks on the 
economic ministries and focuses on the key problems as well as 
on the macroeconomic and macrosocial approach. The 
implementation of these ambitious and difficult tasks will not 
only prevent us from undoing the achievements of the past years, 
but will also limit or eliminate the failures of those periods. 
  First of all, however, it will give momentum to the Polish 
economy and will provide a reward for the effects of the hard 
work that will have to be done by all of us, for which the 
government is supposed to create the proper conditions. This is 
why the efforts of the previous governments to decrease the 
participation of the state in the state's economy and to carry 
out the processes of demonopolization and deregulation of the 
economy will be continued. 
  10. Historical experience of those countries that have 
already achieved economic successes clearly indicates that the 
source of success has always been the hard work of society and a 
wise policy of the governing elites. Strategy for Poland defines 
the framework within which the policy in the present stage of 
the historic process of the transformation of the Polish economy 
and society is being carried out. A necessary condition to put 
it into effect, to give it momentum, and to create the right 
conditions for social and economic development in a more remote 
future--also under next democratically elected governments--is 
PEACE AND QUIET. Therefore, the government is continuing efforts 
to strengthen external and internal security and to subordinate 
foreign policy to the interests of the Polish state. 
  What is also needed is a lasting social peace. The 
government 
cannot work creatively under conditions of instability and 
uncertainty of expectations. After some time, the very results 
of the Strategy for Poland will ensure such a peace to an 
ever-greater degree. Today, however, we also need the goodwill 
of all proreform forces. They attract an immense amount of 
social energy. It must be focused on a creative future-oriented 
effort. Agreement must be reached on the Strategy for Poland 
because our country is worth it. 
<H5>  THE KEY PROGRAMS </H5>
  I. Partnershiplike labor relations and negotiation mechanism 
of wage regulation. 
  II. Reform of the social security system. 
  III. Combating unemployment. 
  IV. Development of rural areas. 
  V. Investment in human capital. 
  VI. Managing state wealth and ownership-transformation 
processes. 
  VII. Medium-term financial strategy. 
  VIII. Development and reform of the financial sector. 
  IX. Security of economic transactions and absorption of the 
"gray market." 
  X. International competitiveness of the Polish economy. 
<H5>  * * * </H5>
  I. PARTNERSHIPLIKE LABOR RELATIONSAND NEGOTIATION 
MECHANISMOF WAGE REGULATION 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The incoherency and defects of present solutions concerning 
labor relations can be seen first of all in the increasing 
number of collective bargaining cases and the multiple aspects 
of negotiations held in various organizational configurations, 
frequently without any legal authority. Even if they result in 
some agreements, they most often do not last long. Equally 
ineffective are instruments used by the state in the sector of 
public enterprises and in the budget sphere--the centralized 
and, in fact, administrative instruments of wage regulation, a 
subject of chaotic bargaining. In the sector of privately owned 
companies, in turn, the conditions of work and wages are 
frequently unilaterally imposed by the employer, to the 
detriment of employees and the budget. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  Political nature of disputes and conflicts over wages, 
organizational chaos and chaos concerning powers, which can be 
seen in the course of such conflicts, increasingly smaller 
social acceptance of the growing wage gaps--all of this leads to 
social frustration and political destabilization. As a result, 
the government has decided to take on the following far-reaching 
goals. These goals go beyond the near future; they require time, 
consistency, and patience from all of the parties of the labor 
relationships: 
  1. Creation of modern labor relations. 
  2. Establishment of a mechanism for wage regulation that is 
socially and economically effective and that, therefore, is 
decentralized and based on negotiation. 
  3. Achievement of a situation in which the state plays the 
role of an arbiter that settles disputes concerning the 
conclusion of collective labor agreements by representatives of 
employers and employees, and concerning the observance of those 
agreements. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  The government will take complex measures that will make it 
impossible to shape labor and wage policy in the state through 
short-term decisions, which are a reaction to chaotic political 
impulses. The most important instruments in this area are: 
  1. Amendment of the Labor Code, which makes it possible to: 
  --Conclude collective labor agreements on the level of the 
enterprise, branch, and the branch-enterprise. Regulations will 
determine the substantive scope of the agreements, and parties 
will be entitled to conclude them; the regulations will also 
specify the clause of social peace, which will not allow 
collective bargaining to start when the agreement is in force. 
  --Specify the criteria and principles of assessing the 
representativeness of trade unions and organizations of 
employees on the branch and regional level. 
  --Abandon variations of the legal regulation of labor 
relations--variations regarding the ownership sector. 
  --Impose on the employer the duty of notifying the employee 
about the reason for an intended layoff; the employee should be 
guaranteed the right to submit reservations. 
  --Impose on employers who take over enterprises (in part or 
in whole) the duty of maintaining, for a specified period of 
time, the rights the employees of the taken-over enterprise have 
acquired in the enterprise so far. 
  --Adjust the leave law to the requirements specified in 
Convention 132 of the International Labor Organization (among 
others, to increase the minimum number of leave hours, to 
establish legal guarantees making it possible to go on leave 
every year, to see to it that the leave regulations no longer 
fulfill a disciplinary function). 
  --Extend the privileges of employees, who are the only 
people 
taking care of small children, to male employees as well. 
  --Stop treating the formal discipline of work as an element 
of legal regulation of labor relations and eliminate the norms 
of a restrictive nature from the Labor Code. 
  --Prohibit an employee from conducting activity counter to 
the interests of the employer during the period of employment 
and within a year following it. 
  2. Establishment of enterprise councils as above-union 
employees' organs entitled to conclude collective agreements; 
the councils would be elected in democratic elections, in all 
enterprises--both public and private--that employ more than 20 
persons. 
  3. Equipment of judicial organs with the right to settle 
disputes related to the conclusion of collective agreements 
(among others, as far as the branch and territorial scope of the 
effectiveness of agreements is concerned) and with an effective 
instrument enabling them to impose sanctions on the parties of 
the collective labor relationships. 
  4. Change in the status of state-owned enterprises, which is 
aimed at making it possible for their management to act in the 
role of an autonomous party to the labor relationship. 
  5. Amendment of a packet of laws: on trade unions, on 
employer organizations, and on resolving collective bargaining 
cases, as well as the adoption of such an interpretation of them 
that could guarantee a balance to the parties of the labor 
relationship. 
  6. The government supports the idea of strengthening the 
economic self-government and other forms of professional 
self-government; it will initiate the introduction of legal 
solutions that will prevent these organizations from turning 
into oligarchical interest groups, capable of imposing their 
will on the public administration at the cost of other social 
groups, especially consumers. Therefore, because control and the 
effectiveness of the influence on decisionmaking must be ensured: 
  --All units, the interests of which may be violated by the 
resolutions of the organs of the economic self-government, will 
be given the right to file lawsuits against these resolutions. 
  --Obligatory membership in the organizations of the 
occupational self-government will be abolished. 
  7. The status of the Trilateral Commission for Socioeconomic 
Affairs, which acts at the central level, will be regulated by a 
legal act. Apart from opinion-issuing powers in such areas as, 
for example, reform of the pension system or the mechanism of 
wage regulation in the budget sector, the commission will also 
be equipped with the right to launch a legislative initiative 
the content of which would bind both parties--that is, they 
would be obliged to support this initiative in parliament. This 
concerns issues that must be resolved at the central level, 
which are well-defined and focus the activities of 
well-organized and isolated interest groups. 
  Introduction of the above-mentioned solutions that 
contribute 
to the creation of a new labor system is an urgent matter that 
will be finally decided as early as in 1994. However, the actual 
implementation of these solutions will require extensive 
training and educational activities, which will be implemented 
jointly with trade unions and employer organizations. The 
financing of these undertakings will be ensured primarily by 
resources derived from foreign assistance. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. The barriers and possibilities of economic development, 
especially the requirements of international competitiveness. 
  2. Lack of progress in restructuring the economy 
(particularly in the ownership, organizational, substantive, 
technological, and regional area) is an increasingly more 
serious source of inflation. Therefore, activities related to 
the establishment of partnershiplike labor relations and a 
negotiation mechanism of wage regulation are aimed at resolving 
the key problem of economic development right 
now--restructuring, especially industrial and regional 
restructuring. If these efforts were not made or if incorrect 
aims were set, the transformation that is under way might 
regress, which would be independent of the macroeconomic policy 
that is being carried out. 
  3. The need to employ extraordinary administrative measures 
of wage control resulting from the continuation of uncoordinated 
and incoherent activities and decisions concerning wages. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  A drop in the number of working days lost by the economy as 
a 
result of strike activities. 
  II. REFORM OF THESOCIAL INSURANCE SYSTEM 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The implementation of the strategic intentions of the 
government--economic growth, leading to an improvement in the 
living standards of citizens--is not possible without 
appropriate transformations in the social arena. Right now the 
burden placed on the budget and the inefficiency of the existing 
system may soon cause public finances to collapse, which would 
undo the reform efforts that have been made so far. The existing 
system does not allow for the exercise of effective controls 
over the method of subscription collection and does not 
guarantee appropriate receipts in the budget; moreover, it is 
frequently an element of political bargaining. From the point of 
view of citizens, the system is inefficient and unfair, as 
well--very often it is those who need help the most who do not 
receive appropriate assistance, and, instead, people who should 
not take advantage of these benefits actually get them. 
  A complex reform of the social insurance system, understood 
as social insurance, health protection, and unemployment 
protection, is thus not a matter of choice but an absolute 
necessity. In the long run, there is no alternative here; 
however, there is a historical necessity, resulting mainly from: 

  -  A systematic decrease in the relation of the people paying 
subscriptions to the existing insurance system to the number of 
people taking advantage of the benefits. According to forecasts, 
this trend will be maintained in the coming years, as well, when 
the processes of ending the professional activity of generations 
of the postwar demographic explosion coincide with the 
professional activation of the generations of the population 
slowdown of the second half of the 1980's and the beginning of 
the 1990's. 
  -  An increase in the subscription level from 15.5 
percent (1970's) up to 48 percent of the remuneration; in 
addition, these payments should be already 9-percent higher to 
provide money for the expenditure on employee retirement 
pensions and other pensions--so that this additional money would 
not have to be provided to the Social Insurance Fund [FUS] by 
the budget. 
  -  Lack of a possibility for the budget to bear the 
present burden related to the financing of the budget 
sphere. 
  -  The decreasing of the health condition of the citizens. 

  The present government considers the systemic resolution of 
the issue of social insurance to be one of the priorities of its 
activities. Taking as much advantage as possible of the 
conclusions resulting from the work conducted by previous 
cabinets, the government is preparing a complex concept of 
reforms in this sphere; preparations are under way to implement 
it. There is an awareness, however, that it may take from 10 to 
20 years to complete the entire process of reforms. 
Simultaneously, steps are being taken to enhance the efficiency 
of the existing system so that the danger of an overall collapse 
in the social sphere will be avoided and the sphere will be 
gradually adjusted to the transformation requirements. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  1. Consolidating the social insurance system, understood as 
the evaluation of the effectiveness of the benefits from the 
standpoint of social policy, and, in well-founded cases (for 
example, subtracting the subscription from the gross salary), 
changing their character. 
  2. Decreasing the system's tendency to create conflicts, 
through an improvement in its clarity (among others, concerning 
the principles of financing and the share of the budget in 
expenditures) and individualizing the accounts of the individual 
participants of the system (the state of the account is the sum 
of accumulated subscriptions and benefits), as well as 
introducing retirement funds. 
  3. Improving the overall effectiveness of the functioning of 
the system (self-financing, rationalizing the level and scope of 
benefits, enhancing the quality of the services in the sphere of 
health protection). 
  4. Gradually decreasing the insurance subscription 
(currently 
49 percent, along with the Labor Fund) down to a level 
comparable to the world level (approximately 25 percent). 
  5. Decreasing the scale of involvement in the state budget. 
  The achievement of these goals calls for an overall concept 
of reform of the social insurance system. The government has 
such a concept and will begin implementing it; in doing so, it 
will take into account the opinions of the people--that is, it 
will see to it that measures going against the feeling of 
security of the people, which is rather weak already, are not 
taken. 
  Following are the main elements of the concept of the social 
insurance system reforms: 
  1. Complexity--that is, introduction of changes in five 
areas 
of the system: 
  --Pension insurance. 
  --Sickness benefits. 
  --Health insurance. 
  --Insurance for accidents at work and occupational diseases. 
  --Unemployment insurance. 
  2. Gradualness of the changes in the system--from a 
redistribution (repartition) system, based on the financing of 
benefits from current payments and contributions from the 
budget, to an insurance system (with elements of 
redistribution), whose structure and financing will be based on 
principles determining the activity of insurance companies 
(following the model of most such systems that exist in the 
world), particularly as regards the individually paid 
subscriptions and individually paid benefits. As a result, the 
level and scope of the benefits will vary with the size of 
subscriptions paid and with the period of their 
payment--benefits exceeding the period guaranteed in the general 
insurance will be included in the nonmandatory insurance. 
  3. Achieving a situation in which the social insurance 
system 
includes the following mutually complementing subsystems: 
  --A fundamental, state-guaranteed subsystem of social 
insurance, paid jointly by employers and employees, or, in some 
cases, by the state; the size of the benefits in this subsystem 
will depend on the size of the subscriptions and the period over 
which they are paid. 
  --A fund subsystem, based on individual or group savings, on 
participation in retirement pension funds and commercial 
insurance, which is functioning on the market (services for the 
latter are provided by banking and semibanking establishments, 
as well as by commercial insurance companies). 
  --A health insurance subsystem. 
  --An unemployment insurance subsystem, subject to the 
"Subject of the policy of social insurance." 
  A fundamental reduction in the degree of the system's 
dependence on the central budget. The intention is to finally 
eliminate most of the subsidies that have been extended so far 
and replace them with the principle of linking the size of the 
benefit strictly and individually to the size of the burdens 
borne earlier by the citizen and the employer. 
  Maintenance of the budget as an indispensable and important 
source of additional financing of some of the costs of the 
functioning of the social sector (for example, the construction 
and maintenance of the infrastructure for health protection, 
preventive care, social assistance for the poorest groups of 
society, intervention activities in the sphere of unemployment). 
Until the final version of the system is fully mature, it will 
function mostly at the level of the fundamental system. 
  In the transitional period, when a mixed system is 
functioning, all of the hitherto benefits and privileges 
obtained by pensioners will be maintained. 
  Emergence of retirement pension funds and insurance 
companies, as well as a gradual increase in their role in the 
financing of benefits under strict control by the state, 
especially in the area of investing their resources, 
particularly in the conditions of the competition of retirement 
funds. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  Between 1994 and 1997, the government will take the 
following 
steps, leading to the implementation of the outlined concept: 
  1. The law on the financing and the organization of social 
insurance, as well as the law on the Social Security Agency 
[ZUS], will be changed. 
  2. The "subject of the social insurance policy" will be 
established; it will deal with the individual calculation of 
subscriptions and benefits; it will also exercise supervision 
over social insurance establishments. 
  3. There will be an individualization of the accounts of the 
individual participants in the system. 
  4. Principles of paying subscriptions by employers and 
employees will be introduced; they will make it possible for any 
interested party to control the state of the account, as a 
result of which privately owned and state-owned enterprises will 
be more disciplined in paying their subscriptions. This, in 
turn, will increase budget receipts. 
  5. Identification cards for all citizens will be introduced, 
on the basis of which events influencing the state of the 
account of every insured person will be registered. 
  6. Legal, institutional, and organizational framework for 
the 
functioning of retirement funds and insurance companies will be 
created. 
  7. The present tax system will be modified in such a way as 
to make it possible for employees and employers to include their 
insurance subscriptions in the costs of obtaining incomes. 
  8. Steps will also be taken to establish order in the 
present 
system and to enhance its clarity by: 
  --Eliminating undue benefits from the portfolio. 
  --Controlling and rigorously executing payments, as well as 
decreasing the amount of overdue payments and, in effect, 
increasing the number of those who pay their subscriptions (for 
example, noncash settlements or inclusion of the subscription in 
the first installment [transza] of the tax). 
  --Decreasing the number of those who are entitled to 
retirement benefits by prolonging the required employment 
period, equating the retirement ages of men and women, and 
sharpening the principles of obtaining earlier retirement rights. 
  --Complementing the regulations concerning the possibility 
of 
suspending benefits if a certain income level is reached in the 
case of people who continue (take on) work after obtaining 
retirement rights. 
  --Changing the principles of the valorization of pensions 
(departing from indexation in relation to wage movements in 
favor of adjustments to price changes). 
  --Decreasing the number of people receiving invalid pensions 
by making painstaking diagnoses of health conditions, placing 
emphasis on rehabilitation before a pension is granted, 
sharpening the criteria for granting invalid rights (especially 
for people who have maintained the ability to work, for example; 
liquidation of the third invalid group; change in the judicial 
decisions concerning invalids--a bill that is being prepared by 
ZUS), and by undertaking active preventive-rehabilitative 
activities aimed at improving health conditions and restoring 
professional activity. 
  --Excluding from FUS the benefits for which subscriptions 
are 
not paid and benefits of social character. 
  --Regulating the payments of peasants to KRUS [expansion 
unknown]. 
  --Uniforming the principles of paying sickness and maternity 
benefits in all sectors of the economy. 
  --Limiting the antimotivational character and enhancing the 
effectiveness of the solutions in the sphere of social 
protection for the unemployed, including pressure on control 
over access to benefits and giving a motivational character to 
their scope, form, and size. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. Lack of the will or of the political possibilities to 
implement the above-outlined changes. 
  2. Blunting of the crux of reforms through compromises, 
stopgap measures, and substitute solutions. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  Decrease in the share of the expenditure on social insurance 
in the expenditures of the budget. 
  III. COUNTERACTING UNEMPLOYMENT 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The mass unemployment in Poland affects 3 million people, 
and 
the unemployment rate amounts to almost 16 percent, which is one 
of the highest rates in Europe. A characteristic feature of 
Polish unemployment is its considerable regional variation. In 
the areas of some large agglomerations, the unemployment rate 
ranges from 5 to 8 percent, whereas, in regions of deep economic 
depression, it reaches as much as 40 percent of the total number 
of occupationally active people. 
  Other important characteristics of Polish unemployment 
include a high percentage of young people (approximately 35 
percent), as well as the percentage of people chronically 
unemployed (approximately 45 percent of people do not have a job 
for over 12 months). Over 50 percent of the registered 
unemployed lost the right to unemployment benefits, along with 
the rights that are granted to employed people, including health 
insurance benefits. There is a real danger that unemployment may 
enter a chronic state. 
  The size and characteristics of unemployment place this 
phenomenon among the most important and the most difficult 
economic, political, and social problems. In addition, it is a 
new threat and not known to two successive generations of Poles. 
Therefore, there are neither individual nor collective 
experiences in dealing with unemployment; nor is there a network 
of social organizations that would be supported by an efficient 
public administration and the goal of which would be to combat 
unemployment. 
  The evaluation of the medium-term prospects for economic 
development suggests that, over the next few years, even if we 
achieve a high, over-10-percent rate of economic growth, we 
cannot expect a considerable drop in the unemployment level, 
mostly because of: 

  -  A defective structure of employment that is not adjusted 
to the requirements of a modern market economy. 
  -  Excessive 
employment in many public enterprises, which, in order to 
effectively compete with others, must be modernized, which 
entails the need to lay off large numbers of redundant 
employees. 
  -  A considerable demographical increase in the amount 
of labor force. 

<H5>  II. THE AIMS </H5>
  The approach to the problem of unemployment is dramatically 
changed. The government will go over from a passive policy, 
consisting mainly of providing social protection, to an active 
policy, the intention of which is stimulating the process of 
creating new jobs as well as protecting public finances. 
  Therefore, the government has set the following goals: 
  1. Successively lowering the unemployment rate, especially 
between 1995-97. 
  2. Combating chronic unemployment and the afflictions 
accompanying it. 
  3. Decreasing the unemployment scale among young people. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  To achieve these goals, measures are being taken to: 
  1. Strengthen the proinvestment policy conducive to creating 
new jobs. 
  2. Link more closely the modernization and restructuring 
programs to the situation in the labor market. 
  3. Use a variety of active methods to stimulate employment, 
particularly in regions characterized by a high unemployment 
rate, including resources that enhance the mobility of employees 
and unemployed people. 
  4. Introduce changes in the system of social protection of 
the unemployed; changes should both strengthen this protection 
and limit the antimotivational effects of the present solutions. 
  Large-scale investment undertakings related to the 
modernization of the technical infrastructure of the country and 
initiated by the government will be conducive to increasing the 
demand for work. These investments will concern, among others: 
  1. Modernization of the road network and the construction of 
super highways. 
  2. Development of telecommunications. 
  3. Modernization of the railroads. 
  4. Development of the gas supply system. 
  Therefore, detailed programs are being prepared and 
implemented, such as the governmental program for the 
construction of fast roads and superhighways, modernization of 
the railroads, and development of telecommunications and a gas 
supply system. 
  A number of sector-specific restructuring programs are now 
in 
the advanced stages. Setting these programs in motion and 
implementing them will allow for the economic and social 
consequences of changes in the demand for labor. A considerable 
portion of the resources earmarked for these programs will be 
used to change the qualifications and skills of laid-off 
employees and for their occupational activation. 
  A chance to limit unemployment and minimize its social 
consequences will be offered by the establishment of special 
economic zones on the basis of enterprises rich in technical 
infrastructure, the production property of which is not fully 
utilized, and that have highly qualified cadres at their 
disposal. Work is under way to implement such a program in 
Mielec. 
  One of the evaluation criteria of privatization undertakings 
is the protection of jobs. This requires that contacts [as 
published] take into account not only clauses concerning the 
level of guaranteed employment but also investment commitments, 
the implementation of which will, in the long run, allow the 
maintenance of existing workplaces and the creation of new ones. 
  The policy of counteracting unemployment will be implemented 
to a considerable degree at the regional level; however, the 
government will sharpen the criteria of including local labor 
markets in the group where special activities are conducted. In 
those areas, the instruments that are supposed to result in an 
increase in employment will be reinforced and concentrated. They 
will consist, among others, in the following: 
  1. Permission for the quicker amortization of fixed assets. 
  2. Tax allowances for training employees and apprentices by 
individuals conducting economic activity. 
  3. An increase in the employment limit that does not cause 
the loss of rights to pay taxes in the form of the tax charter. 
  4. Periodic tax allowances for investment expenditures. 
  5. Credit guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
  6. The sending of unemployment benefits directly to the 
employers who employ them. 
  7. Employment of young people who have finished their 
education in occupations that are locally useful. 
  8. A decreasing of work hours in order to increase the 
number 
of employed people (in close cooperation with trade unions). 
  Because of regional variations in the conditions and sources 
of high unemployment, there is a need to apply a packet of 
solutions adjusted to the unique situation of the various 
endangered areas. Such packets (the purpose of which, for 
example, is to stimulate economic growth in regions 
characterized by a collapse in other-than-agricultural sectors 
of the economy, domination of nationalized agriculture, or 
domination of traditional or obsolete industries) will be the 
basic instrument for the state's regional policy. 
  Programs, the purpose of which is to educate people or 
change 
their qualifications, will first of all contribute to an 
increase in the mobility of unemployed people; that is, they 
will contribute to the shortening of the period of occupational 
inactivity. 
  1. The government will want closer cooperation between 
employers' organizations, occupational training establishments, 
and unemployment offices. Especially desirable are training 
courses organized at the request of employers, the purpose of 
which is to prevent the layoffs of employees. Changes in the 
regulations make it possible to subsidize such activities with 
the resources of the Labor Fund. 
  2. Changes in the structure of education will be 
intensified. 
As a result, the share of young people educated in high schools 
and universities will increase, whereas the share of vocational 
schools will decrease. 
  Changes in the system of social protection for the 
unemployed 
will aim to increase the effectiveness of social protection and 
decrease its antimotivational effects. The following measures 
will be taken: 
  1. The modification of the principles of providing benefits; 
it will to a greater degree take into account the variation of 
the situations at local labor markets, as well as the material 
situation of the family of an unemployed person. The prolonging 
of the period over which the benefit is received in areas 
particularly threatened by unemployment will be accompanied by a 
shortening of this period in areas where the situation in the 
labor market is relatively good. 
  2. A change in the conditions of providing benefits and 
registering the unemployed. Unemployed people who refuse to 
accept an offered job or training will be denied the right to 
benefits, either permanently or over a period of time. 
  3. The introduction of separate unemployment insurance and 
the establishment of a special insurance fund made up of the 
subscriptions of employers and employees, earmarked exclusively 
for unemployment benefits. The establishment of unemployment 
insurance will disburden the state from financing unemployment 
benefits and will make it possible to increase the amount of 
money that can be allocated for active stimulation of 
employment. The introduction of this insurance-related form of 
financing unemployment benefits will demand that the 
subscription be set at the level of 7-7.5 percent of the wage 
fund (with the present scale of unemployment). This issue will 
be resolved together with the reform of the entire sphere of 
social insurance. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. Lack of sufficient progress in the restructuring of the 
economy. 
  2. Populist trends and pressure on excessive wage increases. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  A drop in the unemployment rate. 
  IV. DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL AREAS 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The Polish agricultural sector entered a period of 
transformation with labor efficiency and the effectiveness of 
invested money that are lower than in the developed countries of 
West Europe. The market economy has placed it in a different 
situation: uncertainty over selling prices, the need to look for 
buyers of its products, a considerable decrease in the demand 
for food, as well as increasing prices for machines, expensive 
credits, and high unemployment. This is accompanied by 
old-fashioned structures, including, among others, an 
ineffective system of market establishments. 
  The conviction that the market relations will themselves 
force structural transformations in line with the model--the 
weaker farms will leave the market, the stronger ones will 
produce more efficiently--proved false. The market merely 
strongly diversified the situation of farms regarding the 
possibility of the reproduction of property and the farms' links 
to the market. There is an increasingly clear division of 
agricultural farms into three categories: 

  -  Development-oriented farms, highly efficient, economically 
strong, farms that supply more than 50 percent of food to the 
market. 
  -  Stagnation farms, some of which have a chance, offered 
by the interventionist policy of the state, to modernize and 
move up to the first category (some link agriculture to another 
profession). 
  -  Poor farms, which are withdrawing from the market, 
which are not able to even recreate the used fixed assets and 
guarantee a decent income for the family of the owner. Some of 
them must find other sources of income, related to work outside 
the agricultural sector; others will have to be supported 
socially (the problem of old people). 

  The policy of the state will then have to speed up the 
positive trends that strengthen structural changes in 
agriculture and rural areas. Such trends appeared in the period 
of the transformation and include: rationalization of investment 
and increasing its effectiveness, developing the technical 
infrastructure of rural areas, and giving momentum to foreign 
trade. Agricultural production between 1989 and 1993 decreased 
to a lesser degree than in the other branches of the national 
economy. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  1. A renewal of rural areas--a multifunction development of 
rural areas. Creating new opportunities in rural 
areas--modernization and improvement in the structure of 
agriculture--establishing new jobs in the processing industry, 
other industries, services, trade, in branches associated with 
agriculture, and with advantages that the countryside has to 
offer. 
  2. Orientation of changes taking place in agriculture, 
toward 
future processes that are a result of current changes in the 
EU's agricultural policies and in world trade, without 
constantly looking back or following the model of processes that 
took place several decades ago in other countries and under 
different conditions. 
  3. Development of the socioeconomic infrastructure, the 
cooperative movement, agricultural chambers, a system of stock 
markets. Establishing telephone networks, building new roads, 
and other measures that improve the quality of life in rural 
areas. Agricultural research and counseling. 
  4. Utilizing rural areas' natural advantages. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  Food-management development will be gradually heading in the 
direction of an increased role of food processing and 
distribution. This will be accompanied by strengthening the 
economically strong farms, demonstrating itself in land 
concentration, decreasing the number of farms, and a fall in the 
number of people employed in agriculture. The following are the 
necessary preconditions for these processes to occur and, at the 
same time, a means for stimulating the processes: 
  1. Activation of extra-agricultural activities (changes in 
agriculture may take place mainly through changes in the 
extra-agricultural sector). 
  2. Interventionism that stresses a program of state 
assistance for agriculture for the long term rather than 
immediately. State interventionism will take the form of 
addressed assistance [adresowana pomoc], and it will be most 
active in two areas: 
  --Speeding up structural changes in agriculture 
(modernization). 
  --Establishing new nonagricultural jobs in rural areas 
(rural 
areas' multifunctionality). 
  In the programs establishing new jobs in rural areas, one 
will consider that development of agriculture, food processing, 
services for the rural population, and of alternative income 
sources (for example agrotourism) may not absorb the labor 
surpluses existing in rural areas. Depending on the age 
structure, part of the rural population will be covered by 
various types of education and training or by social assistance. 
  The government will be limiting--gradually but 
persistently--those types of intervention that only preserve the 
inefficient production system or those that preserve old 
structures and delay the process of necessary changes by taking 
upon themselves functions of a social nature. 
  3. Financing agricultural development will be based on: 
  --Farmers' own means. 
  --Commercial credits. 
  --Addressed credits [adresowane kredyty] to be granted on 
the 
basis of preferential principles. 
  --Financial assistance coming from the state, interlinked to 
assistance programs by international institutions and 
organizations. 
  4. Elaborating detailed assistance programs addressed at 
specific types of agricultural farms. In the programs, 
conditions will be defined that will have to be met by farmers 
and their farms in order to be able to use the assistance. 
Widespread availability of so-called cheap agricultural credits 
will be gradually restricted. As a future goal, these credits 
will cover those agricultural farms that, with the state's 
assistance, will go through the transformation process faster 
and will be able to repay the credits while modernizing their 
infrastructure and production processes. 
  5. Financial assistance for agricultural development and 
entrepreneurship in rural areas, especially in the following 
fields: biological progress; agricultural and marketing 
counseling; investments causing a drop in production costs, 
quality improvements, the limiting of food waste, reorientation 
and adaptation of the agricultural sector to market 
requirements, the development of rural and agricultural market 
infrastructures, the development of education and different ways 
of acquiring knowledge that serve to reorient farmers toward 
nonagricultural occupations or that serve to prepare them for an 
occupation. 
  6. Appropriate economic and financial policies that would 
support the program for alleviating unemployment in rural areas 
and that would support local self-government economic 
undertakings and initiatives in that regard. 
  7. Development of vertical integration, especially based on 
its simpler form--that is to say, government-farmers contracts 
for supplying agricultural products [kontraktacja]. This is an 
alternative to imposing central limitations on production. 
History knows no other ways to develop rural areas and 
agriculture but through vertical integration, meaning 
integration of nonagricultural capital with expenditure of 
agricultural work, thus making biological and technical 
progress, and, most importantly, lowering the cost of food 
production and distribution in the entire food chain (beginning 
with the farmer and ending with retail trade). 
  8. Development of all types of counseling that will deal 
with 
popularizing progress, information, and teaching occupational 
skills. 
  9. Government attention to the stability of economic 
policies, especially ones that would encourage people to invest 
in rural areas (a system of tax breaks and other facilitations.) 
  10. Intensification of measures for the sake of regional 
development. The state will take a favorable position on 
decentralization of decisionmaking, and it will speed up the 
transfer of more powers to self-governments than they have 
enjoyed thus far. The concept of multifunctional development of 
rural areas has been tested in West European countries. In 
Poland, it requires initiating a new philosophy of development. 
Its essence can be described as each region finding its own way 
to utilize the region's own local conditions in the best way 
possible and as the necessary reforms stimulating activities by 
rural self-governments. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. Attempts at either conserving the existing agricultural 
structure or making sudden changes. 
  2. A mechanical surrounding of agriculture with protective 
barriers against outside competition, or leaving agriculture 
outside the state's area of responsibility regarding changes 
taking place in agriculture. 
  3. Lack of harmonization of reforms taking place in cities 
with those taking place in rural areas. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  An increase in the role of incomes deriving from 
nonagricultural activities, in overall incomes of the rural 
population. 
  V. INVESTING IN HUMAN CAPITAL 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  An increased significance of investing in man--in his 
knowledge, skills, culture, and environment--is a trait 
characteristic of development of the world's leading countries. 
It constitutes one of the distinguishing marks and a fundamental 
factor of the development of modern economy. Through investments 
in man, a speedy departure from traditional ways of production 
takes place, based on using raw materials, for the sake of 
branches using primarily human skills, knowledge, and so forth. 
These modern branches produce goods of a high degree of 
processability and also services associated with generating, 
processing, and supplying information, as well as meeting 
cultural needs. While, in countries of developed market 
economies, expenditures for investing in man have been rising 
dynamically for several decades (in both public and private 
sectors), in Poland the opposite has been taking place for 
years. In those countries, the participation of expenditures for 
education reaches 8 percent of the national product, while, in 
Poland, it is maintained with great difficulty at a level of 
slightly more than 4 percent. As a result, when it comes to the 
indicator of education of the youth at the high school and 
higher levels, we are one of the last on the list in Europe. 
  The maintaining for many years of low expenditures in 
education and science constitutes today a fundamental barrier to 
restructuring the Polish economy and a factor weakening our 
international competitiveness. Especially now, at the stage of 
overcoming the effects of a deep transformation recession, the 
choice between investing directly in production activity and 
investing in human capital is difficult. But we cannot be 
shortsighted; even though investments in human capital bring 
results only over the long run (on average, after seven to nine 
years), to abandon them now would bring negative results much 
sooner, costing us much more overall. 
  Although foreign investments are a necessary condition for 
our economic development, the enclaves of modernity established 
through those investments will fail to contribute to a general 
growth, if the technologies and organizational solutions applied 
are not transferred to the environment and absorbed by it. But 
this will not happen if, because of lack of investment in human 
capital, neither managers nor employees are able to use these 
models or to creatively adapt them, and if we do not have the 
appropriate innovation potential. 
  There is a strong relationship between investing in man and 
changes in institutions and in social behavior. People with 
higher levels of general education adapt more easily to the 
changing conditions of management and the labor market, 
demonstrate more entrepreneurship and initiative, and are not 
just participants of the transformations but also animate them. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  While assuming that expenditures in human capital, 
especially 
in education, science, culture, and health protection, are 
investments for which one has to wait long to see results but 
are also investments of the highest degree of social 
effectiveness, the government will be creating the proper 
conditions conducive to such investments by both public and 
private subjects. In the implementation of these policies, the 
government has the following goals: 
  1. Widening the scope of education of the youth at the high 
school and university levels. The proportion of elementary 
school graduates who continue their education in high schools 
will increase from 53 percent in 1992 to over 60 percent in 
1997. The number of university students will also be rising, 
which will contribute to an increase in the scholarization 
coefficient of youth between the ages of 20 and 24 at the higher 
education level, to over 20 percent in 1997. 
  2. Stimulating interest on the part of economic units 
[podmioty gospodarcze], through financial facilitations, in 
investing in human capital, especially in financing 
research/implementation measures. 
  3. Stopping the emigration of educated and creative cadres 
and increasing their participation in domestic 
scientific/research and academic institutions. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  The government has already made its initial decisions 
regarding preferential tax treatment for investment activity 
geared toward innovation and technical progress. In addition, 
the government will set in motion the following measures, mainly 
of a financial nature: 
  1. Gradual exclusion from the basis of tax assessment on 
personal income [podstawa opodatkowania] of part of the costs 
borne on investing in human capital. 
  2. Inclusion in the cost of obtaining gross revenue [koszty 
uzyskania przychodow] of teachers and employees of scientific 
and research/developmental units, of part of the costs borne for 
books, professional journals, scientific equipment and its 
software. 
  3. A system of educational credits, subject to remission, 
will be introduced. 
  4. Donations for public educational, scientific, cultural, 
and health protection units will be excluded from the basis of 
tax assessment. 
  5. Over the long run, preferential tax measures for those 
who 
invest in education, science, culture, and health protection 
will be widened. 
  6. Tax breaks have already been widened, and credit 
guarantees have been established for those purchasing and 
assembling equipment and machinery associated with implementing 
licenses and patents and with implementing the results of 
domestic scientific and research/developmental projects. 
  7. A system is being prepared of incentives for economic 
units that establish new foundations (or that support the 
existing ones) that act on behalf of education, science, 
culture, health protection, and the environment. 
  8. Supporting investments in the training of managers and 
employees through: 
  --Widening the cost of obtaining gross revenue to cover some 
costs borne by participants of training sessions. 
  --Directing for that goal a major part of subsidiary means 
at 
the government's disposal. 
  --Negotiating with international organizations over the 
issue 
of transfer of means for managerial/employee training, also for 
the benefit of extragovernmental organizations and of private 
economic units. 
  9. Undertaking financial measures for the sake of 
preferential awarding of outstanding innovators, scientific, 
cultural, and art activists (for instance, popularizing the 
custom that is applied in many countries of establishing and 
financing special professorial appointments for outstanding 
academicians, by large public and private enterprises, with the 
permission of the authorities of the particular university.) 
  10. Widening the scope and size of means for the sake of 
research projects ordered by the Scientific Research Committee, 
in accordance with the government's policy priorities. 
  11. Implementation of already approved segment programs 
[programy odcinkowe] (or of those that are currently being 
worked on), such as "Main Directions of Improving the 
Educational System in Poland," "National Health Program," and 
"The State's Ecological Policies." 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. Succumbing to the pressure of immediate needs, to the 
detriment of the future. 
  2. The appearance of economic barriers in accessing the 
educational system at the level above elementary schools. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  An increase of the proportion of expenditures borne by 
education, science, culture, and health and environmental 
protection in the GDP. 
  VI. MANAGING THE STATE WEALTHAND PROCESSES 
OFOWNERSHIP TRANSFORMATIONS 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The economic transformations are linked to changes in the 
role of the state as the owner. The participation of the 
state-owned sector in the GDP, in production, and in employment 
has been clearly decreasing, even though it continues to be 
significant, and, in some areas of the economy, it is even 
outright determinant. The way of managing state wealth has been 
subject to widespread criticism. Ownership prerogatives are 
exercised by several dozen offices and institutions. A uniform 
representation of the State Treasury is lacking. This blurs the 
issue of responsibility for state-owned property, makes 
supervision and control measures difficult, makes the processes 
of ownership transformations longer than necessary, and makes 
proper management difficult. 
  In exercising ownership functions, the issue of 
privatization 
has gained an unduly major advantage over the issue of effective 
management of state-owned property. That is one of the important 
reasons of the crisis in public finances and of many cases of 
unnecessary bankruptcies by public enterprises deprived of 
ownership assistance. Despite the preferential treatment granted 
to privatization, ownership transformations, even though they 
did score substantial progress, are taking place at a rate that 
is slower than planned. At the same time, there is no wide 
social acceptance for those ways and means of privatization of 
state-owned enterprises that have been implemented up to now. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  1. A clear improvement in the management of state-owned 
property through the establishment of strong, efficient, and 
effective management structures that would be guided by market 
principles of action. The following, among others, will serve 
that goal: 
  --Transformation of constitutive fundamentals of state-owned 
enterprises. 
  --A strengthening of the independence of managements of 
state-owned enterprises, of administrative organs. 
  --A stabilization of the managerial cadre through the 
application of managerial contracts and strong economic 
incentives. 
  --An institutional separation of the State Treasury. 
  2. Defining ownership policies vis-a-vis the basic group of 
state-owned enterprises and State Treasury companies, with the 
goal of eliminating uncertainties, with regard to both 
managements and work forces of enterprises and to investors. The 
government, in cooperation with the interested parties, will 
shortly: 
  --Define areas of the state's vital interests in which state 
administration will exercise direct regulatory functions. 
  --Define a map of measures aimed at bringing units back to 
health [dzialania sanacyjne] in those cases where there are 
chances for a successful restructuring of sectors and 
state-owned enterprises. 
  --Create the right conditions for an effective and speedy 
liquidation and bankruptcy process, which will be conducive to 
rational industrial policies and the establishment of a new type 
of economic ties. 
  3. Continuation of ownership transformations clearly geared 
toward: 
  --Stimulating measures promoting efficiency and the 
improvement of current and predicted economic efficiency. 
  --Demonopolization of the economy, leading to increased 
competitiveness among independent economic units. 
  --Capital concentration in those areas that require such 
measures due to international competition. 
  --Popularization of ownership in society. 
  --Limiting the participation of state-owned property in the 
economy. 
  --Improvement in the short-term and medium-term state of 
state finances. 
  4. Rendering the privatization process prosocial, to make it 
spread beyond the formal distribution of shares or certificates 
among work forces of units being privatized. The government will 
be implementing that intention through, among other means: 
  --Applying property remuneration systems [majatkowe systemy 
wynagradzania] under which work forces could collect part of 
remunerations in the form of shares of the companies they work 
for. 
  --Obtaining social and employment guarantees from investors. 
  --Securing a minimum of participation in the management 
process for work forces of units being privatized. 
  --Securing an obligation in the process of privatization and 
making private investors comply with their obligations to make 
developmental investments in the enterprise acquired by those 
investors. 
  5. A final settlement of issues linked to the so-called 
reprivatization and a simultaneous elimination of uncertainties 
regarding the ownership of many components of domestic wealth. 
The complex social delicacy of this issue (among others, the 
balance between remedying old injustices and causing new ones) 
and also of the state of state finances must be the appropriate 
context for reprivatization policies. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  1. Commercialization of state-owned enterprises and an 
institutionalization of the State Treasury through: 
  --Settling the issue of exercising ownership by the State 
Treasury vis-a-vis state-owned enterprises. 
  --Creating the right conditions for bringing state-owned 
enterprises and State Treasury companies back to health. 
  --Appropriate deployment of the wealth of those enterprises 
in which remedying measures turned out to be ineffective or 
unjustified. 
  --Creating the right conditions for speeding up the 
processes 
of ownership transformations, among others by making it possible 
to conduct installment-based sales of enterprises being 
subjected to capital privatization. 
  --Creating the right conditions for popularizing ownership 
in 
society. 
  --Preparing a law on the State Treasury and establishing a 
separate, central institution that would manage state-owned 
wealth. 
  2. Activation of the Popular Privatization Program by 
establishing National Investment Funds. As a priority, the 
program will cover those state-owned enterprises and State 
Treasury companies that have already been submitted and 
selected. Information and organizational measures will be 
continued with the goal of a gradual extension of the scope of 
the program, while the time frame for activating the program and 
its scope in 1994 and subsequent years will depend on the 
state's financial situation and the size of support for the 
program received from foreign countries. 
  3. Implementation of the 
"Stabilization-Restructuring-Privatization" program, which is 
being implemented with the organizational and financial 
participation of the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. The program covers enterprises in a particularly 
difficult situation, which will be subjected to a process of 
bringing them back to health. 
  4. Continuation of the process (initiated in 1993) of 
financial restructurings of state-owned enterprises and banks. 
The implementation of a second stage of injecting additional 
capital into commercial banks is being planned for 1994, and 
also extension of the process to cover "bad" credit portfolios 
of more banks (among them, Bank Gospodarki Zywnosciowej, Polska 
Kasa Opieki-Bank Panstwowy, Polska Kasa Opieki S.A.), with a 
simultaneous assessment of the efficiency of the usage of means 
throughout 1993. 
  5. Implementation of a multiyear program of financial, 
wealth-related, and organizational restructuring of sectors of 
particular importance to the economy, like the fuel/energy 
sector, the steel, arms, shipyard, pharmaceutical industries, 
and heavy chemistry. Due to these industries' concentration in 
some regions of the country--which brings about the danger of 
structural unemployment--these programs will be supplemented by 
some derivative programs (programs of regional restructurings, 
raising the level of economic activity, supporting foundation 
privatization, and so forth). 
  6. Privatizing the Polish economy by using all means of 
privatization and decentralization of privatization 
decisionmaking. Among others, the following will take place: 
  --Speeding up of the sale of small and medium-size 
enterprises through a simplification of sale procedures. 
  --Speeding up of transferring small and medium enterprises 
into leasing by employee companies through a simplification of 
the procedures and an easing of the conditions of leasing. 
  --The introduction of a new institution of State Treasury 
companies, with employees or other private investors, which will 
make it possible to conduct partial privatization, with the 
possibility of conducting full privatization in the future, with 
the participation of the same or other investors. 
  7. Speeding up of the process of dissolution of permanently 
ineffective enterprises. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. A slow rate and inefficiency of legislative proceedings. 
  2. Minor demand for enterprises being privatized, especially 
in the case of capital privatization, which would be undertaken 
on a scale wider than heretofore. 
  3. Social fear of privatization and primarily fears on the 
part of employees of enterprises being privatized. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  Improvement in the enterprise profitability ratio. 
  VII. MEDIUM-TERMFINANCIAL STRATEGY 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The government's economic policies must eliminate the 
fundamental weak aspects and impediments to the establishment of 
stable bases of economic growth and stabilization. The situation 
in that regard is mainly defined by: 

  -  A high inflation rate, which also means high nominal 
interest rates that impede investments processes, including in 
the sector of export-bound production and of production that is 
substitutive vis-a-vis imports. 
  -  A low financial potential of the 
economy compared with developmental needs, which means an 
insufficient level of domestic savings that are not increasing 
fast enough, a very limited credit potential of the banking 
system (which is caused by the banks' poor levels of capital, by 
high contribution of so-called bad debts, and by high costs of 
banking services), a big discrepancy between interest rates on 
credits and those on deposits (which is detrimental to both 
saving and investing), and, finally, a shallow financial and 
capital market that is only beginning to develop. 
  -  A high level 
of strongly increasing needs expressed by the budget sector for 
loans that are covered mainly by debts in the banking system. 
This has a negative impact both on reducing inflation and on the 
possibilities of limiting crediting the sector, which means it 
has a doubly negative impact on investments and economic 
growth. 
  -  Replacement of prodevelopmental expenditures borne on 
human capital and on economic infrastructure, with the 
increasing cost of servicing the public debt and with the second 
most dominating item of public expenditures--retirement pensions 
[emerytury], other kinds of pensions [renty], and social 
transfers. Both of these sectors absorb over half of all public 
means spent per year, which, in turn, absorb half the national 
product and, in this way, are a reason for the relatively high 
tax rates in Poland that, in turn, bring about a low potential 
of savings and investments. 
  -  Insufficient dynamism of exports and 
a fast increase in imports, as a result of which the foreign 
trade balance on the sheet of current turnover [obroty biezace] 
is highly negative. And, even though maintaining the level of 
foreign currency reserves does not present major problems (after 
the temporary decline in 1991 and 1994), thanks mainly to the 
relatively high positive balance on the sheet of short-term 
capital turnover, there continue to be no stable bases for a 
stabilization of the balance of payments over the long run. 

  Meeting deadlines for repayment of the foreign debt and for 
servicing the debt's cost requires the development of a sector 
of production of export-bound goods and of goods substitutive 
vis-a-vis imports. This is a key issue in a long-term policy of 
a permanent balance of payment. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  The financial strategy for 1994-97 is subordinated to 
implementing the fundamental goals of the socioeconomic 
program--that is to say, maintaining the rate of real economic 
growth at the level of approximately 5 percent per year, and a 
reduction of the inflation rate to below 10 percent in 1997. The 
existing realities make it necessary for various goals of the 
financial strategy to gain various degrees of importance and 
also to have them spread, in time, in different ways. Some of 
these goals are regarded as of an absolutely priority nature and 
to be reached within a short or medium time period, while the 
implementation of other goals, which are equally important, 
requires a longer time period. That other group of goals of the 
financial strategy also includes some goals whose implementation 
will bring positive and tangible effects for the economy most 
probably not until after 1997. The main goals of the 
government's medium-term financial strategy are: 
  1. Gradual restoration of a balance in the budget sector. 
This will be about reducing the sector's deficit vis-a-vis the 
GDP, from 3.9 percent in 1994 to 2-3 percent in 1997; decreasing 
the ratio of the public debt from over 85 percent of the GDP in 
1993 to 70-75 percent in 1997; and decreasing the cost of 
servicing the internal public debt in relation to an increase of 
the GDP. This will allow for stopping the declining trend of the 
size of bank credits for the nonfinancial sector, and their real 
growth at a rate that would approximate the real GDP growth rate. 
  2. Mobilization of domestic savings and improvements in the 
credit potential of the banking system and also development of 
the financial and capital market, including the establishment of 
a specialized savings-and-loan system for housing purposes. But 
the significant effects of this will not be visible until the 
long term. 
  3. Lowering of the level (measured by its relation to the 
GDP) and a change of the structure of public expenditures and of 
the level and structure of taxes. This means that, over 1994-97, 
the rate of real growth of expenditures and incomes will be 
maintained below the rate of growth of the real GDP and the rate 
of real expenditure increases--which will be lower than the real 
rate of growth of incomes. 
  4. An increase of foreign currency reserves of the banking 
system over 1994-97 at the rate approximating the real GDP 
growth (despite a negative foreign trade balance on the sheet of 
current turnover over the entire period until 1997). 
  5. Gradual reduction of the foreign trade deficit in 
relation 
to the GDP, as a result of a real almost one-and-a-half-times' 
growth of exports compared with the growth of the GDP, and as a 
result of the real rate of import growth approximating the rate 
of general economic growth. 
  6. Maintaining a stable situation in the balance of payments 
over the short term, with a very strict observance of deadlines 
for repaying the foreign debt and of servicing it, in accordance 
with decisions reached within the Paris and London Clubs. 
  7. Denomination of the zloty and introduction into 
circulation of new bank notes and coins effective 1 January 
1995, which will affirm the stabilization processes and the 
advancement of the transformations. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  The main tasks and instruments of the financial policies 
will 
be: 
  1. A fall in nominal and real interest rates. The process 
will be influenced by the process of restructuring the banking 
sector and of injecting additional capital into it, which has 
already begun and is being planned for subsequent years, and 
also by a gradual decrease in the rate of mandatory reserves. 
  2. A much lower rate of decline in interest rates on bank 
deposits, compared with interest rates on credits. Investment 
promotion will also be supported by investment breaks [ulgi 
inwestycyjne] on income taxes, while export promotion will be 
supported by a gradual development of a system of insurance and 
guarantees of export credits, along with (in the initial stage) 
guarantees by the state budget. 
  3. Exchange-rate policies will maintain the stable relation 
of the zloty's real value to convertible currencies, while 
observing the principle of a creeping growth in the exchange 
rate, which would continue to decrease along with the inflation 
rate. 
  4. Gradual change of the tax structure aimed at increasing 
the role of indirect taxes in general tax revenue, with a 
gradual decrease of the burden of income taxes, especially 
through a wider application of tax breaks. 
  5. An increased discipline of budget expenditures, including 
a reduction in the cost of servicing the domestic public debt 
and slowing down the excessive rate of growth of expenditures 
borne on retirement pensions, other types of pensions, and 
social transfers. A fundamental role in that regard will be 
played by: 
  --A reform of the social insurance system and the 
establishment of retirement-pension funds. 
  --A change in the principles of indexation of retirement 
pensions and other types of pensions. 
  --A reduction in the cost of social protections, coupled 
with 
aiming to address them at the really most needy social groups. 
  6. A gradual decentralization of the system of public 
finances, leading to strengthening the position of territorial 
self-governments. 
  7. Maintaining the trend of a growing role of the nonbanking 
sector in purchasing Treasury securities. 
  8. Increasing the role of foreigners in purchasing Treasury 
securities. 
  9. A partial change in the structure of creditors in the 
public debt, among others through: 
  --The introduction of indexed forms of debt instruments. 
  --A striving at extending time limits for payment of 
Treasury 
securities. 
  --Facilitation in dealing with securities on the secondary 
market. 
  10. Continuing with the reforms of the Treasury apparatus 
(tax administration). 
  11. At least a partial inclusion in the basis of tax 
assessment ("tax basis") of results of activity in the economic 
gray area. 
  12. Creating a climate conducive to the flow of foreign 
direct investments, primarily in the form of stable tax and 
legal rules. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  The main danger is inflation. Its return or a decrease that 
would be lower than planned in the program will automatically 
mean a decreased reduction of interest rates and worse 
conditions for investment and economic growth. 
  1. Inflation incentives can result from, among others: 
  --An increase in prices of merchandise and services not 
subject to exchange with foreign countries. 
  --Inflation inertia as a result of blocking the change of 
the 
principles of indexation and of slow privatization and 
demonopolization. 
  --Excessive and uncontrolled salary increases. 
  2. A fast and uncontrolled salary increase that would absorb 
profits reached by state-owned enterprises, slow down investment 
activity, and lead (with current rules of indexation of 
retirement pensions and other types of pensions retained) to 
increases in budget expenditures. 
  3. An end to the net flow of foreign currency registered on 
the short-term capital turnover sheet, and a minor inflow of 
direct foreign investments. 
  4. Insufficient progress in reforming the area of public 
expenditures. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  A fall in the relationship of public debt to the GDP. 
  VIII. DEVELOPMENT AND REFORMSOF THE FINANCIAL 
SECTOR 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  Thus far, the transformation process with regard to the 
financial sector in Poland has not disturbed the commercial 
banks' dominating position in the area of collecting savings and 
providing credits for investments and consumption. These banks 
continue to be the fundamental player in the money/credit 
market. Despite the emergence of several dozen privately owned 
banks (including between 10 and 20 with foreign capital) and the 
privatization of several banks that used to be the property of 
the State Treasury, over 80 percent of the banking sector's 
turnover continues to take place in state-owned banks. 
  As a whole, the banking sector is characterized by 
significant underdevelopment. The total assets of all Polish 
banks is much smaller than the total assets of a major Western 
bank, while the ratio of domestic assets of the entire banking 
system to the GDP is just about 20 percent in Poland (in 
developed countries, the ratio is 100 percent or more). The 
underdevelopment of the domestic banking sector is also 
demonstrated by domination by commercial banks (with an almost 
complete lack of mortgage banks, building societies, investment 
banks, and so forth) and by a deep crisis of a large part of 
cooperative banks [banki spoldzielcze] servicing Polish 
agriculture and its environment. 
  Despite considerable progress in putting in order the role 
and tasks of the National Bank of Poland [NBP] vis-a-vis the 
banking sector and in building the NBP's independence, the NBP 
continues to perform money-issuing, supervisory, and ownership 
functions at the same time, which is not good from the point of 
the proper implementation of any of those functions. 
  The Polish insurance sector is characterized by low capital 
levels and considerable monopolization. The State Insurance 
Bureau collects close to 70 percent of insurance premiums, while 
another 15 percent falls to the Warta Insurance and Reinsurance 
Company. The problem of independent supervision over the 
insurance sector continues to be unresolved. A regulated 
securities market is also in its initial stages. It is true 
that, in the 1991-93 period, an infrastructure for the market 
was established (which meets the requirements existing in 
developed securities markets), and a concept of dematerialized 
securities transactions was readapted, but the capitalization of 
companies registered at the Warsaw Securities Stock Market 
continues to be below the level of 5 percent of the GDP. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  The dominant strategic goal for the government is to 
continue 
undertaking measures to develop a strong, diversified, and 
efficient financial system. The system must meet the following 
requirements: 

  -  It must efficiently implement the function of collecting 
savings [oszczednosci] and their effective allocation. 
  -  It must 
discipline the activity of economic units. 
  -  It must effectively 
compete with foreign financial institutions, especially in the 
context of full liberalization of service turnover to be adopted 
effective 1999, in connection with our efforts to join the EU. 
The entirety of the government measures toward the financial 
sector will be subordinated to meeting these fundamental 
criteria: 

  1. Measures will be continued to strengthen the NBP's 
independent position as the state's money-issuing bank and the 
government's financial agent. 
  2. Government policies toward the banking sector will be 
clearly heading in the direction of making its role in the 
process of economic growth more active, through injecting 
additional capital into the banks, improving the security of 
economic transactions, policies for developing competition in 
the market for long-term credits, and so forth. 
  3. Appropriate conditions will be created to prevent 
"returning to bad debts" and to monitor the situation. 
  4. The government will be using domestic banks to a larger 
extent for managing state-owned wealth, for the privatization of 
state-owned enterprises, and for bringing them back to health. 
  5. The government will be persistently working to 
demonopolize the insurance market, without which domestic 
reinsurance companies will not be able to open up the Polish 
market for unrestricted activity by foreign companies, which, 
considering the prospect of our membership in the EU, will have 
to take place over the next few years. 
  6. Active measures will be undertaken to strengthen and 
further develop the capital market to render it capable of 
assuming allocation functions in the economy to an 
ever-increasing degree, while supplementing traditional banking 
mechanisms and instruments, including systems of capital and 
credit accumulation for the purpose of communal infrastructure. 
  7. The government will be conducting an open but selective 
policy of allowing foreign capital into the domestic financial 
sector by supporting the foreign capital's inflow primarily in 
cases of absence of domestic investors. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  The list of strategic goals delineated this way will be 
implemented through specific instruments and means of 
implementation. 
  A. In the banking sector 
  1. Stimulating and supporting the process of consolidation 
of 
commercial banks, to include: 
  --Supporting the process of more efficient banks taking over 
weak banks that are incapable of independent action. 
  --Merging inefficient banks operating in the form of State 
Treasury share companies [spolka akcyjna Skarbu Panstwa] with 
those banks owned by the State Treasury that have demonstrated a 
capability to generate profit and a simultaneous capability to 
raise the real value of their own funds. 
  --Establishing regional and supraregional [ponadregionalne] 
banks. The goal is to have between 10 and 20 of these in Poland. 
  --Developing a network of specialized banks, geared toward 
servicing specific types of activity, unique kinds of markets, 
types of operations, including mortgage systems, the contract 
system, and specialized mortgage banks. 
  2. Measures enabling the injection of additional capital 
into 
banks, both through fiscal instruments and policies for 
collecting dividends, and through specific privatization 
techniques, refinancing techniques, and other forms of financial 
support. 
  3. Ownership transformations in the banking sector will be 
perceived by the government as an instrument enabling an 
efficient allocation of means. Policies in that regard will be 
characterized by a rational approach, within which the choice 
between ownership type and efficiency, if a need for such a 
choice arises, will be made in favor of efficiency. 
  4. Strengthening banks' independence from direct 
intervention 
by administrative authorities. This will be accomplished by, 
among others: 
  --Widespread application of managerial contracts with regard 
to State Treasury banks. 
  --Stabilization of managements and governing boards. 
  --Making the salaries of banking authorities and work forces 
dependent on the financial results achieved. 
  5. While recognizing the role of small and medium-size 
enterprises--and that of local communities--in developmental 
processes and in creating jobs, the government will establish 
legal, organizational, and financial conditions facilitating the 
establishment of a system of guarantees, especially of a local 
dimension. 
  6. A Bank Guarantee Fund [Bankowy Fundusz Gawarancyjny] will 
be established, which will perform the function of a guarantor 
of banking deposits. This will take the burden off the central 
bank and the state budget. 
  B. In the insurance sector 
  1. Conducting measures for the gradual consolidation and 
demonopolization of the insurance sector, among others by 
supporting the process of integration of small insurance 
companies, and the selective policy of granting licenses to 
foreign firms. 
  2. Establishing, out of the Finance Ministry, insurance 
supervision by the end of 1994 and an independent Insurance 
Supervision Office [Urzad Nadzoru Ubezpieczeniowego]. 
  3. Initiating and supporting new institutions of the 
insurance market, using those existing in developed countries as 
a model, among others in connection with the planned 
restructuring of the social insurance system (retirement funds, 
insurance companies, and so forth). 
  4. Putting the system of real estate record keeping, 
land-and-mortgage registers, and multifunction cadastre in 
order, as well as modernizing it. 
  5. Improving the synchronicity between the powers of gminas 
[small administrative units] and the system of financing and 
providing credits to communal investments. 
  C. In the capital market 
  1. Conditions will be established before the end of 1994 for 
the operation of both closed and open (for instance, Pioneer) 
trust funds. 
  2. The government will be supporting entry into the market 
of 
institutional investors other than trust funds: insurance 
companies, retirement funds, and, to some extent, banks, in 
particular those that are geared toward investment activity and 
guaranteeing new issues [emisje]. 
  3. The government will be supporting the establishment of 
venture funds [preceding two words in English] in order to 
diversify the sources of financing for developmental enterprises 
of an increased risk factor, which by definition cannot be 
covered by bank financing. 
  4. Further development of the Warsaw Securities Stock Market 
will be continued. At the same time, measures will be undertaken 
for the purpose of activating a stock exchange for date 
operations [gielda operacji terminowych], with regard to foreign 
currencies and stock market instruments. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. An unskilled implementation of the banking and insurance 
sector's consolidations, where the growth of the sector's 
efficiency, compatability, and progrowth orientation would not 
be activated. 
  2. Losing control over the expansion of foreign subjects 
(supported by their capital strength and technological 
supremacy) and a consequent taking of a number of important 
instruments of economic policies, beyond the borders of the 
country. 
  3. Shortage of domestic capital. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  Maintaining the rate of providing credits to the 
nonfinancial 
sector, at a level that would not be lower than 20 percent of 
the GDP. 
  IX. SECURITY OF ECONOMICTRANSACTIONS AND 
ABSORPTIONOF THE "GRAY AREA" 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  Institutional guarantees for the security of economic 
transactions are an indispensable condition for financing the 
economy in any country. The problem is of particular 
importance--and it acquires additional importance--in a 
situation of a systemwide transformation that is about 
implementation and introduction of market rules for managing 
wealth. The current state of economic, legislative, and 
structural/organizational provisions should be regarded as 
highly inadequate and as being very far from the needs in the 
area. Lack of security of economic transactions is a barrier to 
developing activity for economic units, and, consequently, it 
contributes to a slowdown of the rate of economic growth. 
  Development of a so-called gray area, which demonstrates 
itself both in nonregistration of economic activity and in tax 
frauds, criminal, and corruption acts, is a result and, also, 
through mutual linkages, a reason for the lack of security of 
economic transactions. It is estimated that about 70 percent of 
income for the gray area comes about in units that operate 
legally, while the remaining 30 percent comes from nonregistered 
activity. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  1. Increasing incentives for undertaking active investment 
measures on the part of Polish entrepreneurs. 
  2. Increasing the involvement of foreign subjects in Poland. 
  3. Increasing the volume of tax-derived income, by absorbing 
the gray area through legal economic measures and increasing the 
tax basis instead of increasing tax rates. 
  4. Elimination of the gray area's criminal side. 
<H5>  III. THE MEANS </H5>
  A. In the area of monetary settlements 
  1. Popularizing noncash financial settlements through the 
use 
of bills of exchange and securing the executability of claims 
based on bills of exchange. 
  2. Spreading the use of checks in economic transactions, 
among other ways through the prevention of counterfeit checks, 
and by banks guaranteeing the amounts present in the accounts of 
check issuers; with that goal in mind, the Checking and Bills of 
Exchange Law will be amended by the introduction of a new 
definition and scope of application of banking secrecy. 
  3. Securing the possibility of exchanging information on 
customers, which will mean preventing many crimes in banking, 
check, and bills-of-exchange transactions, as well as an 
increased rate of detection of these crimes. 
  4. Introducing a uniform system of financial settlements 
with 
the use of magnetic cards (including foreign-made ones). 
  5. Introducing a duty upon every economic unit that fulfills 
specific requirements (for example, regarding turnover size) to 
have a bank account, coupled with noncash financial settlements 
in case of every transaction not exceeding 3,000 ECU's. 
  6. Improving the operation of bank noncash financial 
settlements, among others through support rendered for the work 
of the National Financial Settlement Chamber, with the goal of 
introducing a fully automated financial settlement system. 
  7. Introducing guarantees of transaction security among 
banks, of mandatory compliance with deadlines for financial 
settlements, and of setting limits to bank commissions in 
noncash transactions. 
  8. Securing better technical safeguards on valuable items. 
  9. Introducing uniform principles of bookkeeping, through a 
legal act of a high order of importance. 
  10. Introducing institutional barriers to the laundering of 
so-called dirty money. 
  B. In the area of international relations, particularly in 
the state's foreign-currency policies 
  1. Maintaining limitations on capital transfers out of 
Poland 
over the next few years. 
  2. Extending the legal framework for the protection of 
Polish 
investments, through the conclusion of bilateral agreements on 
protecting and supporting investment. 
  3. Developing international tax cooperation based on 
agreements on preventing double taxation. 
  4. Increasing efforts to counteract monopoly practices 
regarding price creation in foreign trade. 
  5. Preventing the illegal transfer of incomes out of Poland. 
  C. In the area of the tax system 
  1. Improving institutional mechanisms in the area of taxes 
on 
merchandise and services (extending the taxes' subject scope and 
application, tightening the tax system, eliminating unfair 
competition, taxing unregistered activity, which will be 
accomplished through a continuously updated and uniform database 
on all taxpayers, the obligation to have cash registers capable 
of registering the tax along with the price of an item [kasy 
fiskalne] in retail trade and other services for the population, 
which will be introduced in stages, improvements in bookkeeping 
and in the circulation of documents, among others with the goal 
of mutual taxpayer identification). 
  2. Enforcing and widening the duty to label merchandise with 
Treasury excise labels [znaki skarbowe akcyz]. 
  3. Widening the scope of investment breaks with regard to 
income tax. 
  4. Establishing a uniform taxpayer registry, based on 
Taxpayer Identification Numbers [NIP], which will ensure the 
reliability of partners. 
  5. Introduction by the Finance Ministry of a comprehensive 
and complete real estate database for fiscal purposes, including 
the value of real estate as the basis for tax assessments, in 
the form of a fiscal cadastre. 
  D. In the area of absorbing and limiting the scope of the 
gray area 
  1. Establishing the appropriate conditions and incentives 
for 
registered firms to reveal their entire income. 
  2. Increasing measures to combat criminal acts (the 
receiving 
of stolen goods, the drug trade, the arms trade, and so forth), 
using the means provided by criminal law and criminal/fiscal law 
and the instruments at the disposal of the police, public 
prosecutors offices, and courts of law. 
  3. Counteracting tax evasion by registered firms (decreasing 
tax and similar burdens to a minimum, failure to record all 
turnover, costs, income, and using transactions of order [umowy 
zlecenia], which result in decreased income for ZUS) through: 
  --Eliminating gaps in the tax law. 
  --Raising the qualifications of employees of the State 
Treasury apparatus (including customs officials), increasing the 
range of powers of control, State Treasury, and customs 
apparatuses, integration of State Treasury and customs services 
within the range of functions of the Finance Ministry. 
  --Registering taxpayers and computerizing the process of 
imposing and enforcing taxes and customs duties. 
  --Enacting a tax law adapted to the conditions of the formal 
tax law. 
  --Establishing an appropriate salary system for employees of 
State Treasury, customs, and supervision services, linking 
salaries to work results. 
  --Supporting the development of tax advisers with a 
persistent implementation of a loss of the right to perform the 
profession in cases of detecting dishonest acts (work is in 
progress on a law on granting licenses to tax advisers). 
  --Combating, with the amended means of criminal law and 
criminal/fiscal law, the most harmful economic crimes. 
  4. Application of a simple tax in the form of a lump-sum 
amount not subject to record keeping, which would be set every 
year in advance, for such small activities as cleaning, taking 
care of children and the sick, private lessons, home services 
(for instance in the form of repairs, overhauls, typing, 
tailoring services, knitting, and so forth), and street and 
bazaar trade. 
  E. In the area of customs duties 
  1. Harmonizing merchandise vocabulary for domestic 
transactions with those with foreign countries, eliminating 
differences in the principles of imposition, execution, and 
enforcement of customs duties, taxes, and introduction of a 
uniform merchandise statistical system run by the Central Office 
of Statistics. 
  2. Increasing supervision over the functioning of customs 
warehouses, with the goal of making it impossible to introduce 
merchandise into the Polish customs zone before making an 
appropriate payment to the state budget. 
  3. Tightening the borders and further improving the 
functioning of customs services throughout the entire country, 
which will limit the extent of transactions involving illegal 
dealing in foreign-made merchandise, especially excise products. 
  F. In the area of other types of measures 
  1. Establishing a deposit insurance institution that would 
operate in the form of a fund guaranteeing bank deposits of 
individuals and economic units. 
  2. Establishing a credit insurance fund with the 
participation of the State Treasury, with the goal of providing 
credit guarantees to small and medium-size enterprises. 
  3. Changing the principles of executability of claims 
[wierzytelnosci] toward securing the appropriate rights duly 
accruing to all creditors, especially public ones. 
  4. Reforming and making uniform the system of extrafiscal 
record keeping of data on economic units (draft laws on issuing 
MONITOR GOSPODARCZY I SADOWY, on amending the Commercial Code 
and the law on economic activity, are being prepared) as well as 
introducing a National Commercial Registry. 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. Delay in the necessary legislative work. 
  2. Lack of persistence in the implementation of a range of 
means presented above. 
  3. Insufficient means for combating economic criminality and 
for the judicial system. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  Widening the scope of the tax basis. 
  X. INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESSOF THE POLISH 
ECONOMY 
<H5>  I. THE DIAGNOSIS </H5>
  The Polish economy's international competitiveness is a 
precondition for the implementation of the intentions described 
in the "Strategy for Poland." This means a need to make exports 
more dynamic (in a situation of a stable real foreign-currency 
exchange rate), which will make it possible to pay for the 
necessary imports and to service the country's foreign debt. 
Such transformations of our economy that would render Polish 
merchandise and services competitive with the growing volume of 
foreign goods in the Polish market are also indispensable. An 
increase in efficiency and the capability of implementing 
efficiency-oriented structural changes are a fundamental 
precondition of competitiveness defined this way. One should 
also remember that competitiveness is linked to, rather than 
conflicting with, the increasing standard of living and the 
increasing employment opportunities. 
  Competitiveness requires building an open economy that would 
utilize various instruments of allocation of assets and of 
attracting foreign capital and technologies. Such a 
competitiveness will not be secured through conventional 
economic policies based exclusively on market allocation 
mechanisms. The Polish economy must become highly competitive on 
a world scale because it continues to be characterized by: 

  -  Relatively high import absorption [importochlonnosc] of 
the economic growth. 
  -  Low export capabilities. 
  -  High foreign debt. 

  In addition, the lifting of customs duties with regard to 
imports of merchandise from the EU effective at the end of 1998, 
and with regard to countries of the European Free Trade 
Association [EFTA] and the Central European Free Trade 
Association [CEFTA] effective at the end of 1997, as well as a 
general lowering of customs rates as a result of the Uruguay 
Round, will lead to increased competition in our market. 
  A deep transformation of the global context of the Polish 
economy's functioning is a very significant argument in favor of 
increased economic competitiveness. The end of a relatively 
simple arrangement of competition between East and West, which 
was replaced with a much more complex arrangement, unequivocal 
efforts to widen economic space at the regional level, 
relatively low dynamics of growth in the world economy, a 
radical decrease of demand for unskilled labor and raw materials 
per production unit, unfavorable trends in terms of trade 
[preceding three words in English], increased protectionism in 
developed countries, increasing competition in world merchandise 
and financial markets, as well as a very clear increase in the 
instability and uncertainty of operation of the international 
economic system--these are the fundamental external factors of 
our development in the current decade, presented in a very 
summarized fashion. 
<H5>  II. THE GOALS </H5>
  1. Building a modern economy that would be characterized by 
a 
significant contribution of exports to the GDP, as well as a 
good position in international trade. 
  2. Establishing the appropriate conditions for attracting 
foreign capital and for its efficient use in the process of 
development. 
  3. Creating an appropriate situation for the rational 
integration of the Polish economy with the world economy (EU, 
EFTA, CEFTA), as well as securing the economy's institutional 
presence in the system of international cooperation. 
  4. Making efforts to limit--in a situation of a gradual and 
rational liberalization--the deficit in the balance of the 
current turnover of balance of payments [rachunek obrotow 
biezacych bilansu platniczego] over the medium term. This is a 
factor for strengthening the country's international position, 
including primarily its position in financial markets. 
  5. Increasing the Polish economy's absorption capabilities 
with regard to outside financial means. 
  6. Rationalizing foreign financial relations through 
renegotiations of existing credit agreements in those cases 
where it is justifiable. 
  7. Striving at changes in the organization of foreign 
assistance: increasing the role of the Polish side in defining 
lists of priorities and devoting an ever-increasing amount of 
means for investment projects. 
  8. Applying types of foreign sources of financing other than 
credits and investment capital (for instance, placing financial 
instruments in foreign countries). 
  9. Observing the principle that lessening burdens existing 
at 
a specific time must not take place at the cost of increasing 
some obligations that would substantially limit the country's 
future developmental possibilities. 
  10. Establishing the appropriate conditions for 
intensification of economic cooperation with countries of 
Central and East Europe, countries of the former USSR, and 
countries of Asia and Latin America, particularly those with 
whom Poland enjoyed good and productive economic relations. 
Achieving an export dynamism, which is necessary for 
guaranteeing a high rate of economic growth, is not possible 
with the current geographical structure of exchange with foreign 
countries. 
<H5>  IV. [as published] THE MEANS </H5>
  1. Persistent implementation of such already existing 
programs of action as: a time frame for work associated with the 
implementation of the state's proexport policies, programs 
supporting Eastern policies, fundamental principles of policies 
of economic cooperation with countries of the former USSR, East 
and Central Europe, and China. 
  2. The undertaking and intensifying of work on programs 
relating in particular to issues such as: 
  --Proexport transformations in industry, agriculture, and 
other branches of the economy. 
  --The Polish economy's capabilities to effectively absorb 
outside sources of financing development. 
  --Opportunities for improved utilization of special economic 
zones, including free customs areas. 
  --Adaptations associated with the consequences of Poland's 
increasing participation in international economic structures 
(EU, CEFTA, OECD, GATT-WTO [GATT-World Trade Organization]). 
  3. Continuation of the network of treaty-based agreements, 
which makes it possible for Polish and foreign economic units to 
cooperate with one another, with the goal of a geographic 
widening of markets. 
  4. Popularization of international standards and norms, and 
conclusion of international agreements on cooperation in science 
and technology. 
  5. Continuation of negotiations with countries of West 
Europe 
regarding increasing their openness to Polish merchandise and 
eliminating protectionist practices. 
  6. Elaboration of concepts for the development of trade and 
cooperation with the countries of East Europe, including, in 
particular, a concept for a system of financial settlements, 
which is a precondition for an efficient application of export 
guarantees and insurances. 
  7. Intensification of the promotion of exports, especially 
to 
European countries, and also to China, Japan, India, countries 
of Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, the Middle East, and 
some African countries. 
  8. The speeding up of legislative work on a law concerning 
insurance on export contracts. This will make it possible to 
insure payments for exported goods from nontrade risk, and also 
to widen guarantee and insurance activities in the financing of 
export transactions. The Corporation for Export Credit Insurance 
[KUKE] will become a key element in the system of financing 
exports. KUKE will be provided with substantial budget and 
extrabudget financial means. Governmental guarantees for export 
activities, especially with regard to exports of investment 
goods, will be an important element in the system of financial 
support to exports. Implementation of the law will close a 
fundamental chapter in the establishing of a financial structure 
for supporting exports, using mechanisms in effect in over 60 
countries around the world for a long time, as a model. 
  9. Preparation of a draft law on insuring export credits 
against nontrade risk, as well as strengthening and enlarging 
KUKE. The new legislative guarantees will make it possible to 
widen activities supporting the development of Polish economic 
units, in cooperation with commercial financial institutions in 
both Poland and abroad. As early as 1994, an increase in KUKE's 
share capital by 165 billion zlotys will take place--this will 
happen with the use of state budget means. This additional 
financing of KUKE will be further increased throughout the 
subsequent years. Apart from financial means coming from the 
state budget, KUKE's capital will be using untapped means of 
foreign trade enterprises, banks, and other economic units. In 
justified cases, the possibility of supporting exports with 
government guarantees for export credits is envisioned. 
  10. Intensification of research/developmental and 
implementation-related activities, which will be stimulated, 
supported, and also partially directed by the government. 
  11. Stimulation of changes in the structure of imports in a 
way that would provide for an increased role of investment 
goods, with a simultaneous decrease of the role of consumption 
goods, especially of those goods that can be produced 
domestically. 
  12. Using tariff and extratariff opportunities that, through 
a regulation of the structure of imports, will lead to 
protection of the domestic market against unfair competition 
(antidumping measures, granting licenses for imports of 
sensitive merchandise, compensatory payments, increasing 
sanitary and veterinarian controls at the border, and so on). 
<H5>  IV. THE DANGERS </H5>
  1. An increase of autarkical trends. 
  2. Insufficient progress in economic restructurization. 
  3. Trade restrictions on Polish-made goods. 
  4. Political destabilization preventing foreign capital from 
flowing into Poland. 
<H5>  V. THE MAIN CRITERION OF EXECUTION </H5>
  Export growth exceeding the growth of the GDP. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31788 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jezek Resigns as Chairman of Property Fund </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jezek Resigns as Chairman of Property Fund </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006171494 Prague CTK in English 1646 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006171494 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 10 (CTK) -- Tomas Jezek resigned today 
from his position as chairman of the National Property Fund 
(FNM), Privatisation Minister Jiri Skalicky told CTK. The 
fund's presidium has named First Deputy Privatisation Minister 
Roman Ceska the new chairman. Jezek's official reason was the 
presumed legal incompatibility of the positions of FNM chairman 
and chairman of the parliamentary Budget Committee, he said. 
  Jezek told CTK that he decided to resign "because of 
untiring 
attempts on the part of some FNM Presidium members, particularly 
its chairman (Jiri Skalicky)" to get him to step down, and also 
"in the interest of restoring normal working conditions at the 
National Property Fund," which have recently been seriously 
disrupted by "continuous attacks" on his person. 
  He added that his decision had also been influenced by the 
fact that a proposal for a law on conflicts of interests has 
been submitted to parliament under which, Jezek said, "I would 
have had to put an end to my activities in the fund in the near 
future anyway." The decision was facilitated also by the fact 
that the privatisation process is "drawing to a close," he added. 
  The FNM Presidium today also decided to dismiss FNM 
Vice-Chairmen Jan Princ and Jindrich Kapoun for failure to 
fulfill duties towards the Presidium as members of the Executive 
Committee, Skalicky reported. 
  Presidium members agreed that in order to carry out approved 
privatisation projects more efficiently, the original system of 
close cooperation between the fund and the Privatisation 
Ministry should be reinstated, he continued. The Presidium 
asked the new chairman to propose candidates to replace the 
dismissed members of the Executive Committee at the next 
Presidium session. 
  Karel Ledvinka, vice-chairman of the Civic Democratic 
Alliance (ODA), told CTK that ODA had unanimously approved two 
months ago a statement in which they recommended to Jezek that 
if he was forced to make a decision "he should give priority to 
his parliamentary mandate." ODA leaders believe that "with his 
wisdom and range of knowledge (Jezek) would be most valuable as 
chairman of the Budget Committee -- one of the most important 
parliamentary committees," Ledvinka said. He added that the 
final decision, however, rested entirely with Jezek alone. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31789 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus `Surprised' by Resignation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus `Surprised' by Resignation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006184394 Prague CTK in English 1751 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006184394 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 10 (CTK) -- Premier Vaclav Klaus said 
he was surprised by the resignation of National Property Fund 
(FNM) Chairman Tomas Jezek and the appointment of Deputy 
Privatisation Minister Roman Ceska as his successor, Klaus's 
advisor Vadim Petrov told CTK today. The premier wonders 
whether the change was not overly hasty and whether the new 
chairman will be able to carry out much-needed improvements in 
the activities of the fund. He told Nova Television today that 
he had not been informed beforehand of Jezek's intention, but 
got the news from CTK. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31790 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   New FNM Chairman Ceska Profiled </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New FNM Chairman Ceska Profiled </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1006195894 Prague CTK in English 1856 GMT 10 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1006195894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 10 (CTK) -- New National Property Fund 
(FNM) Chairman Roman Ceska today said he considered his most 
important task to be the stabilisation of the "unbearable" 
situation in the fund. He told CTK he did not think that his 
appointment could jeopardise the fund's activity. "I do not 
believe that people will leave the fund due to my appointment," 
he said, adding that his primary task will be to put an end to 
long-lasting feelings of uncertainty among the fund's employees. 
  In his opinion, an FNM chairman should devote all his time 
to 
management, not politics. He described his predecessor Tomas 
Jezek as a "remarkable political figure." 
  Ceska was born in Plzen, western Bohemia, on January 29, 
1964. After finishing studies at a grammar school in Plzen he 
left for Prague where he graduated from the Prague School of 
Economics. He started working in the Czechoslovak Academy of 
Sciences Economic Institute in 1990, and when the Privatisation 
Ministry was created he became an advisor to then minister Tomas 
Jezek. After the parliamentary elections in 1992 Ceska was 
appointed deputy privatisation minister. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31791 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Privatization Minister Notes `Tension' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Privatization Minister Notes `Tension' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306081194 Prague CTK in English 1816 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306081194 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Kladno, Central Bohemia June 11 (CTK) -- Chairman 
of the coalition Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) Jan Kalvoda 
said today he had not expected Tomas Jezek (ODA) to resign as 
chairman of the National Property Fund (FNM) as soon as Friday 
[10 June] even though he had known about his intention to leave 
the post. Jezek's official reason was the presumed legal 
incompatibility of the positions of FNM chairman and chairman of 
the Parliamentary Budget Committee, Jezek said yesterday after 
handing in his resignation. 
  He told CTK that he had decided to resign "because of 
untiring attempts on the part of some FNM Presidium members, 
particularly its chairman (Jiri Skalicky)" to get him to step 
down, and also "in the interest of restoring normal working 
conditions at the National Property Fund," which have recently 
been seriously disrupted by "continuous attacks" on his person. 
Jezek resigned after a FNM Presidium's discussion about him, 
which took almost five hours and in which he was not allowed to 
take part. 
  Speaking at a press conference within ODA Day in Kladno 
today, Privatisation Minister Jiri Skalicky (ODA) said that 
Roman Ceska, who was appointed new FNM chairman yesterday, would 
retain his post of first privatisation minister. "The (FNM) 
Presidium decided on Friday to return to the original close 
personnel connection between the Privatisation Ministry and the 
Fund. Earlier the Fund was headed by the first deputy 
privatisation minister. We have found this link functional and 
we have returned to it," Skalicky said. 
  He said that the Presidium had dismissed Jezek yesterday 
because, at the beginning of its deliberations, he had announced 
his intention to resign in connection with the planned passage 
of a law on conflict of interest. But Skalicky admitted that 
the Presidium members had had to persuade Jezek to resign 
immediately. 
  Skalicky also admitted that tension had been afflicting 
relations between the Fund leadership and the Presidium for a 
long time. "There were disputes over how to solve the exercise 
of ownership rights... and we have been dissatisfied with the 
pace of realisation of privatisation projects." 
  In view of his announced intention to resign within several 
next months, the personality of Jezek did not provide guarantees 
of these shortcomings to be removed. That is why Ceska has been 
chosen to replace him because his activity has been most tightly 
connected with the FNM, Skalicky said. 
  The FNM Presidium has charged Ceska with drafting by the 
next 
Presidium session on June 24 a "programme statement" which would 
outline ways of removing the above shortcomings, Skalicky said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31792 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  12 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Havel on Benes Decrees, Normandy Anniversary </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Havel on Benes Decrees, Normandy Anniversary </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306094794 Prague CTK in English 1413 GMT 12 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306094794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 12 (CTK) -- Czech President Vaclav 
Havel said today that the decrees issued by President Edvard 
Benes in 1945 resulted from the dramatic war events and casting 
doubt on them was almost unimaginable. In his regular Sunday 
radio programme "Talks in Lany," Havel was reacting to a 
complaint lodged recently with the Constitutional Court by a 
Czech citizen of German origin living in Liberec, North Bohemia. 
  In it he complained against a verdict reached by the Usti 
nad 
Labem Regional Court in 1945, whereby the property of his 
forebears was confiscated and alleged that the confiscation was 
unlawful and in breach of his basic rights. He made an appeal 
for the repeal of decrees Nos. 5, 12, 33 and 108. Decree No. 
108 laid down the confiscation of property from Germans and 
Hungarians. Decrees Nos. 5, 12 and 33 ordered that Germans and 
Hungarians be dispossessed of agricultural property and stripped 
of state citizenship. 
  Turning to the celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the 
Allied landings in Normandy at the beginning of June, Havel 
regretted that he could not decorate Czech veterans with state 
distinctions just as the other heads of state. There has been 
no law on orders and distinctions since the creation of the 
independent Czech Republic on January 1, 1993. 
  Havel said it seemed in the Czech Republic as if the 
veterans' experience was recalled only by the veterans 
themselves. He stressed that it was just thanks to the 
Czechoslovak units abroad that the Czech Republic was perceived 
in the West "as a country having a democratic tradition which 
was capable of putting up resistance to the mounting evil." 
Havel invited the veterans of the Czechoslovak Army living 
abroad to come for the celebrations of the end of World War Two 
next year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31793 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  12 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Havel Cited on Assigning Powers of Senate </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Havel Cited on Assigning Powers of Senate </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1206171894 Prague CTK in English 1433 GMT 12 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1206171894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 12 (CTK) -- President Vaclav Havel 
said today the current state where the undissolvable Chamber of 
Deputies was taking over the powers of the yet unformed Senate 
could not last forever since "it is really dangerous." In his 
regular Sunday radio programme "Talks in Lany" Havel said that 
either the Senate had to be set up in compliance with the 
Constitution, or some other constitutional solution had to be 
found. 
  He was reacting to the fact that the Chamber of Deputies 
failed on June 2 to pass a bill on elections to the Senate and 
to the Chamber, thus making senatorial elections planned for the 
autumn probably impossible. Elections to the Chamber are to be 
held in 1996. 
  Reacting to Friday's [9 June] proposal from the coalition 
Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party (KDU-CSL) 
on the division of the Senate's powers between the Chamber of 
Deputies, the president and possibly the government, Havel said: 
"Every additional power needs more work for my Office which 
already now would need more employees than it has. The question 
is what is correct." 
  But he added that "the powers which the Senate was to have, 
must go somewhere." It would be logical if the president's right 
to return laws to the Chamber would be extended by the right to 
accompany the returned law with comments which the valid 
Constitution does not guarantee for him, Havel said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31794 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  12 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus Denies Coalition Relations `Freezing' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus Denies Coalition Relations `Freezing' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306094294 Prague CTK in English 1522 GMT 12 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306094294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 12 (CTK) -- Premier Vaclav Klaus, 
chairman of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), said today he did 
not think that relations between the coalition parties were at 
freezing point as alleged by some parties and media. The 
coalition is formed by the ODS (65 out of a total of 200 
parliamentary seats), the Christian Democratic 
Union-Czechoslovak People's Party (KDU-CSL -- 15), the Civic 
Democratic Alliance (ODA -- 15) and the Christian Democratic 
Party (KDS -- 10). 
  Speaking on the regular Czech Television's Sunday discussion 
programme "Debata", Klaus also disagreed with the opinion that 
the coalition, which was continuously dealing with "dozens, may 
be hundreds of questions," could not find consensus. "There is 
absolute agreement on a number of points and this is not 
practically mentioned, this is not pointed out. We have a 
couple of evergreens -- once it is the Senate, another time it 
is higher administration units or restitution. Views on these 
evergreens undoubtedly and logically differ," Klaus said. 
  Klaus said that every week "there are 95 matters" on which 
the coalition's opinion was very firm and diametrically 
different from the parliamentary opposition's. He said he 
believed that the positive was unequivocally prevalent "and the 
squabbling..., unfortunately, is part of political skirmishes, 
of the tug-of-war, every one wants to be stronger, every one 
wants to be seen better, every one wants to be heard more 
strongly." 
  "Let us proceed from the fact that citizens... have elected 
this and not some other coalition. If they gave 51 percent of 
the vote to one political party, there would have to be no 
coalition, just as in Hungary, for example. If, on the 
contrary, there had to be eight parties to form the government, 
we would have a different coalition," Klaus said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31795 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Compensated Gulf War Veteran for Illness </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army Compensated Gulf War Veteran for Illness </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306080894 Prague CTK in English 1429 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306080894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 11 (CTK) -- "While the United States 
decided only this week to compensate American veterans from the 
Gulf War, the Czech Army paid compensation to a soldier from the 
Gulf of Persia several months ago," today's issue of the 
independent daily MLADA FRONTA DNES writes. Czech authorities 
paid compensation to the soldier after a long-term investigation 
of his individual complaints, before the U.S. Senate published a 
report saying that there existed unchallengeable proofs of the 
use of chemical and maybe even biological substances in the war 
against Iraq, the paper writes. 
  Doctors had found out in him the so-called hepatitis 
positive 
Australian antigen, and concluded that his condition was related 
to his participation in the war. The officer of the 
Czechoslovak anti-chemical unit has no longer been a career 
soldier. 
  Fifteen or so soldiers have turned to the Army's Health 
Administration, complaining of various health problems. "The 
connection between their complaints and the Gulf fighting is 
still being investigated," the paper says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31796 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll: Citizens Leaning Toward Political Center </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll: Citizens Leaning Toward Political Center </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306110294 Prague CTK in English 1006 GMT 13 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1306110294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 13 (CTK) -- The majority of Czech 
citizens declare themselves supporters of the political centre, 
a poll conducted by the Institute for Public Opinion Research 
(IVVM) on April 28 to May 6 among 946 people over 15 showed. 
Although most Czechs are still orientated to the right, a shift 
towards the centre or left of the centre continues, the poll 
revealed. According to the IVVM, such development is connected 
with a repeated fall in voter preferences of the Civic 
Democratic Party (ODS), the strongest party in the government 
coalition. 
  Only five percent of those polled declared themselves 
supporters of extreme right parties and only 2 percent said they 
support extreme left parties. Thirty-three percent of the 
respondents see themselves to be at the political centre. 
  Followers of the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia 
(KSCM), the Left Bloc Party (LB) and the Democratic Left Party 
(SDL) are mostly left-orientated. As regards the Czech Social 
Democratic Party (CSSD) none of its potential voters declared 
themselves supporters of extreme left while 75 percent of them 
support either left of the centre or centre parties. 
  The ODS's potential voters traditionally stand unambiguously 
on the right spectrum of the political scene, while followers of 
the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) and the Christian Democratic 
Union- Czechoslovak People's Party (KDU-CSL), both government 
coalition parties, mostly declared themselves supporters the 
right-centre spectrum. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31797 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114__a94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister Comments on `Shocking' Explosion </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Minister Comments on `Shocking' Explosion </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1106185894 Budapest MTI in English 1653 GMT 11 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1106185894 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Budapest, June 11 (MTI) -- "Such a violent action 
is understandably shocking to a country where terrorists are 
uncommon, where social transformation has been going on for 
years in the greatest possible peace," Minister of the Interior 
Imre Konya told MTI on Saturday, commenting on the explosion. 
Konya said it was especially startling because it affected the 
parliament building, the symbol of democracy in Hungary. 
  "This event warns us to devote more attention and money to 
the protection of our public buildings," Konya continued. "I 
have already directed the chief police commissioner and the 
commander of the Government Guard to elaborate a proposal on 
improving the protection of the parliament and the 
representatives' office building. But this is basically a 
question of money and I intend to present a proposal on the 
issue to the Cabinet at its next session." 
  Asked whether there could be any connection between today's 
terrorist action and the recent explosions in Szeged and 
Szabadka, the minister said, "The chance of some connection 
cannot be excluded but I do not wish to make guesses concerning 
the background of the action while investigation is still under 
way." However, he said there is no information on any political 
group in Hungary that could be connected to the case. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31798 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_s_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commission Considers EU Membership `Priority' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Commission Considers EU Membership `Priority' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606084694 Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network in Slovene 
1330 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606084694 </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] At this moment the State Chamber Commission for 
International Relations is examining our foreign affairs 
activities. Due to sensitivity of the international problems, a 
part of today's session was closed to the public. The 
Commission first gave its consent to the ratification of various 
agreements and initiatives, while the decision about associate 
EU membership was partially discussed at the open part of the 
session and partially at the closed part. 
  The members of the Commission also listened to a report by 
President Milan Kucan on his visit to Croatia. Zvone Zorko 
reports about the part of the session that was open to the 
public: 
  [Begin Zorko recording] At the beginning of today's session, 
several members of the Commission criticized the work of the 
Foreign Ministry and especially Foreign Minister Lojze Peterle 
in extremely sharp words, hinting that, in the fateful moments 
of Slovenia's deteriorating international position, he seems to 
be unaware of this fact, making misleading and sometimes 
untruthful statements and concentrating his efforts on the 
issues and spheres that are of minor importance for Slovenia. 
  In this sense, the Commission emphasized that the foreign 
policy must be coordinated irrespective of party interests and 
that we must prepare a strategy for our foreign policy in which 
it must be clearly stated what our priorities are, where they 
lay, and how we will try to realize them. There is, of course, 
no doubt that our foreign policy must be present and active 
primarily in Paris, Bonn, and Washington. 
  Regarding the signing of an agreement about Slovenia's 
associate membership of the European Union, in the open part of 
the session, the Commission concluded that the signing of this 
agreement must be the first priority of the Slovene foreign 
policy and that the main problems here are being created by 
Italy and some European politicians who maintain that Slovenia 
is still a Balkan state. 
  The conclusion was that we must first of all establish what 
are the benefits and the shortcomings of EU membership for 
Slovenia and decide about the national program in this light, 
that the State Chamber should be the main one to decide about 
this issue, and also that we must maintain contacts with the 
European Parliament, intensify contacts with all EU members, and 
try to accomplish that Italy, by its views, will not block the 
signing of the EU associate membership agreement and its 
ratification. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31799 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ambassador to U.S. Resigns, Comments </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ambassador to U.S. Resigns, Comments </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506165894 Budapest Kossuth Radio Network in Hungarian 
1600 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506165894 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest Kossuth Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pal Tar, Hungary's ambassador to Washington, has 
resigned. He explained his decision by saying that he undertook 
this task at the request of the Antall government three years 
ago, and this period ended with the elections. 
  The foreign minister has accepted his resignation, which 
will 
therefore take effect from 5 July. According to the cabinet 
chief of the foreign minister, a decision of this kind by a 
leading diplomat is not an extraordinary event in a 
well-functioning bourgeois democracy. This can even be 
described as an elegant step. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
not aware of any similar move being considered by other 
diplomats. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31800 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_h_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Party Leaders React to Coalition Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Party Leaders React to Coalition Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506133594 Budapest UJ MAGYARORSZAG in Hungarian 15 Jun 94 
p 4 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506133594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest UJ MAGYARORSZAG </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [MTI report: "Party Leaders on Agreement"] </F>
  [Text] "If this agreement promises a stable government, I 
will gladly accept it," Prime Minister Peter Boross said. 
"However, I again call attention to the fact that it is one 
thing to sign a coalition agreement, and another thing to 
exercise a coalition government. I should know the agreement in 
detail in order to be able to formulate a full-value opinion. In 
any case, efficiency is the only measure of government activity. 
The question is how the veto possibility and the coordinating 
mechanisms will be put into practice," Boross said. 
  In his first reaction, Christian Democratic People's Party 
[KDNP] Chairman Laszlo Surjan pointed out that Sandor Keresztes 
also suggested the creation of the position of deputy prime 
minister to the late Jozsef Antall, but things did not work out 
at the time. 
  "I was not surprised by the success of the first phase of 
the 
coalition coordination talks. I have never doubted the creation 
of this coalition," Laszlo Kover, head of the parliamentary 
group of the Federation of Young Democrats, said. Laszlo Kover 
pointed out that, given the fact that no exchange of views has 
yet taken place in his party about the agreement, his words only 
reflect his own opinion. 
  "I was the only politician who drew the attention of the 
public and the media already before the elections to the 
emergence of a coalition between the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP] and the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ]. These two 
parties are incapable of governing without each other, and the 
fact that the MSZP came out as a bigger winner does not change 
this," said Jozsef Torgyan, chairman of the Independent 
Smallholders Party. Torgyan stressed that he cannot start 
evaluating an agreement that he does not yet know in detail but, 
according to the first information, his opinion is that the 
coalition cannot function this way. 
  According to Lajos Fur, chairman of the Hungarian Democratic 
Forum, it is extremely important that Hungary should have a 
really stable government and he is convinced that the past four 
years have been successful in this respect. In connection with 
the current situation, Fur said that, given the proportion of 
the election victory, it seemed that there would be stability in 
governing. However, in connection with the guarantees that 
emerged in the course of the negotiations, Lajos Fur 
increasingly thinks that there are reasons for concern. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31801 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_h_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kuncze Sees Progress in Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kuncze Sees Progress in Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506174594 Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP in Hungarian 15 Jun 94 p 
4 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506174594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MAGYAR HIRLAP </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Sz.Sz."-signed interview with Gabor Kuncze, acting </F>
parliamentary group leader of the Alliance of Free Democrats, on 
14 June; place not given: "The Conditions for Joint Government 
Are Given"] 
  [Text] This agreement means that the sides mutually ensured 
guarantees for each other that constitute the system of 
conditions for joint governing, Gabor Kuncze, acting 
parliamentary group leader of the Alliance of Free Democrats 
[SZDSZ], told MAGYAR HIRLAP after the 14 June round of the 
coalition talks. In Kuncze's view, no one has scored a victory 
over the other with this agreement, rather, the system of 
guarantees was jointly formed with the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP]. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] According to general opinion, the issue of 
guarantees is the toughest area of the coalition talks, and if 
you manage to agree on this then the main obstacles of 
establishing an MSZP-SZDSZ coalition will be averted. Does this 
mean that the coalition can now be seen as certain after the 
agreement reached on 14 June? 
  [Kuncze] The issue of guarantees is undoubtedly a very 
important matter but we will also have to agree on other issues. 
The programs are still to be coordinated; issues relating to the 
governmental structure have to be settled; ministries have to be 
allocated, and we have to agree on the personnel. Actually, as 
far as I know, good progress has been made in the expert 
committees. If we manage to agree on all the aforementioned 
issues, then the MSZP's congress and the SZDSZ's convention will 
have to approve the coalition agreement. When this is done then 
we can take it for granted that the coalition will be formed. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Does the current agreement mean that the 
SZDSZ has received the requested guarantees on the government's 
operating mechanism? 
  [Kuncze] This agreement means that the sides mutually 
ensured guarantees for each other, guarantees that constitute 
the system of conditions for joint governing. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] According to some newspaper reports, the 
biggest debate was over the right of veto. In light of the 
events yesterday, it appears that the MSZP had given in and the 
SZDSZ's will prevailed. 
  [Kuncze] We need not interpret this agreement in this way. 
The point is that we drew up the system of guarantees together 
with the MSZP and no one has scored a victory over anyone. I 
would emphasize that in the area of guarantees, the conditions 
now exist for joint government by the two parties. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Newspaper articles assessing the coalition's 
chances almost unanimously claim that you, as deputy prime 
minister, will likely lead the Interior Ministry. Are the 
rumors correct, and would you accept such an assignment? 
  [Kuncze] We have not discussed personnel issues, therefore I 
cannot answer questions regarding my position. Both negotiating 
sides agreed that someone is needed who represents the minority 
partner of the coalition in the government. However, we have 
not yet agreed on whether there will be a deputy prime 
ministerial post. As a matter of fact, this is not one of the 
issues of guarantees, this will have to be agreed on during the 
talks on governmental structure. It is not yet decided -- among 
other things -- whether to have one or two deputy prime 
ministers, if any, in the coalition government. It is certain 
that this position cannot be an "independent" position; the 
deputy prime minister will also have to direct the work of a 
ministry. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] In a few days' time, the parliamentary group 
will have a meeting at Rackeve where, according to plans, you 
will also have to decide on personnel issues. Do the party's 
leaders have any ideas on who should lead the work of the 
parliamentary group? 
  [Kuncze] The task of the parliamentary group's weekend 
meeting is to get to know each other and formulate internal 
statutes; we would also like to find out in which parliamentary 
expert committee people would like to work. We will not make 
any personnel decisions because the final result of the 
coalition talks is not yet known and the parliamentary parties 
have not yet agreed on allocating committee positions. 
Obviously, the parliamentary group's leadership will mainly 
depend on which leaders of the SZDSZ take on a role in the 
coalition government. As an acting parliamentary group leader, 
I continue to lead the work of the group but the final decision 
will definitely be made before the parliament's inaugural 
session. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31802 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_b_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karabashev Deplores Privatization Model </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karabashev Deplores Privatization Model </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506111894 Sofia OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK in Bulgarian 10 Jun 
94 pp 1, 3 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506111894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Valentin Karabashev, deputy prime minister </F>
and minister of trade, by Reni Neshkova; place and date not 
given: "Such Privatization Could Create Greater Chaos Than One 
We Already Have"] 
  [Text] [Neshkova] Mr. Karabashev, you do not deny the 
fact that mass privatization is an instrument of 
denationalization. What is the difference between our model and 
what happens in the Czech Republic, for example? 
  [Karabashev] The difference is that in the Czech Republic 
and Poland there is a clear scheme according to which the 
so-called mass privatization is being implemented, while what 
happens in Bulgaria under the same name has no mechanism vested 
in a law. 
  It is not clear, or at least I have not heard any of those 
who intend to implement the privatization, explaining what 
precisely will happen from the legal, economic, and technical 
points of view. 
  [Neshkova] You have been accused of trying to impose the 
Polish model, while the Czech model is more applicable to our 
conditions. 
  [Karabashev] This is a totally invented dispute. It is not 
very important whether the Polish or the Czech ideas will 
prevail under Bulgarian conditions. It is much more important to 
create an attitude among the Bulgarian people that is conducive 
to privatization, while taking into consideration the state of 
the privatization objects and the existing miserable economic 
situation. That is especially important, because it is 
well-known that the Bulgarians do not demonstrate a great 
interest in the subject. 
  [Neshkova] Perhaps, because they do not know what they stand 
to gain? 
  [Karabashev] It is a different question whether they are 
going to gain something. However, one cannot and should not 
require a special knowledge from them. They must only have 
confidence in what is taking place. They must participate in 
the privatization in such a manner that they could gain at least 
a small but guaranteed income. Why otherwise should they take 
part in the privatization if they are not convinced that this is 
in their interest? However, in order to achieve this there 
should have been structures that could mediate between the 
citizens and the enterprises that will be denationalized. 
Unfortunately, there are no such structures. In principle, 
certain investment funds are being mentioned, but it is not 
clear whether they will be created by the state, as I proposed, 
or whether they should be private, which also is possible. This 
is the situation in the Czech Republic. However, both 
alternatives do not exist in the current project. 
  [Neshkova] What will the state gain from the mass 
privatization of its enterprises? 
  [Karabashev] Personally, I am fed up answering that question 
and arguing the subject. The manner in which it is intended to 
carry out the denationalization offers absolutely no clarity on 
the subject, and in addition, I do not know the cabinet's 
intentions. From what I hear on this subject I can say that I 
never supported such mass privatization. In principle, it could 
only be a supplementing scheme. One cannot implement the most 
important things within a very brief period of time, in an 
attempt to achieve privatization's goal -- the emergence of real 
owners and economic figures. Perhaps it could have been 
achieved rapidly if our enterprises were not in such a pitiful 
state. 
  [Neshkova] Actually, what is the state of those 500 
enterprises which have been listed, and which will be offered 
for mass privatization? 
  [Karabashev] More than six months ago Lyuben Berov 
commissioned the Privatization Agency to prepare the list. 
Naturally, since then their state is not the same as it was at 
the time the list was prepared. Everyone could guess what 
happened to them since then. The list should be reviewed and 
updated in accordance with the privatization procedures that 
were introduced and newly demonstrated market interest. 
However, obviously someone has not been doing his job. 
  [Neshkova] Who? 
  [Karabashev] He who deals with privatization at the moment. 
I have no idea who he is. 
  [Neshkova] Will mass privatization contribute to 
establishing normal market relations? 
  [Karabashev] At present there are market relations -- at 
least to a certain degree. However, that only applies to the 
sphere of free price forming. The mass privatization should 
create free economic agents, who could act normally in the 
market. However, I have the feeling that the existing 
privatization variant will create an even greater chaos than the 
one we already have, and will not bring us closer to our goal. 
We will rather find ourselves further away from the goal we set 
for ourselves at the outset of this complex and difficult 
enterprise. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31803 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_b_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Briefs Zhelev on Privatization </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Briefs Zhelev on Privatization </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506161594 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1300 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506161594 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] President Zhelev invited ex-Deputy Prime Minister 
Valentin Karabashev, in his capacity as an expert on 
privatization, to give his views on the amendments to the 
Privatization Act that the National Assembly passed. Karabashev 
advised Dr. Zhelev to return the law to the National Assembly 
for further drafting because the approved changes contain a 
number of imperfections. He voiced serious objections 
concerning the chapter on mass privatization. 
  After his meeting with President Zhelev, Valentin Karabashev 
declared that he is optimistic that the existing imperfections 
in the law can be removed when parliament reconsiders it. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31804 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_b_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rakovski Legion Leader on Wages, Party Contacts </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rakovski Legion Leader on Wages, Party Contacts </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406121194 Sofia 24 CHASA in Bulgarian 8 Jun 94 p 12 </F>
<F P=103> AU1406121194 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia 24 CHASA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Asen Furchilkov, leader of the Rakovski </F>
Bulgarian Officer Legion, by Lyubomir Denov; place and date not 
given: "Lieutenant Colonel Asen Furchilkov: Rakovski Legion 
Will Not Be Obedient"] 
  [Excerpts] [Denov] Mr. Furchilkov, where do you think the 
money could be found for the 25 percent increase in military 
wages the Rakovski Officer Legion demanded at its congress? 
  [Furchilkov] We know that the military budget is low. 
However, in order to avoid being accused of populism I must 
stress that our declaration on increasing the wages is a unique 
signal that the military wages are low. Let the government draw 
its own conclusions. 
  [Denov] Is there a danger that the legion could be excluded 
from the Defense Law when the parliament votes on it? After the 
Khaskovo petition many deputies said that they will not support 
the legitimation of the organization. 
  [Furchilkov] I am not afraid of that. The Europeanization 
of the country cannot be stopped. Such organizations exist in 
all democratic states in Europe. [passage omitted] 
  [Denov] How are relations between the legion and the Defense 
Ministry chiefs after the conflict over the so-called "bloody 
letter?" When the letter was published the Defense Ministry 
leadership accused the authors of the letter, who initiated a 
petition demanding to increase the military budget, of 
instigation and planning a coup. 
  [Furchilkov] The whole problem is that we failed to 
construct a proper cooperation mechanism. We reached an 
agreement at all meetings at which specific problems of the 
officers were discussed. When our relations are disrupted 
blunders occur. This is a paradox -- after all, both we and the 
minister of defense pursue the same goals, and yet conflicts 
emerge. Obviously, the problem is in the mechanism of our 
contacts. I hope that everything will be strengthened out. 
Naturally there will be differences, but the legion will not be 
an obedient organization. 
  [Denov] What is the legion's attitude toward the intention 
of Minister Aleksandrov to apply the 1958 Law on Military 
Service and force all officers above the age of 50 to retire? 
  [Furchilkov] The defense minister has no other choice except 
to apply the existing law. There simply is not any other law. 
This is another paradox that stems from the low military budget. 
  However, the legion proposes several criteria for retiring 
the officers. If those criteria are strictly followed the 
tension in the Army will significantly abate. First, officers 
who do not have a higher education should be dismissed. Second, 
those who have posts which are lower than what their rank 
requires must go. Third, officers whose qualifications do not 
correspond to the posts they have must retire. However, the 
1958 law does not contain such clauses. This means that people 
will be dismissed in accordance with the year of their 
recruitment. It is difficult to say which principle is better. 
If the selective method is applied the danger exists that 
distortions will emerge if the "your people -- our people" 
principle is applied. 
  Simultaneously, we nevertheless demand that those people 
receive all compensations and indemnities. 
  [Denov] Does the legion have contacts with political 
parties? 
  [Furchilkov] Yes, the legion has contacts with all 
officially registered political forces. It is a different issue 
how efficient those contacts are. Until now we associated with 
the parties mainly through the newspapers. This produced 
certain negative consequences. From now on we will adopt the 
course of direct meetings with the basic parliamentary forces, 
in order to demonstrate our real face. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31805 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_b_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pirinski, Faction Withdraw From BSP Organs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pirinski, Faction Withdraw From BSP Organs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506194794 Sofia Bulgarska Televiziya Network in Bulgarian 
1700 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506194794 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Bulgarska Televiziya Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Georgi Pirinski, deputy of the Bulgarian </F>
Socialist Party, by unidentified television correspondent in 
Sofia on 15 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Studio announcer] The Alliance for Social 
Democracy [OSD] in the BSP [Bulgarian Socialist Party] has 
decided to withdraw its members from the BSP Executive Bureau 
and from the leadership of the BSP parliamentary group. 
  Georgi Pirinski, a member of the OSD Political Council, who 
until yesterday was the deputy of Nora Ananieva [leader of the 
BSP parliamentary group], has withdrawn from this post. Here is 
what he said to our reporter about his motives. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Pirinski, was your decision to withdraw 
from the leaderships of the BSP and the BSP parliamentary group 
a personal one or one made by the OSD, and what made this step 
necessary? 
  [Pirinski] It was my own personal decision. It is not 
connected with personal motives, but with the issue of what kind 
of policy the party will follow in practice during the coming 
months. As you know, since the autumn of last year a discussion 
has been in progress within the BSP on whether the party should 
actively commit itself to the market reforms or whether it 
should adopt a more rigid and closed position in defense of 
social rights and social demands. The recent BSP congress 
correctly concluded that commitment to the reforms put the BSP 
in a very good light in the eyes of society as a factor for 
stabilizing the state and making some attempt to move forward. 
However, seeing how the accents were placed at the plenum 
following the congress, what is in store for us? In my view, 
the very composition of the Executive Bureau and the commissions 
lends weight to the opposite viewpoint -- the rigid or closed 
position. I do not find this position well-founded, and this 
viewpoint is not in the interests of either the BSP or society. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31806 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Perisic Views Threat of Military Force </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Perisic Views Threat of Military Force </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506210594 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506210594 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" from a speech by Colonel General Momcilo </F>
Perisic, commander of the General Staff of the Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia (FRY) Army, made at the program marking the day of 
the FRY Army in Belgrade on 15 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] Today we are celebrating the day of the FRY [Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia] Army for the first time in the desire 
and hope that the best part of our military and war history 
could be incorporated into a safer future for the citizens of 
our country, and above all, its youth. 
  The Serbian and the Montenegrin peoples have their authentic 
national histories, however, there would be no survival for us 
had we not united our flags of the same colors for a joint 
future. 
  For centuries, our people have had to watch for and defend 
itself from the conquerors, to ensure their biological survival 
and living space with arms, bravery, and collective 
intelligence. We have had our own national armies and each of 
them -- the Serbian and the Montenegrin -- veiled history in 
timeless epics. 
  July 16 is a symbol of the unification of the military 
forces 
of two peoples of the same blood and one of the foundation 
stones in the heroic history, which confirms that only with 
joint forces and in aspiration of the same goals can we defeat 
any enemy. 
  There is a war going on in our vicinity. The Serbian people 
in the Srpska republic and in the republic of Serbian Krajina 
are fighting the decisive battle for their survival. The 
preservation of their freedom and territory would not be 
possible without the policy of peace pursued by the FRY. The 
determination for peace has been made conditional on the manner 
of outcome of the Balkan drama and we greet wholeheartedly all 
the solutions that are leading toward just peace. 
  The enemies of the Serbian nation, unfortunately, want war, 
by trying to transform their blatant military defeats into 
diplomatic victories with foreign forces. Because of the just 
struggle of the Serbs on the territories that they have 
inhabited and created over centuries, our fatherland has been 
punished. All the sanctions are now a dark symbol of the 
confinement of an entire nation, and a squaring of accounts on 
children, helpless, and ill people who are the innocent victims 
of the ruthless intentions of the international superpowers to 
reshape the Balkan territory to suit their interests. 
  Currently, the FRY is also being threatened with military 
force. Some so-called humanists from the wide world have 
demanded the bombing and further decimation of our population. 
Unfortunately, they have been joined by some citizens of this 
country, who have thus cast a curse upon their own nation and 
their fatherland, and called for the [word indistinct] on their 
towns and co-residents. This has never happened before in the 
famous history of the Serbian and the Montenegrin peoples. 
  The FRY Army does not want a war. The participants of the 
war know what it brings and what it takes away and that is why 
peace is the goal of all our goals in the FRY. However, not a 
single army that cherishes the traditions on which it was built 
can accept peace at all costs and if the freedom, dignity, and 
pride of the nation is endangered. 
  We are building an army of professionals that will protect 
peace with its readiness for war and capability to win it, if it 
is imposed on us. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31807 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Chief Addresses Security Issues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army Chief Addresses Security Issues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506165894 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1830 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506165894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Colonel General Momcilo Perisic, </F>
commander of the General Staff of the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia Army, by Svetlana Petrusic; place and date not given 
-- recorded] 
  [Text] [Petrusic] Good evening, esteemed viewers. 
According to a decision of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's 
[FRY] Supreme Command, 16 June has been proclaimed Yugoslav Army 
Day and it will be celebrated for the first time this year. 
Prompted by this, we asked Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff 
Colonel-General Momcilo Perisic for an interview. 
  General, at the beginning of our conversation I would like 
to 
congratulate you on the holiday. August will mark the first 
anniversary of your appointment as chief of general staff. 
[Word indistinct] one of the youngest generals at the head of 
the army, among the army leadership. Tell me, what are your war 
experiences? 
  [Perisic] Yes, the war found me in Zadar, in the post of 
commander of the Artillery Training Center. The Artillery 
Training Center was situated in a facility that was not 
convenient for training and molding future officers because 
antagonism in the environment was evident to the extent that 
freedom of movement was limited. Later, when the situation had 
escalated, and when the Yugoslav Army, that is, the Yugoslav 
People's Army [JNA] was proclaimed to be the occupying force in 
the region of Croatia, clashes broke out which drew the army -- 
despite its wishes and will -- into the war. Of course, in 
Zadar -- where we possessed immense knowledge, extremely capable 
people, and top-of-the-line technology -- we had to accept this 
war only after the lives of people who were there became 
endangered. Since I headed the training center, and since I was 
trained to nurture the greatest responsibility, the most humane 
responsibility which involves caring for the people I am 
responsible for, I -- together with these people -- had to 
oppose them because their lives were in danger [sentence as 
heard]. And of course, in the course of opposing them, since we 
were far superior in terms of training and technology, we won 
and forced the Ustasha units to comply with all the conditions 
we had set them. They complied with these conditions, and even 
engaged their people for many things [sentence as heard]. 
Therefore, we left Zadar together with all the hardware, 
personal property, and the entire education material base 
[nastavno materijalna baza] and mobile infrastructure. We did 
not leave anything for the Ustashas. Of course, after leaving 
Zadar, the Artillery Training Center was relocated to Sarajevo, 
and after the new education center was installed, I was 
transferred to eastern Herzegovina and appointed commander of 
the Bileca Corps, which later evolved into the Herzegovina Corps. 
  Consequently, since I had already learned the war lesson, I 
undertook a series of preventive measures to avoid putting the 
people of eastern Herzegovina -- that is, the people who 
accepted the JNA as their own -- in a position similar to the 
one we had been in in Zadar, that is, in the region of Croatia. 
Of course, thanks to the extremely high degree of awareness of 
the Herzegovina people, the Montenegrin people, and the Serbian 
people -- which at the time aided the armed struggle and 
provided the material backing for it -- we succeeded in 
defending the area from the onslaught of the Ustasha hordes, and 
in saving material goods. I stayed there until the FRY was 
constituted, and until the JNA was ordered to withdraw from 
those areas to the FRY. 
  [Petrusic] Your friends say that you are a modest and 
decisive man, which became evident in this war. With this 
experience, you were appointed to head the Yugoslav Army General 
Staff, at a time when Yugoslavia is in peace and is striving for 
peace? 
  [Perisic] If professional soldiers were to decide in matters 
of war and peace, they would always opt for peace, because it is 
professionals who know best what war entails and what it takes 
away, that is, how extensive material destruction can be. 
Unfortunately, soldiers were never the ones to decide whether 
there was or was not going to be war, and of course, as a 
professional army, we carried out the orders of the state 
structures and implemented political decisions. 
  [Petrusic] General, what forms the basis of the new process 
of establishing the Yugoslav Army, the new Yugoslav Army, and 
what is the doctrinal approach to the country's defense? 
  [Perisic] The transformation and the establishment of the 
Yugoslav Army is primarily based on state control over national 
defense, that is, All National Defense [Opste Narodna Odbrana], 
and on the new military doctrine and all other positive 
regulations. The essence is for us to remain masters in our own 
home, which means defending the territorial integrity of the FRY 
people, that is, Serbs and Montenegrins, and all other national 
minorities because this is a civic state. It is important to 
maximally develop the defense capability of society as a whole, 
and particularly the combat readiness of the army, not in the 
sense of deploying this army outside the FRY borders, but rather 
as one of the possible ways of deterring any aggressor from 
undertaking measures that would endanger the country's security. 
  [Petrusic] You mentioned the transformation of the army. 
Tell me, in what phase it is now, and what is your view of the 
transformation? 
  [Perisic] The transformation of the Yugoslav Army is based 
on a series of realistic factors that we examined studiously and 
then -- in terms of quality and quantity -- dimensioned the army 
in such a way that it completely corresponds to our doctrines, 
that is, so that it provides protection for our country's 
population. We primarily had in mind the real danger 
threatening us from abroad; furthermore, we had in mind our 
realistic material potential, human resources, and birth rate. 
In addition to this, we needed to dimension the JNA -- which 
actually provided the basis for creating the Yugoslav Army -- in 
such a way that, through organizational and structural changes, 
in a new environment, we could create units that in peacetime 
are capable of preventing surprises, yet at the same time 
flexible enough to create, in wartime and in a short period of 
time, a massive army. Of course, the transformation of the army 
is an ongoing process, a process that encompasses everything 
from organizational and structural changes, to the modernization 
of weaponry and equipment and the army's visual identity. 
  [Petrusic] A good part of the military industry remained on 
the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Could this present a 
problem for us today, for the military industry of the FRY? 
  [Perisic] Certainly, the loss of territory and installations 
of the military industry is a problem for the current Yugoslav 
Army and the overall defense capabilities of society. However, 
by carrying out an organized evacuation, we managed to retrieve 
most facilities and to salvage all our technical documentation. 
Thus, parallel to carrying out the transformation of the 
Yugoslav Army, we are also securing conditions in domestic 
companies for the manufacture of equipment vital for waging an 
armed conflict. 
  [Petrusic] There was mention of our industry's new 
weapons. Can you say something about this? What type of 
weapons are we talking about? 
  [Perisic] Well, the modernization refers primarily to 
modernization of the combat training system and supplying the 
army with new hardware, that is, weapons and systems. In the 
course of this period we managed to replace or substitute the 
manufacture of equipment we used to have until recently, either 
by modernizing or by utilizing collective scientific knowledge 
in order to develop new systems that substitute the systems we 
used to manufacture, but with far better features, that is, with 
far better combat specifications. 
  [Petrusic] I believe that the need to defend the country is 
greater than ever. Is the budget adequate to this need? 
  [Perisic] Since our country is under economic blockade, and 
since a war was waged and is still being waged on the territory 
of the former Yugoslavia, all this has had an adverse effect on 
our general economic potential, and thus also on the Yugoslav 
Army. Anyone who forgets the connection between the country's 
economic potential and the financial resources earmarked for the 
Army is being unrealistic. That is why the budget earmarked for 
the Yugoslav Army precisely correlates to the amount society 
could set aside and that is 7.43 percent of the estimated 
national product. 
  [Petrusic] General, there has been criticism of the new 
Yugoslav Army that it has retained certain features of the army 
of the former Yugoslavia? What is the basis for such opinions? 
  [Perisic] Since our country has introduced a multiparty 
system and since many leaders would like to have an army 
tailored to their wishes, consequently, not all of these wishes 
can be fulfilled. The most dangerous thing for the Army, any 
army in a multiparty society, is to have a political party 
interfering with the Army's personnel policy. Therefore, the 
fiercest criticism is precisely directed at the fact that the 
Army -- through the process of transformation -- has been 
depoliticized, thus creating a barrier preventing parties from 
influencing the Army's personnel policy. Moreover, we devote a 
lot of attention to the Army's personnel policy and perhaps the 
greatest contribution to the Army's transformation is that we 
now appoint extremely capable people to command the units of the 
Yugoslav Army -- people who posses a high quotient of knowledge, 
capability, dignity, and pride, and who are ready and capable of 
foreseeing events and making decisions appropriate to both the 
combat readiness of their particular unit and our society's 
overall potential. 
  [Petrusic] You once said that a good commander was one who 
does not surrender and does not allow himself to be deceived? 
  [Perisic] One of the very important things in the education 
and training of officers was, and still is, to ensure that they 
are extremely honest toward their own people and their troops, 
yet at the same time extremely cunning with respect to the 
enemy. I usually say that you must have a multitude of faces 
for the enemy, while you must have only one face for your own 
soldier and your people. It is only in this way that an officer 
can succeed in motivating and leading people in carrying out 
orders, in peacetime and particularly in wartime. However, 
unfortunately, owing to incorrect training of officers in the 
JNA, all of their capability was directed at training them to 
organize themselves and lead the army in a way designed to 
defend the country from external enemies, not counting on the 
possibility of an internal enemy. Because they were naive, many 
of them acted in a way they should not have. Of course, in the 
course of this civil war, starting with Slovenia through to 
Bosnia, many officers were not up to their duties, and they got 
what they deserved. I would like to stress that every unit of 
the JNA that was headed by a capable officer lost neither 
manpower, hardware, nor surrendered. Everything that the Croats 
and Slovenes accomplished, they accomplished through deceit, 
certainly not through armed combat. 
  [Petrusic] How much attention is devoted today to the 
issue of patriotism? 
  [Perisic] Patriotism is a quality that develops and grows 
throughout one's life. The extent to which this is developed in 
the educational process is reflected in the Yugoslav Army. It 
is a very important quality, I might even say virtue, in the 
Yugoslav Army, without which an assignment cannot be 
successfully carried out. Therefore, in some important aspects, 
the officers -- and I particularly stress this -- must be proven 
patriots. This means that an officer is ready to help his 
people in their most difficult moments, that he is in a position 
to share the people's fate, and that he is ready for the 
greatest sacrifices. We have had many such officers throughout 
our history. We had them in both World War I and II, and even 
in this war, and -- owing to their high degree of patriotism -- 
they ultimately succeeded in defending the people who accepted 
them as their own. 
  [Petrusic] How important is it for all of us -- not only the 
Army -- to defend national interests? To contribute? Is this 
generally the case in society today? 
  [Perisic] The degree to which the FRY's social structures 
are ready to defend their country should be tested in practice, 
yet that it impossible without war. Since we are fighting for 
peace and not for war, we actually cannot discuss this without 
drawing on the conclusions and experience gained by the people 
in the Srpska republic and the republic of Serbian Krajina in 
the course of their resistance. Therefore, we know that there 
is a high degree [of readiness to defend their country] over 
there. The resistance encompasses all structures of society and 
both armies; they succeeded in carrying out all tasks. 
Unfortunately, many structures have, in a certain way, isolated 
themselves because they resorted to the line of least 
resistance, which is why we have a lot of people both from the 
republic of Serbian Krajina and the Srpska republic, that have 
moved to other areas, where they lead a comfortable life and 
often boast that they are helping their people, yet the truth is 
they would help them most if they were with them. This applies 
equally to all structures, and particularly to intellectual 
structures. 
  In addition to this, there is a number of relevant factors 
that -- owing to ignorance or intentionally -- prompt people to 
criticize their own army because they do not see it as their 
own. They have forgotten the lesson of history that says that 
it is always better to have and feed thousands of one's own 
troops, than a single foreign troop. 
  [Petrusic] NATO and the United States troops are in close 
proximity to our territory. As a military expert, can you give 
me your interpretation of their presence, their presence in 
close proximity to our territory? Can this presence threaten 
our security, and to what extent? 
  [Perisic] You know that NATO is an alliance created to 
protect the interests of its member states. Therefore, it 
certainly ought to be in the service of all these countries 
equally. However, it has opted for serving the interests of 
only one country which is the architect of the new world order. 
Theretofore, it is quite clear that it has been abused in a 
certain sense, and after all, its raison d'etre after the 
disintegration of the Warsaw Pact is pointless, unless it wishes 
to continue doing what it is doing now. 
  Many NATO operatives have been stationed in the vicinity of 
the FRY with the aim of supporting the forces that were actively 
involved first in the disintegration of the Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia, and are now actively involved in the 
attack on the Republic of Serbian Krajina and the Serbian 
Republic. Since they are in the immediate vicinity -- I mean 
the operatives -- they are indirectly threatening the security 
of the FRY. However, we need to know that they have not come 
here only to help the secessionist forces, but also to create 
pressure on our country. Our country is under a multifold 
blockade; on the one hand, it is under complete economic 
blockade, and on the other hand, it is surrounded by NATO 
vessels that are in a certain sense threatening the security of 
the FRY. 
  [Perisic] We have lots of experience because, throughout 
the four-year-long war fought by our fellow men outside the FRY, 
we have been made aware that their presence can -- in a sudden 
change of sorts -- bring into question the security of the FRY. 
For this reason we have been implementing certain measures to 
prevent any kind of surprise. 
  [Petrusic] NATO planes have been violating Yugoslav 
airspace. After all, there are documents regarding this in the 
United Nations. Tell me, what is the tolerance threshold and 
your opinion on it. Why is this happening? They have been 
warned. 
  [Perisic] The civil war on the territory of the SFRY 
[Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] started primarily due 
to the influence from abroad, of course with a skillful 
manipulation of internal contradictions. Since this civil war 
is based primarily on religious, ethnic, and -- one would say -- 
other antagonisms, then the danger exists of it spreading to the 
territory of the FRY according to a similar principle. Since 
the creators of the new world order in their scheming had, of 
course, not counted on the heroic resistance of the people in 
the two Krajinas, they were in a way stopped, and that process 
was thwarted. If we are united to the degree necessary for the 
defense of one's own ethnic entity, then we can stop that 
process. Bearing all this in mind, the FRY is optimally 
committed to ending the war in Bosnia as soon as possible, and 
in that respect is giving optimal support to all peace-loving 
forces in the world toward preventing the spillover of the war 
toward the East, that is, to this area. 
  [Petrusic] How do you assess the recent Navy exercises? 
  [Perisic] Although the Navy is going through extremely 
difficult times because the infrastructure has remained on the 
territory of Croatia, it has still managed in a relatively short 
period of time to build enough of the infrastructure and 
material base for a successful build-up of combat readiness. 
Tactical exercises involving live ammunition were held to that 
end, to test to what degree the Navy is capable and ready under 
new conditions and with a new organization to defend the 
territorial integrity of its theater of operations, that is, our 
part of the coastline and territorial waters. 
  [Petrusic] Mr. General, they are constantly threatening us. 
They have been threatening us with sanctions, they have been 
threatening us with bombing. Is there any cause for fear? 
  [Perisic] Of course, when our social entity is endangered, 
there has to be some kind of fear. However, we have been shown 
throughout history and the present war fought by our fellow men 
in the republic of Serbian Krajina and the Serb republic, under 
extremely unfavorable circumstances, that for four years they 
have been successfully defending their territorial integrity, 
and that they have been resisting a far more numerous enemy 
supported by the world media -- not only in the moral sense but 
also logistically, even through the use of the air force. We 
can conclude that in this region the Serbian and Montenegrin 
soldiers and the Serbian and Montenegrin people, and other 
ethnic minorities, are ready and capable of defending themselves 
with, of course, the help of the Yugoslav Army. 
  [Petrusic] Vlada Popovski, defense minister of Macedonia 
[The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM], has 
recently said that the Yugoslav Army has been instigating 
conflicts, and that the Yugoslav Army troops have been amassing 
on the border. What kind of conflicts is this about? 
  [Perisic] As we know, Macedonia [as heard] has accepted on 
its territory the UN forces, among which the U.S. troops are in 
the majority. Of course, they are not there to protect the 
Macedonian people but to form their own bases, and to help them 
in securing the borders since the Macedonians have neither 
troops enough nor material means enough to build a more modern 
army. Quite frequently during this help in the border security 
-- out of ignorance but most often out of misinformation as to 
where the border exactly is, since the border is only 
administrative, and not fixed -- the U.S. soldiers quiet often 
stray and enter the territory of the FRY. Every such entry has 
been registered, some have been prevented and even detained 
without any incidents. However, since someone in the world 
wants to turn any border violation into an incident, we have 
often been accused of that. In that sense I have had several 
meetings with the UN commander in Macedonia, warning him of the 
frequent violations of the border, and he has been promising 
that it would not happen again. However, I am not sure that 
many of these violations are not deliberate. As for the 
accusations that the Yugoslav Army has been amassing forces 
along the border with Macedonia, that is a mere media lie. 
  [Petrusic] There have been similar accusations concerning 
the border with Albania. 
  [Perisic] The border with Albania is somewhat different, 
even though the borders with Albania and the western part of 
Macedonia where the population is mostly Albanian is similar as 
far as border violations are concerned, since young men from 
Kosovo and Metohija and even the Raska region [Sandzak], that 
is, Albanians and Muslims, are mostly avoiding serving with the 
Yugoslav Army. However, since they have illusions about a 
forceful secession, they have been sending these young men for 
training to various centers abroad through various channels, and 
upon their return -- to test their training and to bring in a 
large amount of arms, they enter our country illegally -- and 
now, since they are most often prevented by the members of 
border units, there are incidents. [sentence as heard] These 
incidents most frequently amount to their using arms when they 
are stopped by our border patrols whilst crossing the border 
illegally and, naturally, when someone tries to physically 
liquidate our members defending our borders he is met with an 
adequate response, and unfortunately these incidents frequently 
end in serious consequences for those trying to cross illegally, 
which again the world, which is not inclined toward us, has been 
using very effectively in the media propaganda against our 
country. 
  [Petrusic] The foreign media says that there is a 
possibility of transferring the hot spot of war to Kosovo. This 
is aided by the statements, for example, by Ibrahim Rugova, who 
on his recent tour of Europe, in France, to be precise, asked 
for a protectorate of the international community in Kosovo, 
which implies the presence of a military force, that is, NATO. 
To what degree is the Yugoslav Army today a factor of stability 
on the south of Serbia? 
  [Perisic] The Yugoslav Army is a factor of stability of 
Yugoslavia as a whole, and thus the stability in the region of 
Kosovo-Metohija, thanks also, of course, to other elements and 
the people's support. However, I personally believe that an 
average Albanian, that is a Shqiptar in Kosovo, would never 
choose the war options because he can see clearly enough what is 
happening in regions where people are trying to resolve 
something by force. Second, they can also clearly see what the 
living standards of their compatriots in Albania are in 
comparison with Kosovo. It suffices to climb mountains 
bordering Albania to realize what a vast difference there is 
between the economic might and standard of living of Shqiptars 
on this and on that side of the border, for the Shqiptars in 
Kosovo-Metohija live at least ten times better than their 
compatriots in Albania. I believe that all they have been 
creating under the fold of the FRY, in the former SFRY, and 
Serbia today, is such material wealth that they would certainly 
not want to lose in some showdown not of their own choosing, a 
showdown that could be imposed by their leaders. But they were 
wise enough not to have accepted this. If they had, they would 
have lost so much. They are aware of this, so I do not believe 
such a thing could happen. Even if it does, the army and 
militia in Kosovo, as well as other social factors, will be 
ready and able to defend the territorial integrity of the their 
own country. 
  [Petrusic] The situation on the territory of the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is very tense. How do you see the denouement 
of the situation from the military-political point of view? 
And, do you think that the Serbian Republic can defend itself 
from an even greater aggression by the Muslim-Croatian 
federation, and to what extent? 
  [Perisic] The Yugoslav Army and the FRY leadership are 
making tremendous efforts through various international factors 
and through political and military factors in Bosnia to effect 
peace there as soon as possible, because we know that only 
peace, not any kind of peace but a just peace, can put an end to 
destruction and halt the suffering of all three peoples. 
However, there can be no peace if all three sides are not 
equally determined to achieve it. 
  Will there be fresh aggression, an offensive of wider 
proportions? 
  I am certain that a major offensive is a realistic 
possibility if the international factors that contributed and 
even caused the civil war in Bosnia do not exert pressure on the 
Muslims and Croats. I am sure that it will not be more 
successful than the ones so far, and you know that all of them 
ended in failure. The results of the fighting so far are after 
all a clear picture of that. This proves that the army has done 
whatever it could under extremely difficult conditions and has 
successfully resisted all offensives for three years. 
  If these Muslim-Croat forces, the Muslim-Croat coalition, 
were to be aided by certain international factors, especially 
NATO, then the situation would naturally be by far more 
difficult. However, I believe that the international community 
will not allow such a thing to happen, and if it did, the 
consequences would be disastrous, not only the for the people of 
the Serbian Republic, but for the entire population of the 
Balkans, Europe, and even further afield. 
  [Petrusic] Croatian President Franjo Tudjman has said on 
many occasions recently, as has Croatian UN Ambassador Nobilo, 
that they would return Krajina into Croatia's borders and the 
state system by force. What do you think about these threats? 
  [Perisic] In view of the fact that there has been a 
political rift in the Republic of Croatia and that Tudjman is 
losing ground, everything is possible. He could push the 
Croatian nation into another war in a desperate attempt to hold 
on to power. What the chances are to return the Republic of 
Serbian Krajina into Croatia's borders by forces are perfectly 
clear from the operations on its borders so far. 
  Even though they engaged the entire country with the help 
from the international community in a war against a far smaller 
nation, they did not manage to do anything. The Serbs have 
managed to protect their territorial integrity and did not allow 
deeper incursions to be made. 
  [Petrusic] We are all witnesses of a parties' struggle for 
power. Even foreign powers are being called to help in this. 
Can you tell us to what extent can this inter-party bickering 
affect the Yugoslav Army and to what extent has the Yugoslav 
Army protected itself from internal political divisions? 
  [Perisic] It is obvious that the unity of the country is 
inevitably reflected on the unity of an army. The army is a 
social category that in every country, ours included, to a 
greater or lesser degree reflects developments in society. The 
stronger the consensus between parties on vital issues of 
importance for the survival of a nation, normally the more 
positively this is reflected in the overall situation in the 
army, particularly its combat morale. 
  The stronger the disunity, the stronger influence it has 
over 
the army, but as we have said, the army has been depoliticized, 
it has gotten a well-built defense mechanism for the prevention 
of such negative influences, I think that the party influence on 
the overall combat readiness of the army is marginal. 
  [Petrusic] People talk about a professional army? Do you 
think that a partial professionalization of the army has become 
a necessity? 
  [Perisic] Every army in the world, including ours, is partly 
professional, because we have permanent and temporary staff. 
The permanent staff are officers, noncommissioned officers, and 
civilians in the army. The temporary staff are soldiers doing 
their military service. To be more specific, we are currently 
involved in the process of turning the army into a professional 
army. According to the number of the professional soldiers, 
there are considerably more of them now than in the Yugoslav 
People's Army. However, disproportion between the needs and 
capabilities has also arisen in this sphere. This means that we 
need to professionalize the army as much as possible, but 
society's potential is small. This is, after all, reflected in 
the budget, and we cannot have so many people, so many paid 
soldiers, or as we say, we cannot have so many professional 
soldiers on contract. Naturally, the level of 
professionalization will grow with economic growth and the 
increase of our country's general potential. 
  [Petrusic] Mr. General, can you tell us something about 
the FRY Army's current level of combat readiness to defend the 
country from possible aggression. 
  [Perisic] The Yugoslav Army peacetime force is qualitatively 
and quantitatively completely equipped to prevent any surprises. 
By evaluating and analyzing situations, it is always capable of 
taking adequate measures to prevent any surprises, even under 
the most adverse conditions. This means that only a very short 
period of time is necessary to transform the peacetime force 
into a war-time force of over 500,000 men, which is completely 
sufficient to protect the nation from foreign threats of any 
kind. 
  [Petrusic] And finally, a personal question. How strenuous 
and difficult is it to be the chief of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav Army today? 
  [Perisic] It is not easy to be the chief of the general 
staff of an army that, if I may say so, has inherited many 
negative traits from the Yugoslav People's Army, nor is it easy 
under the present economic conditions, in the present ongoing 
war situation on our borders. 
  Had the conditions been any better, I probably would not 
have 
been given this job, but considering that the situation is very 
complex, I came and accepted this duty for three important 
reasons. 
  The first is to prevent, together with other elements of 
society, a civil war in this region, as the enemy has created 
such a scenario. According to that scenario, it has achieved 
everything it wanted on the territory of the former SFRY, using 
primarily the Yugoslavs in the realization of its aims. Using 
the same principle, it wants to accomplish other aims in this 
region. However, thanks to the substantial role played by all 
factors, including the Yugoslav Army -- perhaps its role in this 
is the most important -- we have avoided this civil war. 
Naturally, the danger of that has not vanished, but I hope that 
we will overcome that. 
  The second reason for accepting the post of chief of the 
General Staff is that I wanted to prevent decent people -- who 
are in the majority in the army, there are over 90 percent -- 
from being unjustifiably attacked by, for example, an 
irresponsible military leadership. I think that we have had 
much success in this, because I believe the current General 
Staff gives no reason for other Yugoslav Army members to be 
attacked because of our mistakes or some other omissions. 
  And the third reason I have accepted the post of chief of 
the 
General Staff is to help preserve the social character of the 
Yugoslav Army and the social being of our nation that is now 
more imperiled than ever before in its history. I think that, 
together with other elements of our society, in which the role 
of the media, and others, is not insignificant, and in which I 
would say this role is very important, we can present the 
Yugoslav Army for what it is and not present it as better or 
worse than it actually is for various interests. One should be 
completely objective, critically objective. The assessment of 
the Army will help us a lot. Uncritical and tendentious 
attitudes, which do exist, are hindering us in many ways. 
  [Petrusic] Mr. General, I wish you much success in 
performing your current duties. Thank you for this interview. 
  [Perisic] Thank you. I would like to urge all the viewers 
throughout the FRY to help their soldiers as much as they can to 
overcome the problems that the Yugoslav Army and our society 
face at present, and through firm and unbreakable links with the 
Yugoslav Army, help it become an army that will certainly be a 
guarantor of freedom and peace. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31808 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic `Disintegration' Intensifying </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Economic `Disintegration' Intensifying </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0310B Belgrade EKONOMSKA POLITIKA in Serbo-Croatian 23 
May 94 p 20 </F>

<F P=103> 94BA0310B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade EKONOMSKA POLITIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M. Simovic: "Motor Vehicle Industry: The Process </F>
of Disintegration Is Continuing"] 
  [Text] More than 1,700 items for Zastava motor vehicles, 
which before the disintegration of the SFRY [Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia] were produced by the industry of the 
seceded republics (some were imported from the West European 
countries), have been put into production either in Zastava 
factories or in firms in Serbia and Montenegro which have joined 
the motor vehicle program. So far, according to Eng. Miodrag 
Bogdanovic, director of the motor vehicle factory in Kragujevac, 
more than 19 million German marks [DM] have been spent to 
organize that production, "mainly at the expense of the earnings 
of workers of the firms that have joined this production 
program." You might think that at Zastava they would look on 
substitution of production from its former industrial 
cooperation outside Serbia and Montenegro as a kind of victory 
in the economic war which, along with its other forms, has 
broken out on the soil of the former Yugoslavia. That is not the 
case. Even in the initial phase of heightened tensions in the 
business sphere between Serbia and Slovenia, they were saying at 
Zastava that the disintegration of the state and the 
accentuation of animosities would impose too heavy a price on 
all large business systems, from the producer of the end product 
to his partners in industrial cooperation. Perhaps that price is 
best reflected in the drop of production from nearly 200,000 to 
only about 6,000 last year and about 11,000 vehicles this year. 
Although the situation in production is dramatic, as confirmed 
by the frequent visits made to Zastava by republic and federal 
officials in order to find the key to "faster startup of the 
installed capacity," the question is whether this substitution 
makes sense, that is, whether even that much production would 
have occurred if they had not been "timely in undertaking to 
eliminate dependence on auto parts producers in the seceded 
republics," Bogdanovic says. It is certain that without having 
organized production of those 1,700 items, production would not 
be possible, especially because the sanctions and blockades have 
prevented imports from the West European countries, specifically 
from industrial cooperation with FIAT in Italy. 
  The process of organizing the production of the new items 
has 
not been completed, and certain parts and assemblies are now 
being put into production, especially for the Florida and the 
restyled Yugo, the convertible.... A recent visit to the vehicle 
factory in Kragujevac by representatives of the republic 
government, led by Dragan Tomic, minister without portfolio, who 
is also a member of the team for "rapid intervention" in the 
economy and who is working to guide the decisions of the 
government to more effective invigoration of the economy, had 
the objective of "examining in the most specific terms what is 
interfering with the growth of production, especially because 
the present market--such as it is--is showing a greater demand 
than the supply Zastava is now presenting." It was, of course, 
observed that money was necessary and credits to finance 
production, and then there is the need for the state to take 
specific steps in the area of tax policy to benefit motor 
vehicle producers, as well as in the area of tariff policy, 
whether it is a case of benefits in the importation of 
production supplies or importation of vehicles which because of 
their comfort, capacity, and other features should carry the 
burden of filling the state treasury with the charges that would 
be collected on them. Because the government representatives 
then talked separately to the managers of the vehicle factory 
and the management of the truck and special-purpose factories, 
and then in a broader meeting attended by the journalists as 
well, about the "main direction of the effort to invigorate 
production," it is not possible to talk with much confidence 
about the details that were dealt with and agreed on at that 
time. It was only a few days later that Miodrag Bogdanovic 
announced in a news conference that he was going to Belgrade, 
where he would talk to representatives of the government about 
"three scenarios to invigorate the production of motor 
vehicles." The contents of each of those scenarios and which 
will be adopted are a bit of a secret at the moment, but it is 
known that each one defines the growth of production this year 
and preparation for the period after the sanctions are removed. 
  Will the growth of production be based solely on substituted 
production of parts, or will an attempt be made even by renewing 
ties with the earlier parts producers all over the former SFRY 
to make motor vehicle production cheaper and more concrete? The 
answer to this question does not lie solely in the power of 
Zastava or Serbia or of its subcontractors in Slovenia, Croatia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia--FYROM]. It is certain that those former 
republics of Yugoslavia, now independent states which are 
members of the United Nations, must respect the sanctions that 
have been introduced and the economic blockade. To whose 
detriment: Is it only to the detriment of Serbia? As far as the 
author of these lines is aware, many former subcontractors of 
Zastava in the seceded republics have complained that the 
business ties were severed, least of all, of course, out of any 
sentimental reasons, but purely on the basis of business and 
profit. At Zastava, they make no secret of the fact that the 
economic logic of all the former participants in motor vehicle 
production on the soil of the former state of the SFRY, which is 
to say, its own economic logic, is on the side of renewing the 
business ties, because with every passing day, with every new 
auto part put into production, when it comes to this kind of 
production, the process of disintegration of the economy on the 
territory of the old Yugoslavia intensifies, and this is 
occurring under the pressure of the need to somehow survive. 
Economic interest is now emerging as a factor tending to weaken 
ties further, a factor that has been forcibly yoked to the logic 
of actual war and economic war, the sanctions of the United 
Nations, but also mutual penalization for having lived in the 
same state for decades. All unused capacity previously employed 
to make motor vehicles gives rise to reflections about whether 
it is better for us now or better earlier. 
  The present course of disintegration of economic entities 
attached to the motor vehicle program in the former SFRY will 
indisputably have an impact on the speed of renewal of the 
marketing of Zastava vehicles in the parts that have become 
separate from Yugoslavia. Along with all the negative 
consequences of disintegration, we must not forget that almost 
60 percent of the total sales of Zastava vehicles on the 
territory of the former SFRY were marketed in republics which 
are no longer in Yugoslavia. It is indisputable that economic 
interest will decide whether and at what speed sales will be 
renewed in the newly born states on the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia, but it is equally indisputable that the 
decisionmaking will also be influenced by the fact of whether 
and to what extent Slovenia, say, is involved in the production 
of that vehicle that comes from Kragujevac, when it defines its 
policy to encourage or to block that import. 
  Certain signs at present indicate incontestably that the UN 
sanctions and the blockade of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
do most to favor disintegration of the former Yugoslav economic 
space to the detriment both of the "state being punished" and 
also to the detriment of those the sanctions are supposed to 
protect. Disintegration is deepening superfluous emotions and 
favoring those forces, regardless of where they may be located, 
which do not want peace to return to this region, which would be 
favored best and most reliably by economic cooperation and 
respect for mutual interest. Viewed in this light, substitution 
can be seen as something imposed by necessity for survival at 
any price, as a superfluous effort, as a factor for further 
impoverishment of an already exhausted economy, but also as a 
factor that leads toward a definitive parting of the ways of 
even those business entities which until yesterday relied on one 
another, figuring as factors in each other's rate of development 
and progress. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31809 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kontic: Economy Still Market-Oriented </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kontic: Economy Still Market-Oriented </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506221394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2153 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506221394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budva, Yugoslavia, June 15 (TANJUG) -- The Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia has not given up the market-oriented 
model of economy despite the current regime of sanctions, 
although there have been many reasons to do so with regard to 
the circumstances, Yugoslav Prime Minister Radoje Kontic said on 
Wednesday. At the beginning of three-day consultations of 
Yugoslav economists in the Adriatic resort of Budva, Kontic said 
that the lifting of the international blockade against 
Yugoslavia was the utmost priority because it deeply affected 
the country's overall economy and plans. 
  The United Nations in May 1992 imposed comprehensive and 
binding sanctions against Yugoslavia because of its alleged 
involvement in the civil war in the former Yugoslav Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Participating in a debate at the meeting, headlined 
"Programme of Reconstruction and Recovery of Yugoslav Economy," 
Kontic pointed out significant results in the budget policy, 
which have been achieved since the launching of the economic 
programme in late January. 
  The government is currently examining possibilities for 
reducing budget spending and solving the problem of budget 
deficit, which should be eliminated in the second six-month 
period. With regard to the fact that budget deficit was 
originally planned to be as much as 15 percent of the national 
product in 1994, the subsequent decision on a balanced budget in 
the second half of the year will be a significant additional 
factor of stabilization of economic trends. 
  The fiscal policy is the most vulnarable area, said Kontic 
and added that the state had to make some resolute and positive 
steps concerning the entirety of the tax and tariff system and 
policy, he said. Plans have been made for improving the 
collection of taxes and customs dues without waiting for a 
deeper systematic adjustment, he said. 
  Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Yugoslavia Bozidar 
Gazivoda said that the primary task of the Central Bank was 
stable national currency. The maintaining of stable dinar and 
prices as well as the economic growth entail that the Central 
Bank be free from various influences, he said. Nebojsa Savic, a 
member of the team which had created the programme of economic 
recovery, believes that the greatest achievement of the 
programme is the restoration of the country's sovereignty 
through the new dinar and stable prices. 
  The success of the programme depends on abandoning in July 
the practice of financing budget deficit, on stable prices and 
wages, most of which are free (with the exception of 
monopolistic and public enterprises), and on re-activation of 
social programme, said Savic. He proposed an early start of the 
project of new economic system, the development of new market 
institutions, privatization and financial rehabilitation of 
banks. 
  Belgrade university professor Ljubomir Madzar said that the 
programme had been improved since the beginning of its 
implementation and that, for example, public spending had been 
reduced from 52 to 42 percent. Participants agreed on the first 
day of consultations that there should be more critical views of 
the prospects of the programme and that restoration of economic 
ties with the world was of vital importance for safe and final 
surmounting of the crisis. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31810 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Avramovic Views Economy, Production Problems </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Avramovic Views Economy, Production Problems </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506192994 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506192994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Dr. Dragoslav Avramovic, </F>
governor of the National Bank of Yugoslavia, by Dusko Petrovic; 
place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Avramovic] You have noticed that industrial 
production has continued to grow. Weather permitting, we are 
now facing a big harvest, so it seems, which will contribute to 
a better supply of our market, a stabilization of prices, and 
increased earnings. There are another two or three elements. 
  Regarding one element that has been discussed extensively in 
the press, our farmers can rest assured that the value of the 
dinar will remain fixed and that there will be no deviations or 
compromises on this issue. Therefore, what they will get in 
June will be the same as what they will get in September, 
October, and so forth. Therefore, there is no reason to fear 
depreciation. This is the first thing. 
  Second, the salaries in nonproductive branches have 
increased 
considerably, especially in the higher wage categories. These 
salaries are stabilizing and we believe that for three months 
the salaries in the higher categories do not need to change. 
However, at the same time we must increase the salaries in the 
lower wage categories. Because we will maintain stability in 
this balance and equilibrium in the higher strata of salaries, 
the overall production and increase in production will 
contribute that all this will hold up, balance itself out, and 
that the increased spending power in the low income groups will 
be compensated for by the increase in production. 
  [Petrovic] How can we overcome the current deadlock in the 
relations between banks and the economy? 
  [Avramovic] This problem must be resolved. I believe that 
we will encounter a further expansion of our monetary system. 
At the same time we must take care of our foreign currency 
balance sheet. These are new issues that are coming our way. I 
believe that we will successfully overcome the problems that are 
appearing now and that the satisfaction of the economy's needs 
for credits will be at a high level of realization and at a 
satisfactory level of equilibrium in the balance of payments. 
  [Petrovic] Are there any grounds to fear the reappearance of 
the [currency] dealers' cuts? 
  [Avramovic] I do not think so. Namely, the fourth series of 
dealers' cuts that we first encountered in January and then in 
March, April and now, has so far been lower that any earlier 
cuts. I do not know why we have dealers' cuts now. (?It should 
not have been a big one). One of the factors is that we have 
assumed that we are nevertheless an island in Europe and we are 
rather susceptible to these influences despite the blockade, 
that is, influences in the circulation of capital, you know, 
that is a problem [sentence as heard]. However, I believe that 
problem will be easily resolved. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31811 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Bus Trip Through Serb Corridor Described </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Bus Trip Through Serb Corridor Described </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0313A Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 30 May 94 pp 24-25 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0313A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Uros Komlenovic: "Brother Drives Down the </F>
Corridor"] 
  [Text] Every bus trip down the corridor through Bosanska 
Posavina [Sava Valley in Bosnia] usually begins with a quarrel. 
For example, the conductor may be mortally insulted if an 
unfortunate traveler deferentially seeks a bit of rope or wire 
to somehow tie up the completely collapsed back of his seat: 
  "Rope! Where would I get rope? If I had rope, I would hang 
myself at once! The seat is broken, and I cannot do anything 
about it, so don't make trouble, do you hear!" 
  That is how it was last fall, but this spring the quarrel 
begins on the platform of the Belgrade bus terminal. The 
participants are the bus driver ("boss," "brother," "bro") and a 
woman who is trying to send a package to Bosanska (now Kozarska) 
Dubica by him: 
  "Listen, madam, I cannot take the package, they will give me 
a hard time at the border." 
  The fear is certainly justified--by contrast with the 
Serbian 
police, who work quickly and routinely, the MUP [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs] of the Srpska republic take their job much 
more seriously. At the border checkpoint in Bosanska (now 
Srpska) Raca, young men in new uniforms (blue camouflage 
garrison caps with a brim like that of General Zivojin Misic) 
study personal identity cards carefully, and the customs 
officials poke around in the baggage compartment: "Whose bag is 
this with the flowers? Please come out." In the end, it turned 
out that the flowers were artificial and harmless. 
  The bus passes quickly through Bijeljina without problems 
unless it is market day, when trucks, cars, and wagons 
completely block the narrow street that borders the market. 
There are no visible traces of war until Brcko, which is riddled 
and destroyed and where soldiers fill the bus. These are mainly 
people from Bosanska Krajina who are going on leave. Good humor 
is at an enviable level, so no one objects if the barrel of some 
kalashnikov pushes against his side. A trip is unthinkable 
without the inevitable tipsy fellow in good humor who prattles 
on for hours about the aunt of his comrade-in-arms, that is, 
about her impressive bust. The music from the radio is stylish 
and ethnically pure--they only tune in to "patriotic folk 
music." For instance, aside from the increasingly popular 
refrain "Long live orthodox concord, us and 300 million 
Russians," they also sing "The small and the tall have risen up, 
we are creating you, Srpska republic," but the most fascinating 
is a poetical dialogue with a former friend of a different 
religion: 
  "What kind of Bosnia do you want, friend, One in which the 
Serbs would do your bidding? How do you feel now, my former 
friend, Now that the tanks are rumbling?" 
<H5>  The Moral </H5>
  The music is interrupted by the voice of the woman 
announcer, 
who reports that "Muslim units this morning opened infantry and 
mortar fire on positions of the Army of the Srpska republic near 
Brcko, but the Serbs did not return it." A soldier who obviously 
had not learned all he should in moral-political training 
cheerily commented: "Come on, why is she lying, damn her eyes, 
my battery alone fired 15 shells this morning, ha, ha." The 
militance is nevertheless frightening, and the news that the 
U.S. Senate voted to remove the embargo from imports of arms 
intended for the Muslims is met almost with approval: "Well, 
thank you, now they can't forbid us from settling accounts once 
and for all." 
  The worst part of the trip through the corridor is the 
macadam road around Derventa. This road was cut immediately 
after the corridor was cleared, before it was widened, but even 
now it is sometimes used. This section is some 20 km long, the 
houses along it have been completely destroyed, and it takes at 
least about an hour to travel it. The sun is frying, and every 
car that passes in the opposite direction raises a cloud of dust 
that covers the bus, and so we seek salvation by closing the 
windows. Only then do you realize the real meaning of the term 
"gas chamber." The windows, however, remain closed even when we 
finally leave the macadam and head for Prnjavor and Banja Luka 
on the decent asphalt road. Every attempt to let a bit of air 
into the overheated tin can meets with looks full of primitive 
fear and an imploring: "Don't, it is blowing on my head." The 
tense and sweaty faces of the passengers speak clearly of the 
attempt to settle the issue of who is to blame for this kind of 
heat: the Muslims, the Croats, the leaders of the opposition in 
Belgrade, or perhaps the bus drivers. The closed windows have 
nothing to do with that, and it is well-known that a breeze 
causes instant death, if not something worse. 
<H5>  Advantages </H5>
  Nor did the trip from Pakrac to Belgrade begin without a 
quarrel. To be sure, the drivers are more liberal and take 
packages for Belgrade, but on the other hand they do not 
recognize travel passes: "You have gone to Belgrade 10 times and 
you always have some pass from the Red Cross, the opstina, a 
firm, God, and the devil. You have to buy a ticket." 
  The ticket from Pakrac to Belgrade, incidentally, costs 25 
dinars, but from Belgrade to Gradiska (a trip 40 km shorter) 27 
dinars. A ticket bought from Pakrac Tours is perhaps cheaper 
because there is no music in the bus, but that fact might easily 
be taken as an advantage. On this trip, they do not take the 
macadam, but the asphalt, through the center of devastated 
Derventa, but on the other hand they cannot avoid the checkpoint 
where a zealous policeman spends an entire hour checking papers 
and the content of the package referred to, which is marked 
"Fragile." The content of the suspicious package: Slavonian ham, 
eggs, and walnuts. Aside from the regular one-hour rest stop at 
the Atina Restaurant between Brcko and Bijeljina (prices similar 
to those in Belgrade, a toilet that takes your breath away), 
another stop had to be made to take on at least half of the 
passengers from a broken-down bus traveling the route between 
Okucani and Belgrade. It goes without saying that elderly ladies 
with immense bags effectively push their way into the bus, by 
contrast with a young woman and a child, who correctly judged 
that uncertainty on the highway is a lesser evil than the 
possibility of her child being smothered in an overcrowded bus. 
At the border, it turned out that the Srpska republic is 
incomparably more difficult to leave than to enter. In this 
direction, the baggage is not checked, but on the other hand 
every male of "military age" who has an identity card from the 
Srpska republic must show a certificate that his military 
obligation has been met, and the police of the Srpska republic 
are particularly interested in those whose names might indicate 
a non-Serb origin. Only a personal identity card from Belgrade 
rescues these people. Finally, when a Serbian policeman enters 
the bus at Sremska Raca, ordinary mortals can hardly resist the 
impulse to hug him and kiss him, and the casual examination of 
papers, the incidental (unfulfilled) threat "Come on, people, if 
you have a weapon, turn it in yourselves, so I don't have to 
look for it," and the already forgotten "Good-bye and good trip" 
prove that it does not take much for a man who has a hard time 
to immerse himself in the deceptive dream of freedom and 
democracy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31812 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Increased Number of Serbs Moving From Kosovo </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Increased Number of Serbs Moving From Kosovo </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0313B Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 30 May 94 pp 25-27 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0313B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Perica Vucinic: "About a Resettlement Under His </F>
Picture"] 
  [Text] Because of its undoubted historical and spiritual 
importance as the "cradle of the Serbs," Kosovo is not used 
today to rock anyone to sleep. It is a nightmare for the Serbs 
who have bound up their destiny with it, a "lost land" for those 
who are packing up, an excellent field to start up yet another 
socioeconomic game of chance and to score a few political points 
for those who have already ensconced themselves in central 
Serbia. 
  The same picture as six or seven years ago emerged the other 
day. In the village Milosevo, at the 10th kilometer of the 
Pristina-Kosovska Mitrovica highway, some 20 signs offer some 20 
houses for sale. "I am selling my house because of the slowness 
of the state in solving the Kosovo problem," says the sign in 
front of Vukasin Dutina's house. What it says is that he is 
"completely fed up." After "everything else" came land 
consolidation. Land was taken away from Dutina and his neighbors 
30 years ago. Following the socialist collectivist 
transformations, frequent sale or letting someone else cultivate 
the land, people lose track of the parcels. The parcel 
"returned" to Nikola Grbic is listed under two different names 
by its number in the land records and its number in the opstina 
archives. He knows that Ismailj Jakupi is now cultivating the 
field beside the house which 30 years ago the state turned over 
to the agroindustrial combine Kosovo-Eksport. Jakupi has said 
that he will give up the land to him, but only when the state 
returns land to him, which, it seems, is fine with Grbic. He is 
waiting for the state to do its job, but he "really" is going to 
go. 
  "Land taken away has frequently been turned over to 
Albanians," says Milan Hrkalovic. He took possession of the 
parcel returned by force. Dutina is unable to make a deal with 
his Albanian neighbor, who has plowed over the path and the 
boundaries. He is waiting for the intervention of the 
law-governed state, which is slow. And along with everything 
else, the inevitable story about land consolidation is being 
repeated with talk about inappropriate replacement of the 
quality of the land, if one is to believe Hrkalovic, in which 
the best pieces of land somehow always go to people who have 
some position or hold some office. 
  When Albanians are involved in the episodes, the whole story 
inevitably takes on the Kosovo ethnic mutation, to such an 
extent that an ordinary man concludes that "this is intolerable." 
<H5>  Serbian Walls </H5>
  The land consolidation, say the inhabitants of a village 
with 
250 houses, 90 of them Serbian and 160 Albanian, has been 
satisfactory to only two people. They received parcels alongside 
the mosque, so that they will be able to get big money from the 
Albanians. Grbic says that the price of land is dropping 
dramatically and that five years ago he was getting money which 
he will never be able to get again. Quite often the signs which 
say that a house is for sale protrude over the high walls that 
surround them. Until recently, the walls were the way to 
recognize only Albanian houses. Hrkalovic's house is one that is 
surrounded by one. "It sells better. The Albanian is not 
interested in water, nor a parquet floor, nor the house being 
wired for electricity. All he is interested in is that it have a 
wall around it," explains Milan Hrkalovic. 
  It seems the exodus is inevitable. Aside from the problems 
with land consolidation, Hrkalovic has four daughters, all 
unemployed. "They are all saying they are so sorry I do not have 
a son, and then they would hire him. If I had a son, I would 
employ him myself on the land," says the head of the house. He 
is employed at Kosovosped, but on mandatory leave. He tells how 
he went with a group of colleagues to the Serbian Assembly to 
complain of monkey business in his firm. Bata Zivojinovic, who 
headed the opstina Committee for Petitions and Grievances at 
that time, told them jokes to entertain them and dispel their 
concern. Zivorad Igic, deputy from Kosovo, directed them to the 
Assembly restaurant, where the food is good and cheap. The 
hungry people were taken in, they went to the restaurant, and 
there they encountered the Assembly security. "They came after 
us, and we were glad when we found the door," Hrkalovic relates. 
  That was his first experience with the state. Milan 
Hrkalovic 
has no intention of complaining again. Nikola Grbic, however, 
thinks of writing to Slobodan Milosevic, Serbian president, 
whose picture hangs above him in the living room as he tells his 
sad tale. He was thinking, he said, of giving a house lot to his 
sister, who returned to Kosovo from Krusevac, but now he does 
not have it to give. "Unless Sloba helps out, I do not know who 
will." 
  "Unless Sloba helps out," the Grbices will soon come to the 
end of their own personal Kosovo cycle. They came to the village 
which bears the name of the Serbian hero in 1922 from Lika. 
Vukasin Dutina is "80-percent" decided to leave. He says that he 
does not believe that he has a future here and that "things are 
not being worked out the way they should." His younger son got a 
job only at the age of 29. The elder, Slobodan, is working as an 
auto mechanic at the Obilic Coal Mine for miserable pay which 
does not give him the courage to establish a family. Many have 
already left, and he does not know how why he is staying. Those 
who have left have told me that they would return if the 
situation were "the way it should be." But it is not. Vukasin 
explains that he has been unable to build a new house by his own 
honest labor, while others have been getting a new apartment 
even when they were too lazy to paint the old one. He says that 
he "had hopes," that is why he stayed even in 1981, when the 
exodus was largest, he stayed all these years, but it seems that 
he will have to leave in '94. He has no more hope. The state has 
made promises so that fulfillment of people's hopes is bound up 
with it. Hoping that the state will not betray that trust, 
Vukasin Dutina's younger son waited until age 29 for his first 
job, while during that period Albanians were going to the West, 
opening private stores and trade establishments. 
  Now the Serbs from Milosevo are complaining about the venal 
Kosovo (Serbian) bureaucracy. A myth which is threatening the 
myth of the battle of Kosovo is being created on the theme of 
corruption, venality, and crime. Just as in a myth, there is 
much that cannot be checked out, the facts are mysterious, 
assessments of the role of the heroes vary from case to case. 
<H5>  Getting Around the Prohibitions </H5>
  "The Albanians, which have exceptional economic power, buy 
strategic goods and sell them not only in Kosmet, but also to 
the Macedonians and Croats, with the help of irresponsible and 
venal representatives of the authorities all over Serbia," 
Zejnel Zejneli, POLITIKA journalist and federal deputy from 
Pristina, wrote in that newspaper. No names are given even in 
his article. Zejneli says that in the end he is only a 
journalist, not a judge, so he does not publish the names. This 
deputy on the slate of the Socialist Party of Serbia [SPS] gives 
among examples of machination the case of Kosmet tours, 49 
percent of whose shares were sold below the price of one of the 
10 buses the firm possesses. In the trade in real estate, which 
is prohibited in Kosovo, Serbs and Albanians have found a way of 
getting around the law. One of the ways is a fictitious marriage 
between a Serb and an Albanian woman, so that later, after the 
divorce, the Serb leaves, say, the apartment to his "fictitious 
wife," and he gets money in return. Mortgage loans are another 
way, and there are also less complicated ways reported by the 
farmers in Milosevo: "You grease the right palms, and there are 
no problems." 
  Zejneli also calls upon his obviously extensive 
documentation 
to tell how in Prizren, during the greatest shortages, milk was 
sold from a truck with Belgrade license plates and how the 
people in Subotica were forced to buy corn in Kosovo, after 
previously having sold it there.... 
  Albanian capital is conquering Kosovo. To take an obvious 
example, this is how it looks: On a building bearing the name of 
the publishing house RILINDJE in capital letters in the Albanian 
language, following the transformation and the prohibition of 
the Albanian newspaper, the stylized letters read Gracanica, so 
that Gracanica is leased, and the lessee is an Albanian, and a 
big sign reading "Greguri" is displayed in the window of his 
shop. Thus, Albanian capital and Serbian spiritual history come 
together. 
  Albanian demographic growth and the growth of capital are 
having a depressive effect on the Serbs. The machinations of 
their fellow countrymen are also discouraging. Milos Djordjevic, 
chairman of the Pristina Committee of the Democratic Party of 
Serbia (DSS), also complains of the very low intellectual 
potential of Kosovo Serbs. "What do we amount to here when not a 
single one of our people means anything in culture or science or 
art? They only count for something in the government, and then 
at the local level," says Djordjevic. 
  The chairman of the Pristina DSS suggested to a journalist 
of 
our newspaper "a worthwhile informant." Then that "informant" 
declined. He had received a worthwhile job in a Kosovo 
institution. 
  When someone with university education gives up his right to 
free speech "on behalf of the state," then it is quite 
understandable that he is turning over the question of his 
survival, in Kosovo, for example, to the state. 
  The state is not making itself heard. The president's 
half-sentence that "there are no problems" of granting broad 
autonomy to Albanians has remained; now people are wondering 
whether that unfinished sentence was ever uttered or not. What 
is changing in Kosovo is the slow awakening of the economy. The 
state appointed Vekoslav Sosevic, officially a minister without 
portfolio, to be "minister for Kosovo." Sosevic, they say in 
Kosovo, proved his exceptional managerial abilities in the 
rebirth of the factory Balkan in Suva Reka. The Grand Hotel in 
Pristina is moving faster and faster to restore its old gleam in 
order to receive the numerous economic, financial, and business 
experts, and Sosevic, judging from this, is becoming the Kosovo 
manager. 
  But the problem of Kosovo, which the "minister for Kosovo," 
of course, knows as well, is not a managerial problem. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31813 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Svilajnac Mayor Expels Refugees </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Svilajnac Mayor Expels Refugees </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0313C Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 27 May 94 pp 30-31 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0313C </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with People's Deputy Dobrivoje "Bidza" </F>
Budimirovic by Marijana Milosavljevic; place and date not given: 
"God, That's Me"] 
  [Text] Serious politicians might envy him his image built 
carefully/carelessly. He has been able to turn himself into a 
media star without any effort. The formula is clear: Remain what 
you are. Bidza has no need to make himself better and more 
intelligent. He is perfectly recognizable, and in the meantime 
he has become generally accepted whether in a favorable or 
unfavorable context. Dobrivoje Budimirovic, like it or not, has 
grown to be the standard-bearer of rural philosophy and 
psychology. 
  In Serbia, such a person is respected and esteemed, hated 
and 
supported. He received 87 percent of the vote, and in the 
election to opstina president there were only three votes 
against. This nevertheless did not prevent the local people from 
trying to set fire to his house last year. 
  He says of Slobodan Milosevic that he is the first Yugoslav 
opposition to come to power without killing those who did not 
agree with him. He has proved that they are all politically 
alive and well, but he does not want to talk about their mental 
condition, because that is a personal matter. 
  Budimirovic's mental condition is perhaps best portrayed by 
this story: "When we were university students in Belgrade, my 
future wife and I, we loved to visit furniture showrooms just to 
look. Once, we were in a showroom with furniture in the style of 
Louis XIII. We sat down, and I told my future wife: `If I just 
had this, I could die a happy man.' Not long ago, I bought 
furniture like that, my wife reminded me of my promise, but I 
still do not want to go until I finish this job with the 
opposition." 
  When Bidza is involved, there is no room for tolerance. His 
arrogance is astounding. In the meantime, "bidzizam" has become 
our reality. 
  [Milosavljevic] Whatever else it might be, the opposition 
here is resilient. Vuk and Seselj will in future defend their 
interests together. 
  [Budimirovic] Well, you know, that is typical of us Serbs: 
You kill your best friend's wife, and then you and your best 
friend make up. 
  [Milosavljevic] Do not tell me that you were not surprised. 
  [Budimirovic] I was not surprised. They are Serbs. They come 
from the karst in Herzegovina. They are interested in this 
region here only because of power, so it is not hard for them to 
constantly disgrace themselves with the public. And, on this 
occasion, by making up. 
  [Milosavljevic] It is not just a question of them. The 
entire 
parliamentary opposition has been showing a similar tendency. 
  [Budimirovic] If you consider Vuk, Seselj, and those few 
souls a coalition that threatens us, you are mistaken. With an 
opposition like that, we will stay in power 100 years. 
  [Milosavljevic] What does the opposition need to have for 
you 
to take it seriously? 
  [Budimirovic] Name for me just one of their leaders who has 
the good of this people at heart, who has done something for it 
even if not anything permanent. Just one who at least has tried 
to help. I personally do not know of a single one. They have 
been spitting on their people all over the world and informing 
on us at every step for a handful of dollars. They have been 
selling out Serbia at third-rate suppers. Which one of them has 
made a contribution for this people to have a better life? 
  [Milosavljevic] Is there at least one man in the ranks of 
the 
opposition whom you hold in estimation? 
  [Budimirovic] I just told you about the leaders. However, 
there are quite a few good and proper people in the membership. 
Even creative people. 
  [Milosavljevic] You, then, are not upset at all, you think 
that there is no reason for the opposition to be taken seriously 
this time? 
  [Budimirovic] If you are afraid of sparrows, you should not 
plant wheat. I am enough of an agronomist to know that. The 
opposition is smaller than even those sparrows. 
  [Milosavljevic] What exactly do you hold against Vuk 
Draskovic and Vojislav Seselj? 
  [Budimirovic] Nothing. I feel sorry for them. 
  [Milosavljevic] Why? 
  [Budimirovic] Because they do not want to be with their 
people. We all know that their people is not here. They should 
go across the Drina and stretch out their hand to their real 
people. I would never leave my native Svilajnac and go to Bosnia 
and Herzegovina to sell my intelligence, because I figure that 
my place is not with them. The Serbian people has a good feeling 
who it is and with whom it is dealing. The saddest thing is that 
the people who like them are in error. I guarantee that those 
two are not happy even with their wives. They do not love even 
them. Those two hate the entire world by noontime, and in the 
afternoon they hate even themselves. 
  [Milosavljevic] What do you see as the difference between 
Serbs from Serbia and Serbs from elsewhere? 
  [Budimirovic] Until three years, it never occurred to any of 
them to declare themselves to be Serbs. I drove the refugees out 
of Svilajnac. 
  [Milosavljevic] How did you manage to do that, and are you 
referring here to all refugees? 
  [Budimirovic] Refugees are women, children, and those unable 
to work. I did not touch them. I concluded that the place for 
the rest of them was with their people. I am against our people 
from Serbia going to defend Bosnia while they are here engaging 
in smuggling, prostitution, drugs, and other occupations from 
which they get a fine living. 
  [Milosavljevic] This is odd for the heroic fighting people 
such as the Serbs like to represent themselves. Even we by and 
large are reluctant to respond to the mobilization. 
  [Budimirovic] Not a single man from my native Svilajnac has 
gone off to wage war, nor is there a single black flag flying in 
my town. The people from the Resava region would go if they 
really needed help, but now that they have crawled here to make 
money, mainly in illegal ways, I think that there is nothing we 
can expect from them. Only if all of us together were fighting 
for the common interest of all Serbs, only then should all Serbs 
come together. 
  [Milosavljevic] Is this also our war? 
  [Budimirovic] Serbia is not at war. Nevertheless, many 
volunteers have gone from here to help their brothers in 
trouble. Among them, there are honorable people, but also 
fortune hunters. 
  [Milosavljevic] Are we on the threshold of new federal 
elections? To some people it seems that Milosevic has already 
begun the election campaign. 
  [Budimirovic] There is no need for it. That is not why 
Milosevic has been talking to the farmers, if that is what you 
are referring to. He knows what life is and what the provinces 
are. The opposition has no chance of winning an election. They 
will not win even if they organize a new election every year. 
  [Milosavljevic] What do you think about the incident in the 
Federal Assembly, and has Bozovic been doing his job as he 
should? 
  [Budimirovic] I do not see why this topic is brought up. The 
deputies have voted confidence in Bozovic three times. That says 
enough about how he is doing his job. As far as the incident is 
concerned, sick people display that kind of primitivism. I would 
respect Seselj's demands if he fought for them with words. He 
did not invest the work and sweat to get the Assembly in 
operating condition. I know why the microphones bother him. If a 
doctor of science and the leader of a party comes to the 
parliament to pull out the wires, then it would have been better 
for him not to go to school and not to begin to engage in 
politics. He might better have become an electrician. Then 
presumably he would have a higher opinion of technology. I am 
sorry for him, because his party was at one time the one I held 
most dear after my own. I know his people quite well, and I know 
that 80 percent of its members would renounce such acts in 
themselves. Serbia has had enough wreckers, those who have not 
invested anything in it. This country needs creators and 
investors. Workers and creators whose fruits the people can 
enjoy. 
  [Milosavljevic] Nevertheless, none of that bothered you 
while 
Seselj was supporting Milosevic's policy and working against the 
opposition? 
  [Budimirovic] No. We agreed while he was in favor of the 
interests of Serbia. While he wanted to help the Serbian people. 
Now we would be happier if he no longer defended us that way. It 
is clear that he is thinking only about how to take power. 
Before that, even I liked him. 
  [Milosavljevic] Many charges are being laid against Bozovic. 
From malfeasance to embezzlement. Seselj said there is evidence 
of that? 
  [Budimirovic] Lightning flashes, thunder rumbles, but it 
does 
not rain. The human thing would be to publish that evidence. For 
three years, we have been listening to hearsay without any kind 
of arguments or documentation. If I had the evidence, I would 
publish it even though Bozovic is a member of my party. Unless 
that happens, it is all nonsense. 
  [Milosavljevic] You are saying, then, that Bozovic is a 
honorable man? 
  [Budimirovic] I do not know. For the present, it seems so to 
me. I will change my opinion if it is proven to me otherwise. 
  [Milosavljevic] Many people have said that the former 
closeness between the SPS [Socialist Party of Serbia] and SRS 
[Serbian Radical Party] had the substance of a coalition. 
  [Budimirovic] Seselj drew us in in order to derive 
advantage, 
and we supported him, but we were never in a coalition. I say 
this with full responsibility. I was sitting next to him at that 
time, because at that time I also liked him. When we figured him 
out and found that our interests were not the same, then we 
turned our back on him. In his ranks, he has good and honest 
people, I emphasize once again. 
  [Milosavljevic] Does that also apply to Tomislav Nikolic? 
  [Budimirovic] The two of us come from the same place, and we 
have known each other for a long time. I would say that even of 
him, but it is a pity that he is no longer thinking with his own 
head. 
  [Milosavljevic] As a successful businessman, do you believe 
in the survival of the Avramovic program? 
  [Budimirovic] I do and I do not. My opstina is in good 
shape, 
and there are few others in Serbia that can compete with it from 
the economic standpoint. The program will not succeed unless 
everyone goes back to work. Everyone has to live from his work. 
Nothing comes from empty applause while everyone on the other 
side is going on in the same old way. We all need to be 
Avramovic. Everyone must help him in carrying out the economic 
program. In my native Svilajnac, no one is on mandatory leave. I 
found a job for everyone. 
  [Milosavljevic] How did you manage that? 
  [Budimirovic] I do not sell democracy. I know how to manage 
and command. 
  [Milosavljevic] What do you think about the Dafiment affair 
and publication of the lists of savings depositors who withdrew 
their money? 
  [Budimirovic] I like Dafina Milanovic, because I like big 
heavy women. But that is all I know about it. Only fools give 
their wife and money to someone else for safekeeping. 
  [Milosavljevic] What if the depositors get angry now? 
  [Budimirovic] I am joking, of course. I am sorry for the 
poor 
person who was deceived. However, I do not stay awake with other 
people's worries, I prefer to get along on my own. The important 
thing is that I am not on her list, as you have seen for 
yourself. And if it is nevertheless true that people in my party 
took out their money, I am ashamed for them. 
  [Milosavljevic] Aside from Bozovic's removal, the opposition 
also wants equal treatment on Radio-Television Serbia [RTS]. 
  [Budimirovic] What do they need with RTS, when they have 
Studio B? 
  [Milosavljevic] That television station, however, has a 
limited range. 
  [Budimirovic] But why should they have more when they do not 
deserve anything more? By what right would the opposition get 
that, when it is just a peck of trouble? They have not donated 
anything, nor contributed anything for Serbia to be a better and 
happier country. Why, then, should the people look in their 
direction? I would never talk to such people. We need a 
creative, industrious, and able opposition. The present 
opposition is not like that. To help us when we make a mistake, 
and not just to spit on us like this one. 
  [Milosavljevic] Many of them are above all calling attention 
to the fact that it has never been worse for us than under this 
government and this kind of government, and they are offering 
their solution to get out of the crisis. 
  [Budimirovic] You just give them my greetings and tell them 
that the Serbian people has never lived better than today. Here, 
look (he points to his plate full of roast suckling pig and 
smiles with satisfaction), who has it bad today? If all those 
who fled from the country to the large cities went back there, 
it would be better for us at once. This way, they are putting 
pressure on your dumpsters and social welfare institutions. They 
left their farms in search of the promised land. Until 
yesterday, their wives were tending sheep and wearing sandals 
from Pirot, and now they want to wear spiked heels and be 
Belgrade ladies. That does not cost us in the provinces as much 
as it does you in Belgrade. 
  [Milosavljevic] I have heard that in delivering a speech in 
Svilajnac you publicly referred to yourself as God. 
  [Budimirovic] What I said was: "God, that's me." Because I 
effectively have everything under my control. You know, for me 
God is man. I have a right to say that, because everything I do, 
I do in the interest of my people. 
  [Milosavljevic] Did you like Tito? It is said that you 
personally changed the name of the main street in Svilajnac from 
Marshal Tito Street to Saint Sava Street. Malicious tongues have 
it that you did that because of your father, whose name was Sava. 
  [Budimirovic] Well, for me my father was a saint, and as for 
Tito, there is a place in all of us that would like to have him 
back. I trusted him. Not as a Croat, but as a man who organized 
that entire community spirit. If only Tito were alive instead of 
Mesic. 
  [Milosavljevic] You say that you did not trust him as a 
Croat, but do not tell me that you did not believe in 
brotherhood and unity. 
  [Budimirovic] I did. At one time, I could have slept in the 
park near Tivoli, in Zagreb, in Dugo Selo, in Split, in 
Benkovac.... That is why I trusted him. Before the war, my 
people were day laborers, and I owe everything I have achieved 
in life to that period of time. I obtained everything under that 
communism, and I am grateful that I have been successful and got 
a degree as a son of a peasant from Lukovica. Now those who 
profited the most thanks only to that time and that political 
climate are spitting on him. 
  [Milosavljevic] But you also became a Socialist. 
  [Budimirovic] That is because all the Communists from 
Svilajnac who in 1984 wanted to expel me from the League of 
Communists became the opposition. I did not want to be with 
them. I remained faithful to Serbia, to work, to order, and to 
peace. All those things that the SPS now represents. 
  [Milosavljevic] If the opposition, because of a boycott of 
parliament by the Socialists, nevertheless leaves parliament, as 
Vuk has threatened? 
  [Budimirovic] Pay no attention to him! In our parts, they 
say: "When a wolf [Vuk] barks, it is just like a dog barking!" 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31814 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Opposition Leader Favors Unification With Serbs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Opposition Leader Favors Unification With Serbs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506144194 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506144194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Dragoljub Stankic] </F>
  [Text] At a regular news conference of the Democratic Party 
of Serbia, party leader Vojislav Kostunica spoke about the 
former Bosnia-Herzegovina. Dragoljub Stankic reports: 
  [Stankic] It is positive that the truce is being observed, 
but many issues remain open, Vojislav Kostunica said. The 
acceptance of the proposed delineation and the 51-49 percent 
division is connected with other formulas, above all the quality 
of the territory that is being offered. According to Kostunica, 
the issue of the Serbian access to the sea, the width of the 
so-called corridor through the Sava basin region, the gray 
zones, and so forth are still contentious. 
  Kostunica said that despite all this there are many reasons 
for optimism while waiting for the final denouement. If the 
future of the Muslim-Croatian federation is seen in a joint 
state with Croatia, then, Kostunica said, many contentious 
issues on the Serbian side will be solved much faster if the 
Srpska republic and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia become 
one state. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31815 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   Djukanovic Comments on Relations With Albania </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Djukanovic Comments on Relations With Albania </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506173194 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1530 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506173194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo 
Djukanovic is paying an official visit to Great Britain. We 
have established a direct link with London where Mr. Prime 
Minister [Djukanovic] is. Good day! 
  [Djukanovic] Good day! 
  [Announcer] To get right to the point for the listeners of 
Argument Vise [An Argument More] program -- what is the 
objective of your visit to Great Britain, have you had any 
concrete meetings and talks? 
  [Djukanovic] Together with the deputy prime minister and 
Montenegrin foreign minister I am visiting London at the 
invitation of one of the members of the foreign affairs' 
committee of the lower chamber of the British Parliament. This 
afternoon I am supposed to present my vision of the current 
situation in Yugoslavia in this lower chamber committee. 
  [Announcer] I presume that we will obtain some concrete 
information about your talks there later in the day. 
  [Djukanovic] Hello? 
  [Announcer] Yes, we can hear you. Rather optimistic 
assessments have been coming from Albania, to which you paid an 
official visit beforehand -- that is, mutual satisfaction with 
this visit. Could you say anything more about it for our 
listeners? 
  [Djukanovic] I took the opportunity of the fact that I was 
travelling to London via Albania to hold talks with the Albanian 
Government. We held talks with Prime Minister Meksi, naturally, 
in the presence of the foreign minister and other government 
officials. We discussed the need to intensify mutual relations. 
We took the opportunity to tell Mr. Meksi that the overall 
foreign affairs' goal of the FRY [Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia] is to establish good relations with its neighbors 
and that, within this context, Montenegro has an explicit need 
to establish good, that is to say, better relations with 
Albania, with whom it borders directly, than we have had in the 
past. On that occasion, we discussed some essential issues that 
represent the most important segments of the improvement of 
mutual relations -- the rights of minorities in both countries 
and some vital issues that we perceive as a possibility to 
promote economic and other cooperation. 
  I received assurances that, in accordance with the 
democratic 
changes that are underway in that country, the rights of the 
Serbs and the Montenegrins who live in Albania will receive 
appropriate treatment parallel to a demand that such a policy be 
pursued for the Albanians in the FRY. 
  Naturally, as always, special interest was shown in the 
problem of Kosovo. It seems that there have been some ambiguous 
statements by some diplomatic representatives of some 
superpowers -- I am primarily referring to the statements that 
have been coming from London recently -- which have contributed 
a lot that Albania abandoned the aggressive attitude toward the 
FRY regarding Kosovo, acknowledged that Kosovo is an integral 
part of Serbia and Yugoslavia, and that this issue can only be 
discussed at the level of rights that must be guaranteed to the 
citizens of Albanian ethnicity in Kosovo. 
  I would say that for me all together this was a sign that a 
new leaf has been turned in the attitudes toward this issue and 
in the general FRY-Albanian relations. 
  [Announcer] Thank you very much. We wish you all success in 
you visit and activities in London. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31816 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Police Confiscate Albanian Books, Raid Homes </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Police Confiscate Albanian Books, Raid Homes </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606084594 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606084594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The Kosova Information Center today reported on 
raids and numerous apprehensions of Albanian citizens in various 
parts in Kosova. Education activists and Albanian books were 
targets of the police. Mehmet Haziri reports from Prishtina: 
  [Haziri] After thoroughly checking the house of Esat Kamberi 
in Prishtina, the Serbian police confiscated some books 
belonging to the Agency of Texts and Teaching Means in Kosova. 
A written statement by Mr. Kamberi confirms that the police 
took 90 parcels containing 48 geography books, 750 history 
books, and other documents. A certificate was issued for texted 
items and other confiscated documents. However, the owner of 
the house, which is a teaching place for Albanian students, was 
kept at the police station for 10 hours. 
  Inspectors of the Serbian State Security interrogated Esat 
Kamberi on the work of the Agency of Texts and Teaching Means, 
who finances the schoolbook, and about his contacts with the 
Kosova Education Ministry, etc. 
  The Serbian police in Gjilan broke into the headquarters of 
the Council for Finance and took 1,500 German marks. The 
activists found at the council seat were detained at the police 
station for several hours. 
  The Kosova Information Center reports that the Serbian 
police 
raided dozens of families in the villages in the Kamenice, 
Malisheve, Skenderaj, Podujeve, Mitrovice, Gjilan, Viti, Decan, 
Suhareke, and Vushtrri communes. The majority of these raids 
were conducted on the pretext of searching for arms. 
Schoolmasters were targets of the police, such as at the 
Lumebardh School in Decan. We would also like to inform you 
that Sabit Jakupi and Xhevat Qyla, the director and chief editor 
of the Agency of Texts and Teaching Means in Kosova 
respectively, who were arrested on Tuesday [14 June], have been 
released. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31817 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Albanians Behind Anti-Serb Propaganda in U.S. </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Albanians Behind Anti-Serb Propaganda in U.S. </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506141694 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1247 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506141694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pristina, June 15 (TANJUG)--The review of ethnic 
Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija (KosMet), KOHA, confirmed that 
the Albanian separatists in this Serbian province spent large 
amounts of money in the U.S. to finance anti-Serb campaigns and 
appearances in the U.S. media to market their ideas on the 
secession of KosMet. 
  KOHA wrote that Bujar Bukoshi, one of the leaders of the 
national minority in KosMet, paid in the second part of last 
year to the U.S. public relations firm Rudder Finn 230,141 
dollars to arrange for him to meet U.S. officials and to appear 
in the media. 
  The text goes on to assess that the "results of these fat 
payments are scant", and in illustration notes that Bukoshi paid 
heavily for a five-minute interview on CNN, but that the effect 
was small. 
  A strong separatist movement of part of the ethnic Albanian 
minority was active in KosMet for over two decades. It urges 
secession of this Serbian province and its joining to the 
neighbouring Albania. 
  The separatists' leadership three years ago 
unconstitutionally and illegally proclaimed this Serbian 
province as "Republic of Kosovo" and formed illegal organs of 
authority thus boycotting the legitimate authorities of the 
Republic of Serbia. 
  Among other things, the secessionists formed their own 
illegal "government", headed by self-proclaimed Prime Minister 
Bukoshi. 
  KOHA also revealed that Croatia and the Bosnian Moslem 
leadership in Bosnia-Herzegovina too paid Rudder Finn to spread 
anti-Serb propaganda. 
  Of the total amount of money paid to Rudder Finn by the 
former Yugoslav Republics of Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
the Serbian province of KosMet, two-thirds came from the KosMet 
Albanians, KOHA claims. 
  Apart from Rudder Finn, the Albanian separatists, as KOHA 
says, engaged and paid for the same type of services also to 
U.S. law firm Arnold and Porter. 
  KOHA adds that the funds for the anti-Serb propaganda 
campaign abroad and for covering travel expenses of the ethnic 
Albanian separatist leaders were taken from the 3 percent tax on 
any transactions the separatists' leadership made their 
co-nationals in KosMet pay under threat. 
  And while the people were having a hard time setting aside 
the money for this tax, others were squandering it on sterile 
contacts, such as the ones the Rudder Finn arranged, KOHA 
concludes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31818 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Krajina Leader Stresses Property Protection </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Krajina Leader Stresses Property Protection </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506170794 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1646 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506170794 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, June 15 (TANJUG) -- The president of the 
Republic of Serb Krajina (RSK), Milan Martic, asked the 
co-chairmen of the conference on the former Yugoslavia, Lord 
David Owen and Thorwald Stoltenberg, to urge that RSK property 
is protected in all new states created in the territory of the 
ex-Yugoslavia and in third countries. Martic said that RSK 
representatives have so far not taken part in the work of the 
international conference on the former Yugoslavia regarding 
succession issues. Martic said that no newly-created state in 
the territory of ex-Yugoslavia, including RSK, can be excluded 
from the succession talks. He asked Owen and Stoltenberg to 
mediate in the resolution of the problem of the deposits of RSK 
citizens in Ljubljanska Banka, one of the major commercial banks 
in the former Yugoslavia which was located in Ljubljana, capital 
of Slovenia, to prevent Slovenia from transferring the funds to 
the account of the state of Croatia. 
  RSK was proclaimed by the local Serbs in 1991 in their 
ancestral lands in Croatia in response to its violent secession 
from the former Yugoslav federation and the downgrading of their 
status. RSK is a U.N. protected area since March 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31819 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDA, B-H Croat National Council Meet </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDA, B-H Croat National Council Meet </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506165494 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506165494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Delegations of the Party of Democratic Action [SDA] 
of Croatia and the Croatian National Council of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina headed by their chairmen, Dr. Semso Stankovic 
and Dr.Ivo Komsic, met in Zagreb today. At this meeting, the 
delegations resumed the talks that were begun in Sarajevo on 1 
June with a view to solving the crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
implementing the Washington and Vienna agreements. A high 
degree of accord was reached on many issues. Regarding 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as a state, both delegations start from the 
stand that Bosnia-Herzegovina is indivisible and sovereign 
within its internationally recognized borders, that its peoples 
are sovereign on the entire territory of the state, and that the 
Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina is only a road toward a final 
reintegration of all parts of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
within its borders. 
  The two delegations do not recognize the results of the 
genocide and will invest maximum effort toward having all 
escaped and displaced people return to their homes. The 
delegations agree that the persons responsible for crimes 
committed in war cannot be entrusted mandates within the 
establishment of the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
particularly in the authorities. 
  The delegations also agree that the creation of permanent 
cooperation between Croatian and Bosniak peoples should be 
worked upon with a view to preserving the independence of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina within its internationally recognized borders. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31820 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Journalist Faces Criminal Charges </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Journalist Faces Criminal Charges </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406170894 Belgrade NEDELJNA BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 11-12 
Jun 94 p 4 </F>

<F P=103> AU1406170894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NEDELJNA BORBA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by M. Bunjac: "Smuggling as a Military Secret"] </F>
  [Excerpts] Glina -- Military secrets often affect the fate 
of people in various positions, people with different 
professions, characters, affiliations, and intentions. The 
curious want to find out what these secrets are, the traitors 
want to reveal them, the strategists and military men want to 
use them to achieve an advantage over their enemy. As of 
recently, the Krajina's entire state and political leadership, 
as well as the public, have also been dealing with a "military 
secret." 
  Milka Ljubicic, editor in chief of SRPSKI GLAS, the only 
Krajina newspaper, was banned from attending a political meeting 
that was recently organized by RSK [republic of Serbian Krajina] 
President Milan Martic. As was later explained at this informal 
meeting, they discussed issues "important for the defense of 
Krajina." In her earlier articles, Ljubicic had written 
publicly about these issues. Therefore, she revealed a military 
secret. This was in fact the reason for the open correspondence 
between Borivoje Rasuo, minister of information in the Krajina 
Government, and RSK President Milan Martic. 
<H5>  Location of Corps' Command </H5>
  The allegations about treason are formally based on Milka 
Ljubicic's article in DUGA, entitled "Kilograms of Genuine DM 
[German marks]," in which, writing about smuggling, crime, and 
lawlessness in Krajina, Ljubicic also mentioned the location of 
the Kordun Corps' Command, which is the vicinity of "Sentilj," a 
well- known border area with the Cazin Krajina, an area in which 
profiteers sell various articles ranging from foodstuffs to arms 
of all calibers. Acting on the order of the Corps's commander, 
the communal public prosecutor asked the Vrgin Most court to 
conduct an investigation and file criminal charges against 
Ljibicic for "revealing a military secret," that is, revealing 
the location of the Corps' Command. 
  The contentious article was published in DUGA in August 
1993. 
Criminal charges were filed six months later, in February 1994. 
As we have unofficially learned, after the initial 
investigation, the communal court sent the case back to the 
relevant public prosecutor for reviewing. The public prosecutor 
now has to decide whether there are any grounds for further 
criminal proceedings or not. This offense, committed in 
wartime, carries a prison sentence of up to 15 years. [passage 
omitted] 
<H5>  Unsolved Murders </H5>
  Supporting Borivij Rasuo, information minister in the RSK 
government, the more serious analysts and those familiar with 
the events in Krajina claim that this "case" has its own 
background and causes on a completely different side. In a 
series of articles in DUGA and SRPSKI GLAS, Milka Ljubicic 
revealed to the last detail the channels for smuggling and war 
profiteering in which both the current and former police, 
military, and political leaderships of Krajina were involved. 
In her article in SRPSKI GLAS, "Mile [Milan] Travels Through 
the Corridor," written on the occasion of the first anniversary 
of the corridor, the corridor is mentioned as a paradise for war 
profiteers and a hell for those who opened it. This was the 
first more serious tackling of the problem of illegal trade with 
the Muslims, conducted by the political and business circles in 
Belgrade, where certain individuals, considered to be social 
"cases" until not so long ago, as well as members of certain 
"structures," became millionaires overnight. 
  In the incriminating article that was published in DUGA last 
year, Milka Ljubicic also mentioned several murders that have 
remained unsolved to this date. They were committed in Banija 
and Kordun and are often spoken about in connection with money 
laundering, or claimed to have political motives, as is the case 
of the late Dmitar Obradovic, president of the Vrgin Most 
Communal Assembly. The real reasons for anathemizing this 
journalist are purported to be her criticism of the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and the Headquarters of the Krajina Army for 
the strange way in which they appropriated 760,000 German marks 
at the Moscenica border crossing. Ljubicic continuously 
insisted in her articles on the rule of law and criticized the 
authorities for not doing anything to prevent the anarchy and 
lawlessness that has taken deep roots in Krajina. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31821 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Opposition Stresses Parliamentary Rules </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Opposition Stresses Parliamentary Rules </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406160894 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1300 GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1406160894 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The opposition is interested in principles and not 
in positions it can hold, Drazen Budisa told journalists 
following a several hour-long meeting of the parliamentary 
opposition. Jasenka Dudic reports: 
  [Dudic] The opposition's new proposal is: Until further 
notice, not to put forward candidates for the position of vice 
president of either chamber of the assembly. We are not 
insisting on the appointment of the people we have put forward, 
Budisa said, and added that the opposition insisted on the fact 
that the 14th session of the Chamber of Counties should be 
resumed from the moment the vote on the vice president of that 
chamber was taken which, the opposition believes, was not done 
in line with the rules of procedure. 
  [Begin Budisa recording] In return for our concession not to 
put forward any candidates for the position of vice president of 
either chamber, the opposition demands that principles and the 
rules of procedure be honored, which means that the 18th session 
of the Chamber of Deputies should be held in line with the rules 
of procedure. [end recording] 
  [[Dudic] If the Croatian Democratic Union [HDZ] accepts this 
proposal, Budisa said that the opposition will return to the 
parliament. Failing this, Budisa said that the opposition will 
resign from its posts in committees and commissions. He also 
said that the opposition is united, and that not even the 
Croatian Party of Right will return to the parliament unless all 
of the opposition does. Budisa also announced a meeting with 
Jure Radic for today and a meeting between opposition and HDZ 
negotiators for Thursday [16 June]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31822 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Manolic on Costs of Bosnia War, Kuna Issue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Manolic on Costs of Bosnia War, Kuna Issue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0298A Zagreb GLOBUS in Serbo-Croatian 6 May 94 pp 15-17 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0298A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb GLOBUS </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Josip Manolic, former Croatian Democratic </F>
Community official and current vice chairman of Croatian 
Independent Democrats, by Davor Butkovic; place and date not 
given: "War Between Croats and Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Costs Croatia 3 Million German Marks a Day!"] 
  [Text] Beginning with this issue, GLOBUS will 
publish, in several installments and in the form of thematic 
interviews, the most important remembrances of the cofounder of 
the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Community]; former prime minister; 
chief, until recently, of all Croatian intelligence services; 
president of the Assembly House of Zupanijas; and a short time 
ago one of the founders of the Croatian Independent Democrats, 
concerning the political figures and events in Croatia from 1989 
to 1994. In the first part of his memoirs, Josip Manolic for the 
first time reveals a bewildering fact: The war between the 
Croats and Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina costs Croatia three 
million German marks a day! 
  In the first installment of GLOBUS's feuilleton "Political 
History of Croatia from 1989 to 1994," the vice chairman and 
founder of the Croatian Independent Democrats, Josip Manolic, 
who five years ago, together with Dr. Franjo Tudjman, founded 
the Croatian Democratic Community, and who from 1990 to present 
occupied a series of very important state and party positions, 
talks about how the Croatian currency came to be named the 
"kuna" [marten], how preparations were made for introduction of 
the Croatian dinar, how much the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina cost 
Croatia, and who actually oversaw the money that Croatian 
emigres collected for the needs of national defense. 
  At last year's final session of the Assembly on 29 July 
1993, 
prior to the annual vacation, the Law on Changes in the Law on 
the National Bank of Croatia was adopted. One of the changes was 
in the name of the Croatian currency: The expression "Croatian 
kruna" was replaced by the word "kuna," while "banica," as 
one-one hundredth of the Croatian kruna, was replaced by "lipa." 
  The original text of the Law on the National Bank, with the 
designations "Croatian kruna" and "banica," which were replaced 
by "kuna" and "lipa" last summer, was adopted in early November 
1992. 
  Thus, the Croatian Assembly changed the name of the Croatian 
currency twice in only nine months! 
  "Historically, the Croatian currency has never been called 
the kuna," says Mr. Manolic. "Marten furs were only one form of 
exchanging goods back when currency did not even exist in the 
Croatian region, just as sea shells, goats, or sheep were also 
used. Thus, marten furs were only a means of barter payment, so 
that the name `kuna' for Croatian money cannot be derived from 
any genuine tradition. By the same token, the currency could be 
called `koza' [goat] or `ovca' [sheep] just as easily as 
`kuna,'" Manolic believes. 
  "Prior to last year's decision on changes in the Law on the 
National Bank of Croatia, the kuna had been legal tender only in 
the Independent State of Croatia [NDH--World War II fascist 
state]. Personally, I feel that historically speaking there is 
in fact no reason whatsoever to call Croatian money kuna, but 
also that the name of money is not a critical political 
question. That certainly did not appear to be the case when the 
decision on the name of money was adopted, when the state 
leadership obviously did not consider all the consequences of 
the name `kuna' for the new Croatian currency." 
  [Butkovic] Do you think that it is a good thing politically 
for the money of the new Croatian state to be named after the 
money of the state that was on the wrong side in World War II? 
  [Manolic] No, of course that is not good. We here have not 
yet confronted the fact that during that period of history, in 
only four years, there were a very large number of pogroms 
against members of other nations who lived and live in Croatia, 
but also against many Croats. We must now be realistic. Neither 
Jews nor Serbs will be able to accept the kuna as their 
currency. In addition, although it was a state, the NDH was not 
a bright spot to which anything in present-day Croatia should be 
linked. 
  [Butkovic] How was the name "kuna" even selected? Who 
insisted upon it? 
  [Manolic] It is obvious that some people felt nostalgia for 
the symbols of a certain period that was not the happiest one 
for Croatia. But that was not the only reason. Specifically, in 
the initial period after the Croatian Democratic Community 
victory, in 1990, the prevalent conviction among the party 
leadership due to the euphoric--and nationalistic--attitude of 
the victors was that all the symbols of the new state must have 
a radically Croatian quality to them, so that the majority of 
HDZ leaders at the time were in favor of the kuna, as a symbol 
of something Croatian that was banned for 45 years. After the 
homeland war and amid international recognition of Croatia, the 
mood became more sober. Then, the prevalent conviction was that 
it is more sensible and useful to call the Croatian currency the 
Croatian kruna, which was in fact enacted in the Law on the 
National Bank of Croatia of November 1992. But then the attitude 
that the kuna is a better solution came to prevail. 
  Mr. Manolic remembers well who decided that the Croatian 
currency should be called the kuna, and when. 
  [Manolic] During the period of initial discussion of changes 
in the Law on the National Bank of Croatia, a meeting of 14 
prominent deputies of the Croatian Democratic Community--the 
majority of whom are not currently in my new party--was held at 
the Assembly. Of the 14 of them, 12 were opposed to the kuna, 
and only two were for it! Shortly thereafter, at a meeting of 
the Presidency of the Croatian Democratic Community, Dr. Tudjman 
said that the new Croatian currency must be called the kuna and 
that the Law on the National Bank of Croatia must be changed to 
that end. At that meeting, Dr. Tudjman instructed the chairmen 
of HDZ parliamentary caucuses that all deputies of the Croatian 
Democratic Community must vote for the kuna! 
  [Butkovic] Thus, the president himself insisted on the name 
kuna? 
  [Manolic] Yes, at a meeting of the Presidency of the 
Croatian 
Democratic community held last year, he stipulated that the new 
Croatian currency be called the kuna. The Assembly deputies 
simply executed his decision. 
  [Butkovic] How did Dr. Tudjman explain his insistence on the 
kuna? 
  [Manolic] He said that the kuna is one of the expressions of 
the Croatian nation-building tradition. Specifically, although 
Dr. Tudjman participated in the war against the NDH, he 
nevertheless regarded the Independent State of Croatia as an 
element in the Croatian nation-building tradition, and for that 
reason he wanted the kuna specifically, as the currency of that 
regime and as a symbol of that nation-building approach, to 
become the official Croatian currency. 
  [Butkovic] How did Dr. Tudjman defend the kuna against the 
objections of international and domestic public opinion? 
  [Manolic] At the time of the adoption of the decision by the 
HDZ Presidency, but not by the Assembly, he did not accept any 
negative consequences whatsoever of the name kuna--not only from 
an international, but also from a domestic-policy viewpoint. I 
repeat once more that we cannot serious count on reintegration 
of the occupied territories with things like the kuna. 
  [Butkovic] Who was for the kuna in the Croatian Democratic 
Community, and who was against it? 
  [Manolic] Pressure to rename the currency the kuna was 
exerted by the Herzegovinan lobby. At the time, I got the 
impression that Tudjman made that decision under pressure from 
the Herzegovinans, as a concession to the Herzegovinan lobby. 
However, there were many other prominent HDZ figures besides the 
Herzegovinans who defended the kuna. One of them was academician 
Dalibor Brozovic, by no means an ardent rightwinger or 
nationalist, but who did support the kuna. On the other hand, 
Ivan Aralica presented arguments against the kuna. Almost no one 
from the President Tudjman's innermost circle, including the 
president himself, was willing to listen to him. I spoke out 
openly against the kuna on several occasions, contending that 
such a name for the Croatian currency will only be politically 
damaging to the Republic of Croatia. 
  [Butkovic] Still, at the end of last July, after bitter 
parliamentary debate in which nearly all opposition Assembly 
deputies cogently challenged the HDZ bill on changing the Law on 
the National Bank of Croatia, that proposal passed, thanks to 
the unanimous support of Croatian Democratic Community deputies. 
It is interesting that the HDZ, in which bitter factional 
infighting had been going on for some time, was unwilling to 
split over the name of the currency. Why? 
  [Manolic] We felt that the name of the currency was too 
minor 
an issue to provoke a serious political split in the HDZ. That 
is why we preferred to remain silent, so that the majority of 
HDZ deputies voted with the party's--i.e., Tudjman's--decision. 
We felt that it was much more important for our money to be 
solid and stable than for us to quarrel and expose our positions 
in the then-internal struggle on the issue of what the currency 
is called.... 
  [Butkovic] Speaking of the name of the currency, what did 
the 
leaders of the government have to say about that? 
  [Manolic] No one asked the government anything about it. I 
repeat: The decision on the name of the Croatian currency was 
made by Dr. Tudjman under pressure from the Herzegovinan lobby, 
and the government was given the task of implementing that 
decision. It is a major illusion to think that the government 
could have had any degree of autonomy in that regard. Both the 
government and the National Bank of Croatia had to obey 
President Tudjman's decisions, and they have never been 
autonomous in making important political or personnel decisions. 
  [Butkovic] The Croatian currency first began to be discussed 
in earnest at the end of 1990 and the beginning of 1991, during 
the first attempts at a Yugoslav coup against the legally 
elected authorities of the Republic of Croatia and the Republic 
of Slovenia. Shortly thereafter, Serbia conducted the famous 
raid on the SFRY [Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] 
monetary system, when more than $1 billion "disappeared," which 
dealt the death blow to the convertibility of Ante Markovic's 
dinar. Soon the war broke out, so that it became necessary to 
introduce a Croatian currency. However, it is a less-known fact 
that the founders of the HDZ were thinking about the need to 
introduce Croatian currency back while the communists were still 
in power in Croatia.... 
  [Manolic] When we founded the Croatian Democratic Community, 
our goal was to emancipate Croatia from Yugoslavia. That meant 
creating all the instruments of an independent state, including 
Croatian currency. Thus, we were planning the introduction of 
Croatian currency back in the early 1990's.... 
  [Butkovic] When was it decided to actually introduce the 
currency? Did the first armed fighting with Serb rebels around 
Easter 1991 influence the final decision to introduce Croatian 
currency? 
  [Manolic] In my judgment, the war did not begin at Easter 
1991, but rather on 17 August 1990, when the Serb rebels erected 
the first barricades at Knin. Even then, what was going to 
happen had to be clear to all mature people in Croatia. But as 
far as currency is concerned, we had to follow our other 
political decisions. As you know, we did not simply want to 
leave Yugoslavia. We wanted to separate from Yugoslavia in order 
not to leave a huge amount of property in Belgrade's hands, 
so-called federal property, in the creation of which Croatia 
played the biggest role. Negotiations on distributing that 
property are still going on, and have been very unsuccessful. 
Similarly, no peace agreement detailing compensation for war 
damages has yet been signed since the end of this war. 
  Thus, we wanted to separate from the SFRY, with maximum 
protection of all those rights, all that property that we 
created in the SFRY. The decision to introduce an independent 
monetary unit could be made only in the context of that 
separation process, and that is why I think it is unjustified to 
claim that Croatia could have introduced its own--albeit 
temporary--monetary unit, the Croatian dinar, before the end of 
1991. 
  [Butkovic] How long did it take to prepare for introduction 
of the Croatian dinar? 
  [Manolic] The intensive preparations took around six months. 
The main role in these preparations was played by the minister 
of finance at the time, (the now late) Marijan Hanzekovic. 
During that time, there was much discussion of the economic 
justification of introducing Croatian currency, about printing 
costs. I recall that there were negotiations with numerous 
foreign money printers, that an effort was made to reduce costs 
as much as possible. 
  [Butkovic] Who made the decision on the exact date for 
introducing the Croatian currency? Is it true that in the 
Government of Democratic Unity, under the prime ministership of 
Franjo Greguric, there was a desire to introduce the Croatian 
dinar for use as soon as possible? 
  [Manolic] It is true that there were tendencies in the 
government to speed up the introduction of our own currency. But 
it was really impossible for preparations to take less than six 
months. At that time, Croatia was in the middle of the homeland 
war, and was unable to function normally. Naturally, the 
decision on when to introduce the Croatian dinar was made by the 
president of the republic. 
  Even though it had a multiparty composition, the Greguric 
government too was by no means autonomous in relation to the 
president of the republic, even though that impression existed 
among the public. 
  [Butkovic] During the period when the currency was being 
replaced, rumors circulated to the effect that large quantities 
of the replaced Yugoslav money was ending up in Croat towns in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Is that true? 
  [Manolic] It is true that there was a great deal of 
manipulation present during replacement of the currency. I 
cannot tell you about the nature of those manipulations. There 
are still living witnesses to those events who could tell you 
exactly what happened. 
  [Butkovic] As head of the Office for the Protection of 
Constitutional Order at the time, do you really not know where 
the bags of Yugoslav dinars ended up? 
  [Manolic] The intelligence and counterintelligence services 
were unable and unauthorized to deal with that problem. Other 
people were responsible for placement of the Yugoslav dinars, 
and they can now give you all the necessary explanations. 
  After the first eight almost idyllic months of the Croatian 
dinar's existence, amid Greguric's "programmed inflation" of 10 
to 15 percent a month, hyperinflation erupted in Croatia after 
the Croatian Democratic Community won the August 1992 elections, 
and that hyperinflation completely devalued the Croatian dinar 
and lasted nearly 14 months. Josip Manolic, at that time the 
head of the intelligence service and President Tudjman's closest 
associate, explains now that entering into hyperinflation was a 
necessary political move. 
  [Manolic] Hyperinflation was the only way to finance the 
Croatian state. Croatia exhausted all its financial resources on 
the homeland war, and one must not forget that the Dubrovnik 
seaboard was not liberated until June 1992. All funds and all 
reserves were exhausted, and there was no chance of borrowing 
money from anyone. In order to survive, in order to be able to 
pay for the state's most elementary needs, such as weapons and 
maintenance of the armed forces, we had to enter into 
hyperinflation. That is why I think that it is important to say 
that the supposed weakness of the Croatian dinar was not the 
cause of the hyperinflation. The state simply had no money, so 
that hyperinflation was the only possible political decision. At 
that time, we had no opportunities whatsoever for foreign loans 
or revenues from tourism, nor for any real revival of the 
economy. That is why we decided to finance the state through 
inflation.... 
  [Butkovic] But during that time, when the state had no money 
for the most elementary needs, so that it had to cause 
hyperinflation, state institutions decided to purchase a 
presidential airplane and a number of luxury cars. Who made the 
decision to buy the Challenger, worth at least $12 million? 
  [Manolic] The decision to buy the presidential airplane was 
made by the president himself. The president felt that as a 
statesman, he must have a corresponding airplane, that such an 
airplane is a symbol of Croatian statehood. I actually do not 
know how much the presidential airplane cost. As far as the cars 
are concerned, however, I must say that they were acquired at an 
exceptionally favorable price. Specifically, used cars were 
bought for the needs of the Assembly. For example, my official 
BMW Series 5 cost no more than 7,000 German marks [DM]. 
  [Butkovic] At a time of hyperinflation, the Croatian state 
not only enriched its motor pool and housing fund for state 
officials, but also--which is much worse--entered into the war 
with Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina through the HVO [Croat 
Defense Council] and Herceg-Bosna. In recent public appearances, 
you have alleged that that war cost Croatia an exceptional 
amount of money. Thus far, however, you have not mentioned any 
concrete figures. 
  [Manolic] The war in Bosnia-Herzegovina contributed 
essentially to the impoverishment of the population of the 
Republic of Croatia. At the beginning of open Croat-Muslim 
fighting, wages in Croatia were below DM200. It can be proven 
that the state funds would be incomparably fuller, that various 
beneficiaries of the budget, from teachers to doctors, would 
have at least somewhat higher wages, if the Republic of Croatia 
had not had to finance the Croatian Defense Council's war 
against the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Butkovic] Can you estimate how much money Croatia spent on 
the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Manolic] There are only unofficial estimates of how much 
was 
spent on the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. But I do think that a 
more or less accurate figure can be calculated. There were 
63,000 to 64,000 soldiers fighting the Muslims. All those 
soldiers had to be paid. All those soldiers consumed a certain 
amount of ammunition each day. A certain number of shells were 
launched, and the average price of a shell is DM50. To all of 
that you must add logistical costs. 
  All together, the war with the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
cost the Republic of Croatia at least DM3 million a day! Since 
the war lasted nearly one year, it can be estimated that that 
war cost us a total of nearly DM1 billion. The question is how 
impoverished Croatia could allow itself to finance such a 
politically and economically suicidal war! 
  [Butkovic] One of the most important sources of financing 
Croatian defensive needs was money sent to the homeland from the 
diaspora. Today, however, it is unclear what actually happened 
to that money, how much money actually arrived in Croatia, on 
what it was all spent, and who controlled the bank accounts to 
which the money from the emigre community was deposited.... 
  [Butkovic] Not one state or party body ever received a 
report 
on the money that arrived from the emigre community for 
defensive needs. Recently, at one of the last meetings of the 
National Security Council, at which I was present, the issue of 
this money was raised. As in the past, we did not get a single 
concrete response.... 
  [Butkovic] How did the money arrive in Croatia from the 
emigre community? 
  [Manolic] Our emigres began sending money back while 
Yugoslavia still existed, because it was seen immediately that 
Croatia must prepare for defense. During that period, we opened 
several accounts at foreign banks, because we did not want that 
money to go to the SFRY, to be seized by the Yugoslav 
authorities. After Croatia became definitively independent, 
there was no longer any need for our emigres' money to be 
deposited in secret accounts abroad, but that practice continued 
nevertheless. The money was never moved to Croatia from the 
foreign accounts, and not a single state body ever received any 
explanation of why that was so! 
  [Butkovic] Who oversaw that money? 
  [Manolic] From the very beginning, Minister Gojko Susak was 
responsible for gathering money from the diaspora. He is 
probably the only person who knows what all happened to the 
money gathered for national defense, and he has not submitted an 
account statement for that money to anyone. Minister Susak and 
the president of the republic were the only ones with authority 
to sign on all the accounts into which money for the defensive 
needs of Croatia arrived. The majority of other state officials 
knew nothing about that. We were unable to get any more detailed 
information about the spending of that money, or even about the 
actual amounts. 
  [Butkovic] Can you give at least a ballpark figure for how 
much money Croatian emigres sent in for national defense? 
  [Manolic] Most likely it involves at least several hundred 
million dollars, about which almost no one in the state 
leadership knows where it was spent. That is a question to which 
Minister Susak, who from the very beginning was the only one 
overseeing the collection and spending of that money, must in 
fact respond. 
  [Butkovic] Speaking of money spent for defense, what 
happened 
to the money earmarked for Vukovar, because of which Vukovar 
commander Dedakovic was in prison? 
  [Manolic] Dedakovic was not arrested because of the money 
for 
Vukovar, but rather for other reasons. However, during his 
arrest a certain amount of money was found on him, which he said 
was collected from Croatian emigres for the defense of Vukovar. 
The Dedakovic case has been dealt with by the criminal 
investigation system, and I think that there is nothing else 
mysterious in connection with the money for Vukovar. 
  [Butkovic] Is it possible that some of the money gathered by 
the diaspora for the state's needs ended up in the accounts of 
the Croatian Democratic Community? On several occasions the 
opposition has hinted that the HDZ has used this money to pay 
for its extravagant election campaigns.... 
  [Manolic] I think that that is utterly impossible. The 
election campaigns of the Croatian Democratic Community have 
been very modest in relation to the amount of money that has 
arrived from abroad. Moreover, the HDZ has never had problems 
finding sponsors for its election campaigns. I really do not 
believe that money collected for the defense of Croatia has 
ended up in the accounts of the Croatian Democratic Community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31823 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Valentic Warns of `Real' Economic Problems </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Valentic Warns of `Real' Economic Problems </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0310C Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 27 May 94 p 13 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0310C </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by v.a.: "Valentic: A Wave of Bankruptcies Is </F>
Coming"] 
  [Text] The assembled shareholders of Privredna Banka 
[Business Bank] were also addressed by Prime Minister Nikica 
Valentic, who said that prices, the exchange rate, and inflation 
are staying as they are, thereby refuting yet again all the 
rumors about the drop in the exchange rate immediately after the 
kuna is introduced. "Inflation at 10 percent per month is high, 
and anything over 20 or 30 percent is already hyperinflation," 
the Croatian prime minister emphasized. 
  He added that the drafting of the final program is nearing 
an 
end for signing the letter of intent with the IMF, and that the 
signing of a standby arrangement is expected in September. 
Valentic emphasized that a contract will be signed any day now 
with the World Bank on a loan of $128 million, adding that at 
the same time this constitutes a breach of the financial 
blockade. Valentic also said that an agreement had been reached 
with the World Bank on a loan of $100 million intended for 
financial rescue and restructuring of the bank, which will come 
to Croatia after the standby arrangement is signed. 
  After saying that financial rescue and restructuring of the 
banks will begin in a few days, Nikica Valentic repeated that 
the government does not want to support the banks, but only to 
restore order in the banking system. 
  He also announced that there soon would be a wave of 
bankruptcies, which, he said, will affect entire branches of the 
economy, because the structure of the economy that Croatia has 
today is no longer tenable. "The real problems are just 
beginning. Only now will we see whether we have the strength and 
will to carry out the anti-inflation program, on which 
cooperation with international financial institutions depends," 
the Croatian prime minister emphasized, adding that the electric 
power industry, the health insurance fund, and the pension fund 
had been stabilized, that the public debt had been reduced to a 
large extent, and foreign exchange savings are growing. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31824 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Biographic Information on New Assembly Speaker </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Biographic Information on New Assembly Speaker </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0302B Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 25 May 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0302B </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed HINA article: "Biography of Dr. Katica </F>
Ivanisevic"] 
  [Text] The newly elected speaker of the Croatian Assembly's 
Chamber of Parishes, Prof. Katica Ivanisevic, was born on 11 
January 1935 in Omisalj on the island of Krk. She is a Croat by 
nationality and a Catholic by religion. She completed elementary 
school in Rijeka and secondary school in the Susak gymnasium. At 
the Ljubljana School of Philosophy, she received a degree in 
English and English literature, Italian and Italian literature, 
and Latin. She also studied at King's College in London and in 
Peruggi at the School for Foreigners, and pursued graduate 
studies at the Seminar for American Studies in Salzburg, 
Austria. She studied in the United States, and received a 
diploma from the American Culture and Language Institute in New 
York. 
  In 1977, she received a master's degree in American 
literature at the Ljubljana School of Philosophy, and in 1981 
she defended a doctoral dissertation and received a doctorate in 
literary science from the University of Ljubljana. 
  After graduating she worked as an English professor, and 
during the period 1974-78 as a lecturer on English and American 
literature at the Pedagogical Academy in Rijeka. Since 1978, she 
has taught "World Literature" at the Pedagogical Schools in 
Rijeka and Pula. 
  In 1984 she was selected for the scientific research title 
of 
scientific adviser, and for the rank of regular professor in the 
field of philology. 
  From 1982 to 1984 she was vice dean of the Pedagogical 
School 
in Rijeka, from 1984 to 1986 head of the Philology Department at 
the Pedagogical School, from 1986 to 1988 dean of the 
Pedagogical School in Rijeka, from 1989 to 1993 vice president 
of the University of Rijeka, and from 1993 on president of the 
University of Rijeka. 
  She has published four books and more than 100 scientific 
and 
professional works. She has delivered reports at numerous 
international and domestic symposia, congresses, and 
conferences. As an active researcher, she participated in 
scientific projects in Croatia and abroad. She is a member of 
numerous foreign and Croatian scientific and professional 
associations. She is a winner of the Award of the City of Rijeka 
in 1985 for achievements in the area of literary criticism and 
numerous other awards. 
  She is married and has a son, a university graduate. 
  She is a member of the Croatian Democratic Community, and 
before that she never belonged to any party. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31825 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   HVO Troops Ready To Fight for Posavina </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    HVO Troops Ready To Fight for Posavina </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0310D Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 27 May 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0310D </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Mijo Matanovic, chairman of the Provisional </F>
Zupanija Committee of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosanska 
Posavina, by Ivan Sabic; place and date not given: "We Have To 
Show Our Teeth"] 
  [Text] Following occupation of a large portion of Bosanska 
Posavina [Sava Valley in Bosnia], silence prevailed about this 
problem for a long time, and then the time came when, primarily 
thanks to the awakening of the Posavina people themselves and 
proclamation of an autonomous province, people began to talk 
about Posavina, and then another time of silence ensued. 
Autonomy has been almost forgotten. That is why at the beginning 
of the interview with Mijo Matanovic, chairman of the 
Provisional Zupanija Committee of the HDZ [Croatian Democratic 
Union] of Bosanska Posavina, we asked whether establishment of 
the federation and the borders of the Posavina Canton proposed 
by the Vienna agreement are the reason why the talk about 
autonomy died out? 
  "Posavina has always been different from Herceg-Bosna. 
Because it is also physically distant, and communications are 
complicated, there was a desire for some autonomy, but it was 
not an endeavor to separate Posavina from other Croatian 
regions, but of autonomy within that space. Establishment of the 
canton brings about a kind of realization of that aspiration. 
The only essential thing for us is for Bosanska Posavina to be 
preserved intact as a Croatian space, and it makes absolutely no 
difference whether that is a province, canton, or something 
else." 
<H5>  Why Are Brcko and Gradacac in the Muslim Canton? </H5>
  [Sabic] Are you satisfied with the agreed borders of the 
canton? That is, they do not coincide with the borders of the 
Vance-Owen province which the Posavina people considered the 
optimum solution. 
  [Matanovic] There has been a departure, and this occurred in 
the area of Brcko and Gradacac. Under the Vienna agreement, 
those two opstinas belong almost entirely to the Muslim canton, 
but the proposed map nevertheless has great importance, because 
most of the Croatian space occupied by the Serbs has 
nevertheless been included in the Croatian canton. However, it 
is not clear to me why the territory of Brcko and Gradacac has 
been included in the Muslim canton. When the map of Bosanska 
Posavina was being worked out, we in the zupanija committee 
tried to embrace the area in which Croats are in the majority, 
and we had information that the Muslim leadership had nothing 
against the opstinas of Brcko and Gradacac going mostly to 
Posavina. No one explained to us what happened afterward. 
  [Sabic] Nevertheless, the occupation is the biggest problem? 
  [Matanovic] Of course. Especially because it is not very 
likely that the Serbs will make any essential concession in the 
area of Posavina in the negotiations. 
  [Sabic] That means that the military option for resolving 
the 
problem of Posavina is fairly likely? 
  [Matanovic] In that respect, the Posavina people have always 
felt that we should show our teeth. After all, if we have lost 
Posavina militarily, we never renounced it. I hope that today we 
are ready to do that job. 
  [Sabic] A protest of Posavina refugees in Zagreb was 
recently 
announced, but very few assembled. It was later explained that 
the meeting could not be held for certain technical and certain 
political reasons, but the fact is that very few people came and 
that fewer and fewer people are coming to meetings like that. 
What is your interpretation? 
  [Matanovic] I do not know what actually happened in the case 
which you mention, but it seems to me that there have been too 
many of these rallies and meetings about Bosanska Posavina, and 
that might be the reason. We who are operating on the territory 
on the other side of the Sava believe the essential thing is for 
all ideas and all proposals to come right from the free portion 
of Posavina. In that area, all the occupied opstinas have their 
own brigades, the opstina HVO's [Croatian defense councils], and 
opstina committees of the HDZ, so that all conditions exist for 
initiatives to come from there to solve the problems essential 
to the future of Posavina. It seems that the Posavina people 
have grown cool to all the ideas raised from outside that region. 
  [Sabic] Are you maintaining any relations with the refugees? 
  [Matanovic] There is an agency in every opstina which is 
concerned with the refugees. In the cantonal government system, 
there will also be an office for displaced persons in Bosanska 
Posavina, which will provide us far greater opportunities for 
contact with refugees from Posavina. 
  [Sabic] For several weeks, battles have been announced for 
the space through which the Serbian corridor passes; it is said 
that those battles might be decisive for the outcome of the war 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. What is the situation in Posavina, do 
you take the position that it is ready for that development of 
events? 
<H5>  The Corridor Is Important to Us and to Them </H5>
  [Matanovic] It is clear that the corridor is the biggest 
problem of Posavina, but also of Croats and Muslims in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina in general. Serbian propaganda has done its job 
concerning that problem, it has created the idea that the 
corridor is a necessity if there is to be an end to the war. 
However important it is to them for the corridor to survive, it 
is important to us that it not exist, and it is certain that we 
will try to realize our desire. 
  [Sabic] Nevertheless, there will have to be some 
transportation connection of the Serbian regions in western 
Bosnia with Serbia in the final demarcation, at least in some 
transitional period to full normalization of relations in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. Do you have any proposal for solving that 
problem? 
  [Matanovic] There will have to be some compromise. If the 
Muslims are able to pass into western Bosnia, and the Croats 
from Posavina to southern parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, then 
the Serbs will have to pass to Banja Luka. In that sense, it 
probably will be possible to achieve some agreement. But the 
corridor in the sense it has today will not exist. There 
possibly could be a highway under international supervision. 
  [Sabic] A portion of the Croatian population from Brcko 
Opstina is on the other side of the corridor; the 108th (Brcko) 
Infantry Brigade of the HVO is also there. Are you maintaining 
any contacts? Is there coordination? 
  [Matanovic] A system of communications with Brcko Opstina 
exists at the level of the military commander, that is, at the 
level of the corps district, so that some contacts are made, but 
I cannot talk about details. 
  [Sabic] The question of the fall of Posavina is often 
raised, 
and in this connection there is always talk about the fall of 
Odzak, Derventa, Modrica, and Bosanski Brod, but no mention is 
made of the fall of Bosanski Samac, which came under Serbian 
occupation almost without a fight. What is the reason for that? 
  [Matanovic] In my judgment, the fall of Samac signified the 
beginning of the fall of Posavina. I do not know why this is not 
being paid the attention it deserves, but the fact is that no 
steps whatsoever have been noticeable since that opstina fell 
under Serbian authority. 
  [Sabic] The soldiers in Posavina are announcing that unless 
there is an appropriate political decision and organized 
liberation of Posavina they may undertake independent action. 
One action has in fact been carried out, rather unsuccessfully 
it seems. Do you expect that there really could be others? 
  [Matanovic] You are probably thinking of the Svilaj action. 
However, I would not say that this was an unsuccessful action; 
if nothing else, it showed the fighting determination of the 
Posavina fighting man. I think that such actions are possible in 
the future as well. It will be difficult to control them if 
nothing is done to solve the question of Bosanska Posavina, if 
not by peaceful means, then by taking coordinated military 
action. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31826 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Organization for Emigrants Opposes Federation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Organization for Emigrants Opposes Federation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0302A Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 26 May 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0302A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ante Beljo, director of the Croatian Emigrant </F>
Center and administrator of the Croatian Information Center: "We 
Must Not Let Ourselves Be Drawn Into Any Third Yugoslavia"] 
  [Text] You are surely already well-informed through the 
news media of the countries where you live about all the 
pressures being exerted against Croatia. 
  These are the little poems about a Croatian-Muslim 
federation 
on 30 percent of Bosnia-Herzegovina's territory, and about a 
confederation with Croatia (because more room is needed), and 
then once again, because of higher interests, pressures will 
begin for an alliance with the "Serbian Krajinas" (the occupied 
areas on Croatia) and the so-called republic of Srpska (the 
occupied areas in Bosnia-Herzegovina), and since all Serbs must 
live in the same state, it will be necessary to create one 
market (probably a customs-free one), so that in the end 
everyone would end up in southern Slav "fraternity and unity." 
  Later on the same thing would also be offered to the 
Slovenes, to whom such a solution, because of the reduced 
Yugoslav market, could seem attractive. The same thing applies 
to Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- 
FYROM], because of the growing Greek pressures. Alija 
Izetbegovic also would not reject having all Muslims live in the 
same state. 
  We are calling upon all Croats in the world (the 
state-creating ones, because there are a certain number of 
Croats at home and abroad who have already been wholeheartedly 
in the services of the pressures against Croatia for a long time 
now) to do everything in their power in the countries where they 
live to finally permit the Croatian people to decide for itself 
on its own fate, without any pressures. That is the inalienable 
right of every people according to all cultural and legal norms. 
  Why aren't greater pressures being brought against the 
Serbian aggressor? Why isn't he being forced to return the 
occupied territories? Why isn't it being made possible for 
displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes under 
international protection? Why aren't Croats allowed the 
possibility of self-defense? Should the aggressor be granted 
what he has seized? 
  Croatia wanted an alliance with Bosnia-Herzegovina, an 
alliance with the Muslims (A. Izetbegovic). Neither Alija nor 
the world wanted one. Today they are forcing us to share the 
remnant of Bosnia-Herzegovina territory with the Muslims (the 
expelled ones and the ones the Serbs have yet to expel). We are 
being driven into the Lebanonization of this region. 
  During these three years the West has done everything 
possible to bring Croatia to its knees (through the EC, the UN 
Protection Forces, and in various other ways). Now we are being 
forced, finally, to commit suicide. We cannot consent to that 
regardless of the "higher interests of the world at large." Two 
Yugoslavias really were too much for us. 
  We can talk about alliances, but we have to start with the 
situation before the aggression. 
  Dear friends and compatriots, do not allow the governments 
of 
the countries where you live and where you are taxpayers and 
voters to push Croatia and the Croatian people again into an 
abyss from which they will never be able to escape. 
  With regards and thanks, 
  Ante Beljo, director of the Croatian Emigrant Center and 
administrator of the Croatian Information Center 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31827 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Praises `Strategy for Poland' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Praises `Strategy for Poland' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1606084294 Warsaw PAP in Polish 0656 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1606084294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Warsaw, 16 June -- [passage omitted] The 
president was the guest of the morning program "Signals of the 
Day" on Polish Radio First Program and answered questions from 
listeners for an hour and a half. 
  "I have already said it and say it again, this is the best 
program in the past five years", said the president, assessing 
the government's economic development plan, "The Strategy for 
Poland." The president added that specialists should now 
consider ways of implementing the plan. 
  Many questions were on reprivatization. Walesa said that he 
was in favor of the restoration of property but stressed that it 
would be very difficult to sort out past ownership issues. The 
president quoted his proposals to carry out reprivatization. 
According to them the owner would receive the whole property, 
children would receive half, and grandchildren a quarter. 
  Answering questions on vetting and decommunization, the 
president said that he was in favor of vetting either by 
disclosing all documents available or by courts, prosecutors' 
offices and other authorized institutions conducting this. 
  The president said that he will take part in the forthcoming 
local elections and added that he hoped these will not be 
political elections. When asked who he will vote for Walesa 
said: "I trust my wife and my family." 
  "Are we going to decide whether we live in a Polish 
People's Republic No. 2, or in a country where democracy is 
being built, or whether we're to be motivated by the principle 
of a separation of powers, or not?", the president asked a 
listener who accused him of not taking steps to fully clear up 
the issue of the killing of Father Jerzy Popieluszko and the 
punishing of the perpetrators of the crime against Grzegorz 
Przemyk. "What am I supposed to do? Am I supposed to violate 
principles, take over power, become first secretary, Stalin, or 
make room for a Stalin?" Walesa retorted. 
  The president confirmed that he will not sign the amended 
abortion law which allows abortions in cases where the woman 
suffers from material hardship. "I cannot sign this kind of 
decision on murder and I will never sign it," he said. Walesa 
described attempts to adopt or reject the concordat as 
"something we should all be ashamed of". He said in a situation 
where there is pressure to increase wages he will sign the new 
law on taxing excess wage increases, otherwise "the reforms will 
be destabilized". 
  The president was also asked about personnel matters, 
including, why he appointed Henryk Goryszewski to the post of 
head of the National Security Bureau despite information, which 
has also appeared in the mass media, that his son-in-law was 
involved in "the car scandal." "Before I appointed Mr. 
Goryszewski, I ordered a careful examination of his involvement 
in these matters," the president said and added that everyone 
should answer for themselves. "I have four daughters and will 
have four sons-in-law but I don't know what they will be like 
and I am not going to take responsibility for them," the 
president said. 
  "I did not chose a wife for you so please don't chose one 
for 
me," the president replied to a listener who accused the 
president of employing "political amateurs" like Wachowski and 
Falandysz in the Belweder Palace. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31828 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Files Suit Over Aircraft </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Files Suit Over Aircraft </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1506135294 Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 15 Jun 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> WS1506135294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Luiza Kowalska: "Walesa Against Orders Issued </F>
to Defense Ministry; President's Motion to Constitutional 
Tribunal"] 
  [Text]The president has filed a law suit with the 
Constitutional Tribunal regarding part of the budget law. A 
controversial provision of the law orders the defense minister 
to purchase "Iryda" aircraft from the Mielec Transportation 
Equipment Plant [WSK Mielec]. This is the first time that Lech 
Walesa has filed a motion to examine the legality of a law that 
he had signed before. 
  Lech Walesa has addressed the Constitutional Tribunal to 
examine the legality of Article 36 of the budget law which 
orders the defense minister to purchase 3.7 trillion zlotys' 
worth of arms equipment produced in Poland, including 300 
billion zlotys' worth of "Iryda" aircraft manufactured at WSK 
Mielec. 
  According to the president, in imposing the obligation, the 
parliament interfered with the powers of the executive branch 
(the government), and it also breached the constitutional 
principle of separation of powers. 
  In addressing the tribunal, Walesa fulfilled a request by 
Defense Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk who even prior to the 
budget enactment, had made a strongly-worded protest against 
Article 36. As far back as April, Kolodziejczyk assured 
journalists that the president had promised him to file a suit 
over this form of the budget law. 
  "It is a precedent that is unacceptable for legal reasons 
and 
for reasons of substance. If the minister is to bear 
constitutional responsibility for the Armed Forces' readiness, 
then one must not tie his hands with decisions on how he should 
spend money," the National Defense Ministry [MON] chief told 
ZYCIE WARSZAWY yesterday. 
  Sejm imposed the purchase of "Iryda's" from the WSK Mielec 
on 
Kolodziejczyk, on a motion of some Sejm deputies -- mainly from 
the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] -- who are associated with 
the domestic arms industry. 
  "By devoting the money to buy the `Iryda's,' the parliament 
made a decision to defend the Polish arms industry," says SLD's 
Stanislaw Janas who is one of the Sejm deputies. "But that does 
not mean that we ordered the minister to spend all the money for 
domestically- produced equipment. The MON budget amounts to 
almost 48 trillion zlotys, so if the minister wants to spend the 
remainder of the money abroad, he can do that at any time." 
  We found out only yesterday about the president's motion to 
the Constitutional Tribunal, but it was submitted there on 24 
May which is over three weeks ago. Lech Falandysz, deputy chief 
of the President's Office, told ZYCIE WARSZAWY: "From a 
populist standpoint, the meaning of the motion is unfavorable to 
the president as he is taking a chance on being disliked by the 
WSK Mielec workforce. We were hesitant for a while on whether 
or not to file the motion, but in the end, the president said he 
had promised before to file it, so that is what he did." 
  This was the first time that Lech Walesa addressed the 
Constitutional Tribunal to examine the legality of a law already 
in force (which means it must have been signed by him). Thus 
far, when the president has been very unhappy about a law, he 
vetoed it first. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31829 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pawlak Says Steel Strike Opens Market to West </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pawlak Says Steel Strike Opens Market to West </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506203094 Warsaw Third Program Radio Network in Polish 
1900 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506203094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw Third Program Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] At a news conference in Legnica, Prime Minister 
Waldemar Pawlak has assessed the strike situation in the Polish 
steelworking industry. He pointed out its international 
implications. According to the head of the government, Western 
manufacturers of steel have large surpluses of that raw 
material. We are losing at our own volition, the prime minister 
said, because strikes bring our own steelworks to a standstill 
and foreign competitors can enter our markets. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31830 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Seminar Opens; Army Control Debated </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Seminar Opens; Army Control Debated </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1406125394 Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 14 Jun 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> WS1406125394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by LUZ: "Insufficiently Controlled Army"] </F>
  [Text]"The system of control over the Polish Army is 
far from perfect," admits Piotr Kolodziejczyk, chief of the 
National Defense Ministry [MON]. "A civilian minister is just 
not enough to be able to say that civilians are in charge of the 
Army," adds Jerzy Szmajdzinski, chairman of the Sejm Defense 
Commission. 
  "The system of control over the Armed Forces is far from 
perfect and it continues to be at the stage of being 
established. This, among others, is what work on the new 
constitution is about. We want the system to be established in 
accordance with well known examples of armies of Western 
countries that have stood the test of time," Defense Minister 
Piotr Kolodziejczyk said at the opening in Warsaw of an 
international conference devoted to "Civilian and Democratic 
Control Over Armed Forces." 
  According to the MON chief, the basic roles in the system, 
are performed -- in the following order of importance -- by: The 
president, the prime minister, the government (and a civilian 
defense minister within the government), and the Sejm which 
adopts the budget and other laws. 
  Michael Quinlan, former undersecretary of state in the 
British Defense Ministry, told the conference participants about 
how civilians control the British Army: "The law is the most 
important issue," the British guest said. "A soldier is not 
allowed to execute an illegal order because he would be brought 
to justice. This prevents abuses." 
  Quinlan added that it is inconceivable in a democratic state 
that the Army should want to influence for instance the shape of 
the constitution. 
  General Tadeusz Wilecki, chief of the Polish Army General 
Staff, attended the conference: "We have already done some 
things, although it can be concluded from the foreign guests' 
papers presented here, that we are still at the beginning of the 
road. The important point is, we are heading in the right 
direction," Wilecki said. 
  Jerzy Szmajdzinski of the Democratic Left Alliance, chairman 
of the Sejm Defense Commission, was more skeptical: "A civilian 
minister is just not enough to be able to speak about civilian 
control over the Army. First, we must change the awareness of 
the officer cadre. The military must be aware that the law is 
their supreme boss. And it is not the military, but civilians 
that should make basic decisions regarding the Armed Forces," 
Szmajdzinski said. 
  Conference participants will deliberate through Wednesday, 
among others, whether it is better to employ civilian employees 
or professional military in MON, and also the issue of "when can 
we be sure that the Armed Forces are directed appropriately." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31831 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Milewski Comments at Seminar </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Milewski Comments at Seminar </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506153094 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1238 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506153094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 15 June -- The Armed Forces have been a part 
of the state defense policy, but they should preserve their 
apolitical nature, Jerzy Milewski, secretary of state in the 
Ministry of National Defense said today, while summing up the 
proceedings of an international seminar, "Civilian and 
Democratic Control of the Armed Forces," organized in Warsaw at 
Poland's initiative and with cooperation from NATO Headquarters. 
  The seminar was attended by representatives of 38 states of 
the former Warsaw Pact and the North Atlantic Alliance. 
  Milewski emphasized that the most important decisions on 
defense policy should be made by the authorities coming from 
"free and general elections." Civilian control over the Army 
should not be identified with restrictions, but public 
acceptance is necessary for the principles of the defense 
policy, the functioning of the armed forces, and defense 
spending. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31832 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Spokesman Warns of Military's Deterioration </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Spokesman Warns of Military's Deterioration </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1506070094 Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 9 Jun 94 pp 
12-13 </F>

<F P=103> WS1506070094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki, spokesman for the </F>
Polish Ministry of National Defense: "We Have Disarmed 
Ourselves on Our Own"] 
  [Text]Military experts are again in charge of the 
Army. That which has been distorted in a joyful restructuring 
frenzy, will now be fixed -- so writes Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki, 
spokesman for the Ministry of National Defense. 
  Changes in the European political scene have lead to a clear 
destabilization of international affairs. The system of 
military connections has changed. However, I often have a 
feeling that not everyone has come to realize that. 
<H5>  We Have Excessively Disarmed Ourselves </H5>
  The collapse of treaty-based structures, the withdrawal of 
Red Star tanks from the banks of the Elbe river, and the 
withdrawal of soldiers from the Soviet Army's Northern Group 
from our western border, revealed what we are really worth. In 
a situation where we knew that everything was falling apart 
(with our contribution being the biggest of all), we signed an 
agreement on European conventional forces, that is to say, an 
arms reduction treaty. 
  Even Western politicians were surprised that we approved of 
the propositions submitted to us so willingly. So, we will 
shortly have to destroy 1,120 tanks, 247 armored combat 
vehicles, 705 pieces of artillery, and 45 aircraft. Other 
countries have also been obliged to make reductions, but within 
more reasonable limits. But what will happen later, is more 
important. 
  "Later," meaning as the final goal, we are entitled to have, 
for instance, 1,730 tanks at the most. In Russia, 6,400 tanks 
will remain, in Belarus -- 1,800, while in Ukraine -- 4,080. 
All that is beyond our eastern border. What about beyond the 
Oder river? The Germans will have 4,166 tanks, and keep in mind 
that every one of those is twice as efficient as a Polish tank. 
The Russians want to question the treaty because they think 
that they should be allowed to have many more armaments. What 
about us? 
  The time for enthusiasm over the changes is gradually fading 
away. All of our neighbors are getting down to introducing 
stabilization in their countries, and I mean political, 
economic, and defense stabilization. They are paying the most 
attention to the last type of stabilization mentioned here, even 
though they refuse to admit that. On the other hand, when one 
looks at what we have been doing, one can have doubts as to 
whether we know where we are heading. 
<H5>  A Budget of Agony </H5>
  For many years in the past, we were trying to scare society 
with U.S. imperialism, and now it is the same case with Russian 
totalitarianism. In actual fact, however, the overwhelming 
majority of Polish people are afraid of neither side. Still, 
the problem is somewhere else because the line of thinking by 
the average Sejm deputy or senator, is the same as that of the 
average Pole on the street. Such an individual member of 
parliament is harmless, but a group of them with such views, can 
accomplish a lot in the Sejm. 
  Let us take this year's Army budget as an example. Last 
year, there were just enough means to survive, while this year, 
the Armed Forces are heading for agony. That is not a poetic 
metaphor. Even though the issue is serious, there are few people 
who realize it. I will not list different items in terms of how 
much the Army can spend on what. Sejm deputies are afraid that 
the generals and colonels will start purchasing official 
Mercedes cars while in fact, we can only purchase 10 tanks -- 
among others -- with the allocated money. With these kinds of 
capabilities, it would take seven years to equip just one 
armored regiment! 
  We have only a percentage of the required amount of combat 
warheads for some types of rockets, and 30 percent of required 
ammunition for selected types of cannons. Fuel and food 
reserves -- which the state should be collecting -- are also in 
bad shape. I do not even mention the issue of overhauling and 
erecting barracks in new military garrisons. That is because I 
have come across a view that since a young man has spent 18 
years in a feather bed under a solid roof, it means he will 
survive in a tent for 18 months. Well, there is an explanation 
for everything. 
  A major portion of the equipment has already lost its 
"combat 
credibility." That means that soldiers are no longer trusting 
when it comes to their tanks, aircraft, or ships. They are 
simply afraid to shoot, take off with their aircraft, or go in 
the water. 
  One can continue to use the equipment only thanks to the 
remaining spare parts, and thanks to the extraordinary skills of 
the technical staff. The cost of maintaining equipment 
continues to rise. For those reasons, among others, 820 tanks, 
570 armored transport vehicles, and over 5,000 special- and 
general-purpose vehicles were withdrawn from operation in recent 
years. 
  As a matter of fact, we do not have to destroy anything in 
order to meet the conditions of the treaty on the reduction of 
conventional arms. Due to shortage of resources, in a few 
years' time we will have, among other things, only 60 combat 
aircraft, 30 assault helicopters, and 1,230 tanks. Thus, those 
numbers of armaments will be lower than those specified in the 
treaty. 
  Even the poorest countries that are reasonable enough do not 
allow such a collapse of the Army to occur. It is time to say 
this in public. 
<H5>  Politicians Are Not Listening to Officers </H5>
  Higher-ranking commanders are talking about it; however, 
there are not many who are willing to listen to them. 
Parliamentarians, in turn, are deeply concerned about the fate 
of the "Iryda" aircraft, which the Army does not want because it 
does not meet the required parameters. The deputies order us to 
take what they are giving, and to pay. They have allocated 300 
billion zlotys for that. Not in addition; the money comes from 
that which we have received. Did they do this for the sake of 
the Army's combat readiness, or for fear of the Mielec workers, 
who have come to Warsaw several times already? 
  In every state which thinks reasonably about defense there 
must be 70 percent of combat equipment manufactured in this 
country, based on its own construction techniques and 
technology. Any graduate of an officers' training school knows 
this. Therefore, the accusation that the minister does not 
accept the "Iryda" because he wants to destroy the Polish arms 
industry is not very serious. 
  Equally unserious is the atmosphere being created around the 
Ministry of National Defense [MON]. The willingness to take 
over the ministerial portfolio has been observed for some time 
now. The more unprepared for this post a person is, the greater 
the claims he makes. For the past several years, among people 
in charge of the ministry or of one of its sections, it has been 
seen as the proper thing to do to say that one does not have the 
slightest idea what the Army is about. Such people won 
recognition in Warsaw; however, the West was surprised at them. 
Even though civilians are in charge of the defense ministries 
there, they are professionally well-prepared; they are graduates 
of military schools, reserve officers. It is not the one who 
gets up earlier who decides the issues of the state's defense 
there. 
<H5>  They Steal Documents </H5>
  Now there is a chance to repair what has been done poorly in 
the joyful rush for restructuring. A great commotion was caused 
a few months ago by the fact that the Military Information 
Services [WSI] had returned to the structures of the General 
Staff. They returned because that is their place. Information 
provided by the intelligence and counterintelligence services 
help draw operational conclusions; they help the highest-ranking 
commanders make decisions. Incidentally, it is better for state 
security when the civilian minister does not have the full 
knowledge provided by WSI. When one of Minister Koldziejczyk's 
predecessors was leaving his office on Klonowa Street, he took 
some rather important documents with him. He became so attached 
to them it was difficult to take them away from him. How many 
more such people will we see in the future? We can presume that 
they will certainly appear! 
  MON is a ministry the structure of which is complex and not 
easy to steer. It is not possible to get everything done there 
by simply issuing an order. Therefore, experts and advisers are 
needed. Deputy ministers are needed as well; people who are 
prepared theoretically, with rich experience. Can the minister 
be criticized for wanting such people? 
  There were times when there were six deputy prime ministers 
and each of them had quite a lot of work. Now there are only 
three. If there were another six, aside from them, the chief of 
the General Staff, who is in charge of the entire Armed Forces, 
would still be the last rung in the protocol hierarchy. In that 
sense, form overrides content. 
  One Sejm deputy said that the defense minister does not know 
what is going on in the country because he is travelling with 
delegations all over the world. Perhaps he is travelling because 
he knows what is going on. We are a medium-sized country in 
terms of territory and population; however, from the economic 
and military points of view, we are weak. Therefore, it is 
necessary to visit our neighbors, invite them here, talk with 
them, and assure them about our friendship and partnership. It 
is not a ministerial fancy, but a necessity, because we are 
still alone. 
  Our joining the "Partnership for Peace" program does not 
mean 
much. However, it is the first step taken by the West to 
enhance our security. We have made dozens of such steps and we 
are still underway. The actual joining of NATO is a remote 
possibility. We must try to achieve it with all our might and 
by all means. However, there is not much strength and so I do 
not know whether we will make it in time. I fear that we can 
wake up just in time to "blow out the candles." I hope that in 
a few days someone will say that I was not a good prophet. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31833 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inauguration of Air Cavalry Division Celebrated </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inauguration of Air Cavalry Division Celebrated </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506203594 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1648 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506203594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 15 Jun -- Celebrations were held today at a 
training ground near Leczyca, in the Pomeranian Military 
District, marking the start of training and the formation of an 
air cavalry division, the first such division in the history of 
the Polish Armed Forces. Apart from the United States, Poland 
will be the second country in the world to have such a force, 
National Defense Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk said. 
  The inauguration was accompanied by an air display by Huzar 
and Mi-8 helicopters, and an airdrop assault performed by 
commandos from the Sixth Air Assault Brigade from the Krakow 
Military District. 
  The 25th Air Cavalry Division, with its Headquarters in 
Lodz, 
will me made up of three regiments stationed at Leczyca, 
Tomaszow Mazowiecki, and Nowe Miasto nad Pilica. Ultimately it 
will have 150 helicopters, mostly multi-purpose Huzars, 
manufactured by WSK Mielec, as well as Mi-8 transport and Mi-24 
combat helicopters. The first to be formed will be the regiment 
at Leczyca. It is to be ready by next April, and the regiment 
in Tomaszow by the fall of 1995. The division is being formed on 
the basis of the Sixth Air Assault Brigade, whose current 
commander, Colonel Wlodzimierz Michalski, has taken command of 
the new unit. Although stationed in the Pomeranian Military 
District, the division will be under the command of the Krakow 
Military District. 
  At a news conference after the air display, Col. Michalski 
said, among other things: "This will be a reserve division, an 
elite division for special tasks, whose main strength will be 
its speed. It will be possible to deploy it within five or six 
hours to any point on any border and engage the enemy." 
  Asked about how the ultimate size of the division (150 
helicopters) related to international disarmament agreements, 
which allow Poland only 130 helicopters, Gen. Tadeusz Wilecki, 
chief of the general staff, explained that the agreements 
concern assault helicopters, of which Poland has about 30. On 
the other hand, the Huzars, as multi-purpose machines, "do not 
fall in the restricted category". 
  The Huzars, made by WSK Swidnik, are an armed version of the 
Sokol helicopter. The helicopter, flown by two pilots, has a 
1800 horsepower engine, flies at 270 kms an hour, can carry two 
metric tons of cargo, including one metric ton of weapons, 
consisting of guided or unguided missiles, or mines. 
  WSK director Mieczyslaw Majewski said that the basic version 
of the Huzar costs about $2 million. On the other hand, the 
version equipped with the latest "gadgets" costs $4 million, 
which, however, is only half the price of a similar helicopter 
in the West. 
  Minister Kolodziejczyk said that, should the Constitutional 
Tribunal "unfreeze" 300 billion zlotys, which the budget law 
allocated for the purchase of Iryda aircraft from WSK Mielec 
(against the view of the Ministry), the Ministry of National 
Defense [MON] would purchase the Huzars from Swidnik for the 
same amount. "The Swidnik enterprise can annually make 40 
helicopters which, unlike the Iryda, meet all our requirements." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31834 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Views EU Membership Prospects </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Official Views EU Membership Prospects </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PM1606091294 Gdansk DZIENNIK BALTYCKI in Polish 9 Jun 94 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> PM1606091294 </F>
<F P=104>  Gdansk DZIENNIK BALTYCKI </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, Polish Government </F>
plenipotentiary for European integration affairs, by 
correspondent Roman Warszewski; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Warszewski] Mr. Minister, the 10th Europartenariat 
conference is due to open in a few moments. This year the 
organization of the conference was entrusted to the Polish side. 
What expectations does your office attach to this event? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] I will not deny that our expectations are 
quite considerable. The present conference is the largest 
all-European event that has been organized in our country to 
date. In that sense it is a kind of test for us: a practical 
examination of our ability to organize undertakings of this 
kind. Second, it is the first time that the Europartenariat 
conference has been held outside the geographical confines of 
the European Union [EU] . Depending on how well we carry it out, 
other countries which aspire to EU membership may be given a 
chance to organize the conference on their own ground in the 
future. I am thinking here first and foremost of our partners 
in the Visegrad Group. So, even though most of them are 
probably very envious of us, we can be certain that they are 
keeping their fingers crossed for us, too. 
  [Warszewski] But why was Poland selected to host the 
conference in the first place? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] Leaving false modesty aside, I can tell you 
that it was because we have a very good rating in Brussels, that 
is, in the EU central structures. We head the list of the 
countries recently associated with the EU in almost every 
aspect, if not actually in every single "discipline." We are 
often actually ahead of the EU Commission's expectations in 
submitting our recommendations and suggestions; we also record 
the highest economic growth on the whole European continent. 
Consequently, we regard the fact that we were offered the 
opportunity to organize the Europartenariat meeting here as a 
privilege, and at the same time we view it as a serious 
obligation. We are aware that the EU has watched the standard 
and quality of the preparatory work we have put into organizing 
this event very carefully, just as it will watch us during the 
course of the event itself. I hope that this test will go well 
for us. In fact, I think that it could go much better than 
Brussels expects. 
  [Warszewski] Apart from the purely promotional and 
propaganda significance which it undoubtedly carries, is the 
Europartenariat important from the economic viewpoint? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] Its importance lies predominantly in the 
economic sphere. The promotional aspect is just in addition to 
that. The Europartenariat is an all-European forum for contacts 
between medium-sized and small companies. It fosters creation 
and tightening of close cooperation links. After all, it is 
precisely that category of companies -- relatively small -- 
which constitute the most essential basic structures of healthy 
European economies. They are the first and quickest to react to 
the signals coming from the markets, they adopt technological 
innovations with the greatest ease, and they are a particularly 
effective tool in the fight against unemployment. In this 
sphere, Poland has quite a lot of ground to cover before it 
catches up with other countries. Large enterprises still 
dominate the structure of our industry. This proportion must be 
reversed as soon as possible, or else our strategic objective, 
that is, EU membership, will recede into complete unreality. I 
hope that the Europartenariat is able to successfully accelerate 
all changes in that direction. 
  [Warszewski] When, in your opinion, will Poland stand a 
realistic chance of joining the EU? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] At the moment, no one in Europe is willing 
to set a precise date for us. However, we believe that there is 
a chance that we will be entering the new millennium already as 
fully fledged EU members. As time goes on, we encounter less 
and less surprise from the other side when we broach this 
subject. We learn to understand the expectations harbored by 
Brussels, while Brussels appears to comprehend our aspirations 
better and better. It is all a rather complex process of mutual 
learning about each other. Let us hope that this process will 
be relatively quick. 
  [Warszewski] Professor Richard Baldwin's report on this 
subject, which received a very thorough review and analysis in 
POLITYKA not so long ago, is much less optimistic on this point. 
Prof. Baldwin insists that a true accession to the EU of the 
countries belonging to the Visegrad Group will realistically 
take a minimum of 25-30 years. 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] That report is a most misleading and highly 
tendentious document. We are well acquainted with it. During 
his latest visit to Poland, EU Commission Chairman Jacques 
Delors expressed a highly skeptical opinion about it. The 
report does not actually express the official EU opinion: It is 
only a study which was financed by the EU Commission. That is a 
fundamental difference. After all, there are hundreds of 
different reports circulating around the Commission. Many of 
them are highly positive in their assessments of our chances. 
In our view, the Baldwin Report suffers from a number of 
methodological shortcomings. If you are determined to dissuade 
someone from something, you will use any means available. We 
intend to prepare an official public statement in this matter 
shortly. 
  [Warszewski] But is it not, by any chance, the case that we 
are not yet altogether certain what kind of Union we will be 
joining? That organization is at present undergoing a process 
of most dynamic development. It is not yet completely certain 
what the transformation result will be. 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] Indeed it is not. However, we do not have 
too much of a choice. The uniting Europe is for us the only 
strategic direction for the future. Some time ago I said that 
we must shoot at the duck not where it is now, but where it will 
be in the year 2000. I believe that, to a certain extent, this 
holds true for our situation today. 
  [Warszewski] Assuming that we manage that feat, will the 
duck turn out to be a tasty dish? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] That will also depend on us and on whether 
we succeed in making the best use of the years we have left 
until we join the EU as a full member. But the Union, too, must 
learn certain things. I have already mentioned the need for all 
Europe to engage in a learning process: It goes without saying 
that it cannot be a one-sided process. Our own transformation 
prior to our joining the EU is certain to take much time and 
effort, but in the long run it should ultimately bring tangible 
advantages to all citizens. A united Europe cannot be decreed 
by official declarations: It must be a consequence of the 
beliefs held by its citizens. This is the only way which can 
lead to a truly united continent. 
  [Warszewski] I understand that the Europartenariat poses 
itself the same objective. How much shorter will our road to 
Brussels be after the present conference? 
  [Saryusz-Wolski] It will certainly be shorter, that is 
beyond question. I can even tell you precisely how much 
shorter. It will be shorter by the 10th Europartenariat! 
  [Warszewski] Thank you for talking to us. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31835 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Delays Draft Administrative Reforms </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Delays Draft Administrative Reforms </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1506104394 Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 15 Jun 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> WS1506104394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by PS, CEG: "Reforms of the State Center Will Wait"] </F>
  [Text]The government decided to refer some draft laws 
reforming the governmental administration (among them, a law on 
the Council of Ministers), for further consideration. The draft 
laws envision a change in the government's structure, making the 
posts of voivods political, as well as the establishment of an 
apolitical corps of state officials. 
  "Prior to today's government session, there were three 
options: The government could have adopted the draft laws 
reforming the central administration as soon as today, it could 
have repealed the draft laws, or it could have referred them for 
further consideration" -- said Minister Michal Strak after 
Tuesday's Council of Ministers session. "And so, the government 
chose the third option, which -- bearing in mind the complex 
nature of the issues that the draft laws deal with -- satisfies 
me completely." 
  In two weeks, the government will again debate the draft 
laws 
discussed on Tuesday. 
  Regarding the proposed law on the Council of Ministers, it 
is 
being suggested -- among others -- that a change be made in the 
ministries' structure, from a "branch-oriented" structure, to a 
"task-oriented" one. The prime minister would be empowered to 
appoint ministers, and to assign specific tasks to them. He 
will not be restricted by the individual ministries' strictly 
defined powers, the way he has been up to now. 
  "We are suggesting that new Council of Ministers committees 
be established. Up to now, we have only had the Economic 
Committee, the Socio-Political Committee, and the Defense Issues 
Committee -- all of them being committees of the Council of 
Ministers" -- Strak said. "The government will only decide the 
most important issues, while all the details will be debated 
during the committees' sessions." 
  The law on territorial administrative organs would increase 
the powers of voivods by making voivodship special 
administration offices, subordinate to voivods. The provision 
aroused controversy among the ministers because they had doubts 
as to whether the need to consult voivods regarding each and 
every directive given to special administration organs -- which 
are territorial offices subordinated to the ministries -- "will 
improve the work of the ministries or of voivods." 
  But the law on civil state service, did not arouse major 
controversy. It envisions the establishment of an apolitical 
corps of state officials. The political corps on the other 
hand, would be composed of the ministers and deputy ministers. 
Voivods would also be political posts -- they would be under an 
obligation to resign in the case of the government's dismissal. 
  The government did not, however, deal with the Foreign 
Ministry's statute. The issue will be debated at a future 
session, along with the statutes of two other ministries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31836 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Security Policy Experts Meet With Ukrainians </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Security Policy Experts Meet With Ukrainians </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1406135394 Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA in Polish 14 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS1406135394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Exclusive report by Grzegorz Schmidt from Kiev: </F>
"Poland-Ukraine; Talks on Participation in `Partnership for 
Peace"] 
  [Text] On 9 and 10 June 1994 the second session of 
the Experts' Commission for Security Policy at the Consultation 
Committee of the Presidents of Poland and Ukraine was held in 
Kiev. The subject of the talks were issues related to Poland's 
and Ukraine's participation in the "Partnership for Peace" 
program and the implementation of the "Treaty on Conventional 
Armed Forces in Europe." The talks were presided over by 
Lieutenant Colonel Jerzy Milewski and Anton Buteyko, who are the 
chairmen of the Consultation Committee. During the 
consultations the participants stressed the need for closer 
cooperation in the area of security policy of both states. 
  The "Partnership for Peace" program is supposed to become a 
new important element of the all-European (Euro-Atlantic) system 
of stability and security, which is being established. It 
ensures all participants equal rights, as well as excludes the 
possibility of obtaining special rights by any state. The 
"Partnership for Peace" opens new possibilities for bilateral 
cooperation of the countries that take part in the program. 
  Poland looks upon its participation in the "Partnership..." 
as a step leading to full membership in NATO. Ukraine 
approaches this striving of Poland with understanding. The 
Ukrainian party sees in the "Partnership for Peace" a 
possibility for forming national peacekeeping rapid deployment 
forces that might better cooperate with the NATO forces and 
forces of other states. They would, among others, conduct 
peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the UN or the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
  The commission noted with satisfaction the cooperation of 
our 
countries during the preparation of the presentation documents 
within the framework of the "Partnership for Peace." 
  The parties stressed that military relations between the 
Polish Republic and Ukraine are developing on the basis of 
mutual understanding, respect, and partnership-like cooperation. 
This is confirmed in working contacts between the Defense 
Ministries, General Staffs, commanders of the various types of 
the Armed Forces and military districts. 
  The Experts' Commission recommended to the Consultation 
Committee that further initiatives aimed at strengthening 
contacts between our countries within the framework of the 
"Partnership..." program be backed. 
  The session of the Experts' Commission for Security Policy 
was another stage in the implementation of the decisions of the 
Consultation Committee; it was also a phase for implementing the 
direction, set by the presidents of the Polish Republic and 
Ukraine, for intensifying and deepening the Polish-Ukrainian 
political and military cooperation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31837 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian President Addresses People in Citluk </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian President Addresses People in Citluk </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506133594 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1100 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506133594 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Zdenko Vranjes from Citluk] </F>
  [Text] The Croat people have secured their freedom. For 
the first time since the ancient time of the Croatian kingdom, 
we have created a free, independent, and sovereign state, which 
already has allies in the world. These were the words Croatian 
President Franjo Tudjman spoke in reply to a warm welcome and 
applause at the beginning of his address to several thousand 
people outside a hotel in Citluk. By creating a federation of 
Croats and Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina, we have managed to 
enable Bosnia-Herzegovina to team up--or we could even say 
unite--with Croatia through a confederation, President Tudjman 
said. He added: 
  [Begin recording] Mostar will be a mixed canton, as they 
say. 
In Croatian, we will call it a grand county [velezupa]. Still, 
this is precisely because of you, who are the guarantee for the 
Croatian state as a whole that this federation must be a new 
state in which the Croat people will be a sovereign people, in 
which it will secure not only all its civil and national rights, 
but also will ensure its full unity with the parent state of 
Croatia. 
  This is why you can trust the Croatian state leadership who 
paved the way to a sovereign and independent Croatia. Trust 
yourselves. Create the kind of authorities here that will be in 
the interest of Citluk, in the interest of every Croat place, in 
the interest of Herzegovina--that Herzegovina which was and 
remains together with other Croatian regions on the front line 
of the struggle for Croatia's freedom, independence, and 
sovereignty. 
  Your contribution to the establishment of Croatian freedom 
and democracy is a large one. The Croatian people as a whole 
will never forget this. You will always find jobs in Croatia. 
You must create conditions so that people will no longer 
emigrate from this beautiful part of Croatian soil to distant 
countries--to Canada or Australia, America or South America. 
[words indistinct] are already returning. 
  Particularly here, in the Croat-Muslim federation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, we need every Croat man. We need Croat 
returnees from abroad so that we can consolidate, over a long 
period of time, what we have secured. Dear friends, some people 
from your area have asked me: Why do we have to be in this or 
that canton, as they are called? I reply: We are going to call 
them by their Croatian names, grand counties. 
  Precisely because of your presence, all of these 
cantons--this entire federation--will have Croatian 
characteristics. We can demonstrate something that the world is 
also demanding of us. This democratic Western world--without 
which we cannot make do--is demanding that we create here a 
democratic society, that we make sure that this place is part of 
western civilization. If we have curbed Serbian terrorism and 
[word indistinct] aggression, it means that our present alliance 
with the Muslims under the Washington agreement must be a 
guarantee that there will be no fundamentalism, since 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as a federation and in a confederation with 
Croatia will develop as a western democratic country. This is 
why you here are--and you must be--a lasting guarantee of this. 
Long live Herzegovina. Long live our only and eternal Croatia. 
Thank you. [end recording] 
  Following his visit to Citluk, President Tudjman and his 
aides have left for Capljina, where he will also address the 
people of this town on the Neretva and a large number of Croat 
refugees living in Capljina and its neighborhood. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31838 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslimovic Comments on Rifkind's Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslimovic Comments on Rifkind's Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506153094 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506153094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Malcolm Rifkind, the defense secretary of the 
United Kingdom, today visited the Joint Staff of the Army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Croatian Defense Council [HVO]. 
After these talks, Brigadier General Fikret Muslimovic 
explained the goal of this visit in a statement for the Radio 
and Television of Bosnia-Herzegovina: 
  [Begin recording] I got the feeling that the English defense 
minister has come to Bosnia-Herzegovina, that is, the Joint 
Staff of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
Croatian Defense Council, in order to acquaint himself with the 
role and problems the Joint Staff is encountering in realizing 
tasks (?in the process) of establishing peace between the Croats 
and Bosniaks in the present situation. 
  I think that we presented him with the problems we are 
confronted with and that he left with more optimism about the 
fact that peace will really be established between our two [word 
indistinct]. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31839 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sarajevo Radio: Serbs Step Up Attacks on Brcko </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sarajevo Radio: Serbs Step Up Attacks on Brcko </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606094794 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 0800 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606094794 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Hamiz Deronjic and Nihad Salihovic] </F>
  [Text] The Serbian aggressor stepped up provocative 
attacks on the Brcko front last night. At about 2000 last 
night, in addition to strong small arms fire, the enemy also 
targeted the Vranovaca-Bodariste area with 60 mm mortars. 
During this period, the chetniks were also observed to be 
amassing forces on that part of the front. In addition to 
firing Browings and machine guns from Lipovac, the enemy also 
fired over 20 grenades on the central part of the defense line. 
  At about 0130 this morning, the chetniks again fired on the 
central part of the front with Browings and portable mortars. 
The activities of the enemy's reconnaissance units also 
intensified on the Brcko front overnight, especially around 
Djukici and (?Pekici). Members of the 108th Motorized and the 
108th Infantry Brigades, as well as the support units from the 
2nd Corps, were not involved in any combat last night. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31840 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Attacks Force Tesanj Residents To Take Shelter </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Attacks Force Tesanj Residents To Take Shelter </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606110194 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1000 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606110194 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The aggressor did not stop attacks in the theater 
of operations of the 7 South Operations Group either. 
  [Unidentified reporter] In the last 24 hours, the chetniks 
have also been shelling civilian targets in Tesanj, Jelah, 
Tesanjica, and other settlements on this free territory. The 
residents of Tesanj are still in shelters as the aggressor is 
pounding the city center. One eight-year-old boy was killed 
during the shelling last night. Several persons sustained 
either minor or serious wounds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31841 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Army Says Muslims Violated Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Army Says Muslims Violated Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1606001994 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2346 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1606001994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Vlasenica, June 15 (TANJUG) -- After a comparative 
lull on Tuesday [14 June], Bosnian Moslem forces on Wednesday 
violated the latest ceasefire on the Kladanj front east of 
Sarajevo by shelling Bosnian Serb positions from mortars. The 
local Bosnian Serb army command said that the Moslems fired 21 
shells on the Serb Army positions, and eight shells on civilian 
targets in the villages of Doli and Trnovo in eastern Bosnia. 
The Serb forces did not return fire, and the attacks caused 
damage, but no casualties, the command said. 
  The Bosnian Serb Army is not responding to attacks, adhering 
to the letter and spirit of the latest one-month truce, signed 
in Geneva on June 8 by representatives of the Moslem-Croat 
Federation in Bosnia and the Bosnian Serb Republic. The Serb 
Army further reported Moslem attacks on military and civilian 
targets in the past 24 hours in most sectors of the Doboj front 
in northern Bosnia. 
  On the Teslic front south of Doboj, the Moslems launched a 
strong infantry assault in an effort to break through the Serb 
lines, but were beaten back, the Serb source said. A Moslem 
sabotage and reconnaissance team was neutralised in the 
southeastern sector of the Doboj front, the source said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31842 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslim, Croatian Parties Accused of `Repression' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslim, Croatian Parties Accused of `Repression' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506193994 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506193994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A regular news conference of the Social Democratic 
Party [SDP] of Bosnia-Herzegovina was held in Sarajevo today. 
On this occasion, members of the SDP Presidium called public 
attention to some negative phenomena in the political life of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. New members of the party leadership, 
Mustafa Beganovic, Miro Lazovic, and Muhamed (Ababic) were also 
presented for the first time today. Zoran Babic has the details: 
  [Begin recording] [Babic] Apart from all positive results 
in the creation of the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
opening new prospects for preserving Bosnia-Herzegovina in its 
entirety, there are some very bad phenomena as well, Dr. Nijaz 
Durakovic, chairman of the SDP of Bosnia-Herzegovina, said at 
the news conference today. 
  The exclusively ethnic criterion is being promoted again, 
something that narrows down room for the activity of all those 
political parties that are not promoting themselves as eminently 
national or as presenting some sort of national representatives. 
This is certainly not good for the prospects of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and for democracy in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
which is still at its beginning. This is stifling multiparty 
political life in many sections of society. 
  Durakovic gave many examples that confirm this: Thus, the 
ruling parties, the SDA [Party of Democratic Action] and HDZ 
[Croatian Democratic Community], are only proposing their 
representatives in the cantonal assemblies, taking into 
consideration only the principle of national representation, and 
completely disregarding the principle of electoral results of 
the latest multiparty elections. The power of the two national 
teams is thereby installed again, (?as if other) parties do not 
include Bosniaks, Croats, and others, Durakovic said and 
continued: 
  [Durakovic] [words indistinct] registered so far, and I will 
give examples of Gracanica, Zivinice, the free territory of the 
Brcko Commune, Banovici, Srebrenica, and so on (?where) the SDA 
(?and HDZ) simply [words indistinct] (?almost natural right of 
taking for themselves the votes that belonged to the Serbian 
Democratic Party [SDS]. Let me be a little cynical and say that 
[word indistinct] that they are natural allies with the SDS and 
that, according to a right known to them alone, they are 
usurping votes belonging to a party that was proclaimed 
unlawful, that is, was banned. [words indistinct] establish a 
biparty national power in a way. 
  [Babic] Durakovic gave many examples of repression committed 
against members of the SDP, for instance in Tesanj. In Travnik, 
the SDP was thrown out of its offices. There are many examples 
of prominent businessmen holding leading posts being replaced 
only because they are not members of the ruling party. There 
are similar examples of repression and maltreatment in Zenica, 
Zivince, Srebrenik, and other parts of the free territory. 
  Another reason to hold a news conference was the draft law 
on 
the transformation of social property into state property that 
was adopted yesterday. According to the SDP, this was done in a 
very hasty and even undemocratic way. This is what Mr. 
Durakovic said about that: 
  [Durakovic] [words indistinct] the proposed draft law (?is 
not even) nationalization, [word indistinct] (?confiscation) of 
property, [words indistinct] (?through) cadre policy in these 
state enterprises to in fact take over complete economic and 
thereby also political power in Bosnia-Herzegovina, only to use 
some subsequent privatization for ensuring (?more suitable) 
conditions to sell that property to those [word indistinct] that 
are more politically [word indistinct] and will be [word 
indistinct]. This is a model that was used in Croatia to a great 
extent and [passage indistinct] 
  [Babic] Considering the bill's anticonstitutionality as, 
according to the current Constitution, all [word indistinct] are 
equal, and its negative consequences, members of the SDP are of 
the opinion that such a draft law should be withdrawn and that, 
one should examine the complete situation using experience of 
others, and propose a law that would quickly help create 
conditions for privatizing (?social) [word indistinct]. [end 
recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31843 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tuzla in Danger of Becoming Another Gorazde </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tuzla in Danger of Becoming Another Gorazde </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0310E Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 27 May 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0310E </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ivica Nosic: "Tuzla Like Gorazde?"] </F>
  [Text] Tuzla--Will Tuzla experience the fate suffered by 
Sarajevo, Zepa, Gorazde, and certain other towns in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina whose names are not unknown even to the world 
public? The increasingly frequent artillery attacks of the 
Bosnian Serbs on this city support such a forecast. Even the 
most responsible commanders of the peacekeeping forces 
responsible for the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina are no 
longer denying that Tuzla could be the most likely next target 
of the military strategists in Pale. And that is only a 
confirmation of prior voiced reflections and pessimism of the 
most prestigious military commentators at an earlier date. 
  There are several reasons why Tuzla is a real thorn in the 
eye of Radovan Karadzic. Neglecting the fact that the 
aggressor's teeth have been broken in vain on Tuzla for the last 
two years and that over that same period of time the region that 
goes with it did not lose the identity of the largest free 
territory in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is well-known that all 
the activities of the 2d Corps of the Army of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina are directed from that city. Only the viewers, 
listeners, and readers of aggressor media are still unaware of 
the effectiveness with which combat is being organized and waged 
not only defensively along lines from Orasje to Srebrenik, 
Kladanj, and Olovo, and on the Majevica, Ozren, and other 
battlefields in northeastern Bosnia, because the truth about the 
defeats they have experienced is carefully concealed from them. 
<H5>  Threats From Pale </H5>
  The Tuzla Airport is the largest stumbling block for peace 
in 
Tuzla. All those to whom the "Serbian cause is dear" clearly and 
loudly oppose its being opened to traffic. Saying that that 
airport would be used to advance weapons, and this would be done 
under the patronage of the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces], 
Karadzic and his ideological-military team did not even stop 
short of outright threats in their "most vigorous opposition to 
that intention." When the first aircraft landed at Dubrave, it 
became evident that those were not merely empty words. One of 
them, a Russian plane with cargo for the peacekeeping forces, 
barely avoided a disaster, thanks only to the pilot's quick 
thinking. Whether because of the indecisiveness of the man 
giving the orders from the East River or for some other reason, 
even the Blue Helmets have not shown themselves to be any more 
resolute in punishing those who have been striking at their own 
lives. It is no wonder, then, that the airport near Tuzla has 
received a total of some 20 aircraft. 
  And the threats from Pale have not been withdrawn; on the 
contrary, they are continuing and they are being pursued; 
Dubrave is an increasingly frequent target of artillery attacks, 
with and without aircraft. What is more, it is an open secret 
that Tuzla is a strong logistical center for the Army of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. 
  Tuzla has also been the target of projectiles from Majevica 
in recent days. It is felt that the rebellious Serbs are firing 
on that city to take revenge for the defeats they have suffered 
on that very mountain, and the still more disastrous defeats at 
Konjuh and Ozren. The people of Tuzla, however, are thinking 
anxiously about what lies ahead for them. An announcement has 
come from the commander in chief of the Army of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, and Rasim Delic has personally confirmed this in 
several public statements, that a decisive offensive against 
Serbian support points is coming. 
<H5>  Admiral Smith's Gloomy Forecasts </H5>
  It is clear even to Adm. Smith, commander of the Southern 
NATO Flank, that there are serious threats to Tuzla. "I already 
have television pictures before my eyes that will show all over 
the world how transport planes are burning on the Tuzla Airport 
or pictures about yet another massacre like the one in 
Sarajevo," the experienced military operative has written to his 
superior, General Lapresle, commander in chief of UN forces in 
the Balkans. The U.S. naval officer incorporated his horrible 
vision into a proposal for establishment of a protected no-arms 
zone that would embrace Tuzla and environs. The admiral's letter 
and appeal has so far not received a response from those who 
make decisions about the life and death of the Bosnian Muslims. 
  The recent statement of Radovan Karadzic that "the United 
Nations is on the side of the Muslims more and more" is in turn 
indicative. In that accusation, the leader in Pale creates an 
alibi for events soon to come, which comes down to what is 
already familiar: They are all against us, we have to defend 
ourselves by every means. In that same context, Karadzic said 
that "he has long been thinking that some hawk would push the 
United States into its second Vietnam" if there is a military 
involvement in Bosnia. 
  Life has been difficult in Tuzla for all of two years now, 
but now it is still worse. Along with the chronic shortage of 
food, drugs, and other essentials, the attacks have also become 
more frequent. To be sure, this city has already been proclaimed 
a protected zone in declarative terms in the United Nations, but 
the good that does is familiar to members of the Blue Helmets, 
who are mainly being put up in the Hotel Tuzla, which has holes 
from several direct hits from Serbian artillery. 
  There is still time and opportunity for Tuzla to be assured 
a 
different fate from those which have been pessimistically 
forecast. It is well-known who is firing on this city, why, and 
from where.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31844 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Demilitarization of Bosnia Advocated </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Demilitarization of Bosnia Advocated </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0310A Belgrade EKONOMSKA POLITIKA in Serbo-Croatian 16 
May 94 pp 10-11 </F>

<F P=103> 94BA0310A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade EKONOMSKA POLITIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Serbian Gibraltar"] </F>
  [Text] Brcko is located at the exit from AVNOJ [Antifascist 
Council of the National Liberation of Yugoslavia] Serbia, but at 
the entrance to Great Serbia. Before the war, according to the 
1991 Census, Brcko had a population consisting of 20.8 percent 
Serbs, 44.4 percent Muslims, and 25.4 percent Croats. Forget the 
census, as Karadzic and his gang would say. Today, Brcko is a 
Serbian city and must remain as such. If the Serbs do not manage 
to hold Brcko, nothing will be left of the state of united Serbs 
even by the third congress of Serbian intellectuals. If they do 
hold it, the question is whether there will ever be peace. 
  Brcko, then, is not only a geostrategic symbol of a war 
effort, but also the greatest political test for the entire 
international community. It must decide whether to stop the 
Serbs once and for all--as Baroness Thatcher proposes--or to go 
for a political solution that will incorporate an awareness of 
the mistakes and responsibility of all the interested parties. 
  Brcko, that is, the corridor at Brcko, represents the 
exposed 
essence of Serbian war aims. However true it may be that the 
world has not approved those goals from the outset, it is still 
more accurate that it never seriously and resolutely opposed the 
previous phases of their realization. 
  Those who followed with concern the liberation of Vukovar to 
the foundations or the two-year war in Bosnia waged under the 
slogan that people of differing nationalities no longer desire 
or are able to live together there really do not have much right 
to present ultimatums to Karadzic and his Belgrade mentors 
concerning Brcko. Just as our socialist youth built the 
Brcko-Banovici railroad after the war, and along the way also 
built themselves, so the followers of the antibureaucratic 
revolution, from the left and from the right, today want to 
build the Brcko-Belgrade corridor. That railroad was the symbol 
of totalitarian self-sacrifice and enthusiastic effort, while 
this corridor is a geostrategic symbol of new Serbian 
expansionism being presented as the supreme national interest. 
  If the Bosnian Serbs are denied the corridor, after 
everything they have been allowed to do in two years, it is not 
just expanded Serbia that is called into question, but also 
lasting peace in Bosnia. It does not seem likely that the side 
which was so superior militarily will consent to a political 
solution which inevitably destroys its military superiority, not 
to mention its victory. 
  Those who fear the project of Great Serbia must realize that 
realization of that project would yield a weak, powerless state 
divided and atrophied from within that would constitute a danger 
most of all to its own citizens. Incidentally, even Svetozar 
Markovic knew in his time that it would have to be a police 
state, but the so-called world observers and analysts educating 
themselves from the columns of Mira Markovic do not know that. 
As a matter of fact, quite a bit can be learned from those 
columns about nature and society, about life at court and around 
the court, but not about the real consequences of life inspired 
by the great ideals of the antibureaucratic revolution: Serbian 
concord, territories, and a state for all Serbs. 
  The point is, that is, that no political solution adopted 
outside has prospects of being received, of taking hold, as the 
soldiers of the antibureaucratic revolution would put it. Not 
because the Serbs are a dignified people, but because they 
simply will not allow help from outside until they themselves 
realize that their interest does not lie in the Belgrade-Brcko 
corridor, but the Belgrade-Brussels transverse communication 
route, and beyond that, if God allows, underneath the water, 
rather than over. 
  Certainly, the corridor at Brcko should be peacefully left 
to 
the Bosnian Serbs, but all the weapons they possess should be 
taken away from them, and also the Muslims and Croats, by force. 
There is no political solution in Bosnia so long as all three 
are under arms. As long as there are arms, there will also be 
ethnic cleansing to a greater or lesser degree, open or 
concealed. Only a disarmed Bosnia can be a peaceful Bosnia. 
  A peace plan that would proceed from those premises would 
not 
only be a first step in the direction of rebuilding devastated 
Bosnia, because it would prevent its further destruction, it 
would also be a solid prerequisite for a generally accepted 
political solution. A corridor not used for logistical support 
of war efforts, but to intensify business cooperation would be 
not only possible, but even desirable. Used in that way, it 
would quickly cease to have significance as a semisecret passage 
and channel for advancement of weapons and other essentials for 
the army made up of the entire population. 
  The Brcko-Belgrade corridor would cease to have any meaning 
as soon as the focus of the international community's activity 
is moved from observation and supervision of military operations 
to their unconditional cessation. Placing arms under control and 
their systematic destruction should extend to all sides in the 
war. This is the higher justice for which the Serbs should 
strive and which they should be allowed to experience. The only 
other thing is the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31845 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   UN Confirms Serbian Violation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    UN Confirms Serbian Violation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506131894 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506131894 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Serious Macedonian Border Violations"] </F>
  [Text] Elizabeth Baldwin, chief of the UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Forces] press service, officially confirmed the 
Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] 
border has been violated on several occasions by Serbian border 
patrols. The newly appointed Yasushi Akashi's representative in 
Macedonia, Hugo Ansen, in his statement for NOVA MAKEDONIJA, 
pointed out the Macedonian Government and UNPROFOR should 
consider such border violations as serious. Indeed, he said, 
there are no dramatic incidents, but these are clearly cases of 
border violations. Serbian troops have entered into a territory 
which we regard to be Macedonian by all means, Ansen said. He 
also confirmed the reports of a Serbian plane having flown over 
Macedonian territory a fortnight ago, intercepting an UNPROFOR 
helicopter. No shots have been fired thus far. Sometimes, 
Serbian soldiers do point their guns at targets on this side of 
the border, but that is all there is to it, Ansen said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31846 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army To `Observe' Serbs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army To `Observe' Serbs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506131594 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506131594 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Serbian Troops Breach"] </F>
  [Text] NOVA MAKEDONIJA cites anonymous Macedonian [The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] and police 
sources on confirmation of reports on an army camp put up by 15 
Serbian soldiers near Kriva Palanka, who occupied surrounding 
peak elevation and strategic points for observation of the 
Macedonian territory. The same sources also report that the 
Macedonian troops are enforced on this side of the border and 
that this "breach" of Serbian soldiers, made into Macedonian 
territory, is surrounded by Macedonian Army troops, who have an 
order only to observe for the time being. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31847 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Interior Minister Clarifies Citizenship Issue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Interior Minister Clarifies Citizenship Issue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606113294 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1606113294 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Political Pornography, Clown Play </F>
Makers"] 
  [Text] At yesterday's press conference, the Macedonian 
[The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] Interior 
Minister [Ljubomir] Frckovski spoke of the activities of the 
Interior Ministry in issuing citizenship certificates and 
certain parties' attacks on the intelligence agency work. 
  To the 14th June inclusive, he stated, the citizenship 
status 
of 1,463,582 Macedonian citizens of age, i.e. of 98 percent of 
the population, has been regulated. The figure of 150,000 
citizens to be left with unresolved status, which appeared 
earlier, was not correct. Only 5,500 applications have been 
negatively answered thus far, and about the same number of 
applications is being decided on, he explained. (?86,368) 
citizens have not yet been delivered their citizenship 
notification, but this will also be done in due time before the 
census. 
  As for recent accusations of the State Intelligence Service, 
Minister Frckovski said these were plain political games of 
certain parties, which attempted to slander and vilify the 
Macedonian Interior Ministry in order to justify their own 
failures of cover for intentions to glorify certain political 
parties. This is only a pre-election warming up, he said, in 
which parties are using methods appropriate to their own profile 
and internal structures. The minister exposed information 
showing the Interior Ministry has evidence on activities of 
certain political parties, especially of VMRO-DPMNE [Internal 
Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party for 
Macedonian National Unity], during this party members' meetings 
with another party from Bulgaria, in and out of Macedonia. 
These meetings included plans for the joint appearance in the 
coming elections. But, he pointed out, the Interior Ministry 
cannot be possibly blamed for these activities. It can notify 
part of them and present them to the Macedonian public, but 
cannot be blamed for their existence, just as it cannot be 
blamed of making them up. If following such a logic one could 
end up concluding that entire parties are simply made up, this 
goes into the territory of science fictions, Frckovski said. 
  What really concerns the ministry, Frckovski added, is the 
fact that the level of political struggle is being brought down 
to a level of political discussions focused on political 
pornography. [sentence as received] Parties make up stories of 
secret documents and party police squads, avoid checking the 
truth of the presented "evidence," attempt to politically 
manipulate with the public, and, as a result, the ministry is 
disabled to introduce any serious inspection or a serious 
democratic procedure to check any accusations. 
  In regard to rumors of organized crime in the state and 
mentioning of two names by the ex-undersecretary in the Interior 
Ministry, Frckovski said charges have been brought against the 
ex-undersecretary and apologized to the individuals whose names 
were mentioned in connection with such alleged crimes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31848 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Albanian Media Criticize Skopje `Provocation' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Albanian Media Criticize Skopje `Provocation' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606102494 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1606102494 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Provocation By Skopje"] </F>
  [Text] The fair of Macedonian economic products in Albania, 
under the title of "Republic of Macedonia," opened on June 15 
and to last until June 18, caused bitter reactions by a part of 
the media in Tirana. The paper RILINDJA called on the 
authorities to change the title, claiming it imposes a name, 
non-existent in the international communication. The same 
paper, as MAKPRES reports, is a provocation by Skopje, similar 
to the one with the recent agreement on cooperation in 
agriculture, not signed exactly because of the name. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31849 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Association Announces Referendum for Serbs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Association Announces Referendum for Serbs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606102294 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1606102294 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Mistrust for Coming Census"] </F>
  [Text] The Association of Serbs and Montenegrins in 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] 
cannot accept the results and the census itself as objective, 
representatives of the association said at yesterday's press 
conference. The association president Nebojsa Tomovic said the 
census will be just another step towards federalization of 
Macedonia and meeting the demands of Albanians at the cost of 
the Serbian population in Macedonia, whose real number is 
minimized. The association announced an inner census only for 
the Serbian minority, in order to come up with exact figures of 
Serbs living in Macedonia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31850 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs Question Validity of Upcoming Census </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs Question Validity of Upcoming Census </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506161994 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506161994 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Serbian Enclaves With Territorial </F>
Autonomy"] 
  [Text] At yesterday's news conference of the Democratic 
Party of Serbs in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM], the party President Dragisa Miletic 
expressed suspicion about the regularity of the coming census. 
He pointed out the Interior Ministry has yet not delivered 
citizenship notifications to about 85 percent of the Serbian 
population in Macedonia. Miletic attacked media in Macedonia 
for writing of Macedonia being allegedly endangered by Serbia 
and of putting pressure on Serbs in Macedonia to declare 
themselves Macedonians at the census. According to him, the 
names of some Serbs, especially those living a longer period in 
Macedonia, are being changed. Miletic also spoke of existence 
of Serbian enclaves in Macedonia, which presently have a status 
of national communities, but, if necessary, will turn into 
territorially independent enclaves. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31851 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_r_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Union Action Continues After Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Union Action Continues After Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Protest Action </H4>

<F P=102> AU1506161494 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1300 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506161494 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The protest action initiated by the Alfa Cartel 
Trade Union Confederation, which was joined by the CNSLR-Fratia 
[National Confederation of Free Unions in Romania] and the 
National Trade Union Bloc [BNS], is still continuing in 
Victoriei Square. 
  Being present among the protesters, Mr. Victor Ciorbea, the 
chairman of the CNSLR-Fratia, stated that, quote, further 
efforts are being made to organize a second round of 
negotiations with the government. Until now those efforts have 
failed, so what is left is the meeting scheduled to take place 
tomorrow at 1000 [0700 GMT]. However, we still hope we could 
meet with the government today, unquote. 
  At the same time, rallies and marches have been organized in 
several towns of the country by the teaching staff of schools. 
Also today, in Mures County, all employees of the Mures Wood 
Processing Company have gone on strike. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31852 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_r_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Union Action Continues After Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Union Action Continues After Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Talks Resume </H4>

<F P=102> AU1506185394 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1700 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506185394 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The second round of negotiations between 
representatives of the government and a delegation that includes 
15 representatives of trade union confederations, led by Bogdan 
Hosu, president of the Cartel Alfa confederation, Victor 
Ciorbea, on behalf of CNSRL [National Confederation of Romania's 
Free Trade Unions] Fratia, and Cornel Popescu, on behalf of the 
National Trade Union Block [BNS] are continuing at Victoria 
Palace at the time of our broadcast. The talks started about 
three hours ago. 
  The government is represented by State Ministers Dan Mircea 
Popescu and Florin Georgescu, Secretary General of the 
Government Victor Hrebenciuc, head of the office in charge of 
trade union- employers' association relations, Octavian 
Partenie, counselors, and experts. 
  The sides resumed discussions that were interrupted last 
night on ways to solve the four claims put forward by trade 
unions, claims that triggered the latest protest actions and 
trade union rallies. 
  There are different views on the first claim, which refers 
to 
the minimum 50 percent increase of salaries necessary to 
stimulate the purchase power and to give up the notion of 
maximum admissible fund. 
  Minister of Finance Florin Georgescu said that this increase 
should be connected first of all to the increase of production. 
  The claim on supplementing the education budget by 500 
billion lei -- which in fact is a sub-point of the first claim 
-- was also left unsolved, due to the fact that the minister of 
finance stressed that in accordance with the current financial 
possibilities, the budget for education will be supplemented by 
about 30 billion lei. 
  As far as the second claim is concerned, that is to step up 
the act of signing collective labor contracts at all levels and 
of offering guarantee that these contracts are respected, the 
representatives of government said that they will do all they 
can to urge the employers' association to resume negotiations 
with trade unions on this issue. However, the government 
representatives affirmed that everything depends on the 
agreement of both sides. 
  In this context, the representatives of trade unions called 
on the government to draft a normative act that would establish 
the deadline for the signing of the collective labor contract. 
The sides agreed that this aspect should be discussed when the 
current law on collective labor contract is modified. 
  At this hour the sides are holding discussions on the third 
claim, that is, the recognition of legislation for working 
groups that was drafted after the 1989 December revolution. In 
this respect, Minister of State Mircea Dan Popescu said that 
until a new law is drafted, activity will be carried out 
according to the laws currently in force, our correspondent 
Silvia Ilies informed us. 
  A calm atmosphere is currently prevailing in Victoria 
Square. 
The demonstrators are waiting for the results of the 
negotiations that are currently taking place, our correspondent 
also informed us. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31853 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_r_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Union Action Continues After Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Union Action Continues After Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Government Rejects Claims </H4>

<F P=102> AU1506203494 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1700 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506203494 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] After we had started broadcasting our news program, 
we received the following press communique regarding the 
negotiations held today between the government and trade unions 
from Government Spokesman Ioan Rosca: 
  [Begin Rosca recording] As is known, a number of protest 
actions are currently taking place in Bucharest, that is, 
protest rallies and marches organized under the protection of 
the Cartel Alfa Trade Union Confederation. In contradiction 
with the authorization granted to the organizers, they localized 
their protest actions and blocked a part of the Victoria Square. 
For about two days, approximately 300-400 people from Bucharest 
and the provinces have been participating in this action and 
they asked the government for negotiations on a list of four 
claims. 
  Although the demonstration and the obstruction of the square 
are illegal, the government agreed to hold discussions with the 
representatives of trade unions and, in this respect, it 
established a team of negotiators that includes: Mircea Dan 
Popescu, minister of state and minister of labor and social 
protection; Florin Georgescu, minister of state and minister of 
finance; Viorel Hrebenciuc, general secretary of the government; 
and Octavian Partenie, secretary of state and the representative 
of the government in relations with trade unions and the 
employers' association. 
  We wish to mention that a first round of talks was held on 
Tuesday, 14 June 1994, between 2215-0100, and all four claims of 
the Cartel Alfa were approached. These claims, through their 
content, demonstrate that the union representatives are not 
aware of the executive's duties. The claims are mainly attempts 
to destabilize the current situation in Romania and to attract a 
large group of participants in this action, which obviously has 
a populist nature. 
  The government believes that the recent demonstrations have 
a 
clearly political hidden motive as political leaders who belong 
to the opposition have been noticed among the demonstrators. 
  A new round of talks was held between the government team 
and 
the representatives of trade unions this afternoon. 
  One of the claims refers to the minimum 50-percent increase 
in salaries throughout the economy and the cancellation of the 
current legal levers, with which our government is working, just 
like governments in other countries that undergo a process of 
transition, to reduce the negative effects of the salary 
increase that could turn into the major source of inflation. We 
note that the increase in salaries can be achieved solely 
through direct dialogue and negotiations between trade union 
organizations and the employers' association. The result of 
these negotiations, which can take concrete shape in an increase 
in salaries, depends exclusively on the financial potential 
available to each trade company or private corporation at a 
certain moment, financial potential that can result from the 
increase of production and economic performance. 
  In accordance with the current laws, the government has no 
authority to get involved in such a process. We wish to note 
once again that the involvement of the government to force 
companies and private companies to carry out a standard increase 
of salaries is not possible, and that such a measure in no way 
would lead to the restoration of the population's purchase 
power, as the Alfa Cartel leaders claim, but it would lead 
instead to the escalation of inflation and to the rapid 
deterioration of the standard of living. 
  In connection with the request forwarded to the government 
to 
supplement by 500 billion lei the budget allotted to education 
and, in correlation with it, to allot additional sums for the 
other budgetary sectors, we note the following: As is known, 
the state budget for 1994, which also includes provisions 
regarding the funds allotted to various budgetary sectors, 
including education, within the limit of the existing resources, 
was approved by Romania's parliament, and the government, 
through the legal duties incumbent on it, is called upon to 
implement it. Thus, the government cannot respond to such a 
claim, which would be against the law. Apart from the fact that 
there are no such resources, the budget, as is known, registers 
a 1.8 trillion lei deficit, to which solutions are still being 
sought. On the other hand, complying with the same budgetary 
provisions, the executive decided that in accordance with the 
financial potential that remains to be identified through the 
rectification of the budget, maximum priority will be granted to 
the chapter on material expenditure and investment in education, 
and then to the other budgetary sectors. 
  We remind the public that on the bases of the parliament's 
examination and approval, we proceeded to the reestablishment of 
the correlation between the salary of the personnel in this 
sector and the other employees' salaries, by increasing, as of 
September 1994, the basic salaries in the budgetary sector by 
23-30 percent. We gave particular attention to granting a 
higher percent of salary increase to the group of employees 
whose work belongs to the category of top social services. 
  The second claim advanced by the Alfa Confederation does not 
have the necessary legal foundation either. It refers to 
actions of speeding up the act of concluding collective labor 
contracts at all levels and offering guarantees that they will 
be respected. We remind the public that, also in accordance 
with the legal provisions currently in force, the conclusion of 
these contracts is the sole duty of the two sides; that is the 
trade unions and the employers' association. 
  However, the government again expresses its willingness to 
support the proper unfolding of this action. In order to better 
inform the public, we mention that there is only one 
controversial point that stopped the signing of the collective 
labor contracts. The trade unions ask that those who are not 
trade union members should also be compelled to pay a certain 
fee. The argument for this request is the idea that they also 
enjoy the benefits of the provisions of the collective labor 
contract. 
  The government cannot interfere in this case through 
administrative measures either. A final decision has to be 
taken through negotiations between the two sides that are, as we 
have already mentioned, the trade unions and employers' 
association. 
  To force employees to pay a fee through an administrative 
decision would be at variance with democratic principles, 
including the trade union democracy, and nobody can be permitted 
to take such a decision. 
  The third claim referring to the recognition of labor groups 
created after the revolution and the pensioning according to 
these groups is absolutely useless. Romania's government has 
never had the intention of modifying the practice of placing 
employees in labor groups and granting pensions according to 
them, created after the revolution or before that event. 
  Likewise, the government does not intend to carry out any 
modification in the act of pensioning in accordance with the 
labor groups and, in this respect, it presented a written 
viewpoint to the trade union organizations. Thus, this is a 
claim without substance. 
  The fourth and last claim refers to the compulsory 
indexation 
of salaries, including the minimum salary per economy. We wish 
to remind the public that the government can decide on the 
indexation of salaries in accordance with its prerogatives 
solely in the budgetary sector and in the sector of social 
protection, and can do it solely in direct correlation with the 
foreseeable evolution of prices for each quarter. 
  For the other groups of employees, the government can only 
recommend indexation, but the decision undoubtedly rests with 
each trade company and private corporation, in accordance with 
the financial potential of each of them. 
  The viewpoint of the government is that the increase in 
salaries can be achieved only in two ways: by increasing 
production and labor productivity or by restructuring commercial 
companies. 
  The four claims of the Alfa Cartel bring us back to a period 
that we thought belongs to the past, which is the command, 
planned, and centralized economy and the implementation of those 
claims would mean the administrative involvement of the 
government in economy, on the basis of some prerogatives that it 
does not possess and does not even wish to have, because this it 
would mean the reinstallation of practices of the totalitarian 
regime, from which, through joint efforts, we barely succeeded 
in departing four years ago. 
  Romania's government is determined to support the 
establishment of a society based on genuine democratic 
principles, to build a competitive market economy that excludes 
any interference through administrative levers in the economic 
and social development of society. 
  Such demonstrations and protest actions that flagrantly 
violate the legal provisions do nothing else but lead to the 
destabilization of society, with very serious effects on the 
whole reform process, and to the danger of losing everything 
that has been obtained so far through the joint efforts of all 
citizens: the economic increase, the reduction of inflation, 
macro-economic stability, and international trust. 
  Just as has been done so far, the government expresses 
openness for dialogue, but on a principled position, with the 
realist approach to all issues that the trade union 
confederations raise, and only if they are the subject of the 
activity of the executive, as has been established by the law. 
[end Rosca recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31854 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_r_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Union Action Continues After Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Union Action Continues After Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Communique Called `Insulting' </H4>

<F P=102> AU1606095094 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
0400 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606095094 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The trade unions delegation participating in 
negotiations with the government withdrew at around 0100 this 
morning from discussions, assessing that the communique of the 
government spokesman is insulting for the trade unions. 
  After midnight, a protocol was concluded with the Free Trade 
Unions in the field of education, which is affiliated to the 
CNSRL [National Confederation of Free Unions in Romania]-Fratia 
and with the Autonomous Trade Unions Federation in the 
Pre-University Education, which is affiliated to the National 
Trade Union Bloc. The protocol refers to the claim of 
supplementing the education budget. 
  Likewise, at that hour, a memorandum on negotiations 
regarding the ways to find solutions to the four claims of the 
Alfa Cartel was in the process of finalization. 
  Our correspondent at the government headquarters informed us 
that after the trade union representatives had withdrawn from 
negotiations, at around 0215, the commander of the Bucharest 
Police, Major General Nicolae Nitu, called on demonstrators to 
clear Victoria Square and have busses and trade unions members 
move to the Aviatorilor Square. After a series of discussions, 
at around 0300 local time, the shield bearers who were 
positioned in Victoria Square also withdrew while trade union 
groups got in the cars that are at this hour still parked in 
front of the government headquarters. 
  In a statement made last night to our radio station, Mr. 
Bogdan Hosu, leader of Alfa Cartel, expressed his hope that 
discussions with the government side will continue in order to 
finalize the negotiations that have been held for over two days. 
  In turn, Mr. Octavian Partenie, special representative of 
the 
government for relations with trade unions and employers' 
associations, reviewed the major points discussed with the trade 
unions and mentioned that the sides jointly agreed that by next 
Wednesday a mediation meeting will take place with the 
participation of the prime minister. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31855 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_r_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Union Action Continues After Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Union Action Continues After Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Protest Action Continues </H4>

<F P=102> AU1606112994 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1000 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1606112994 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The rally started three days ago by trade union 
representatives from several regions continues in Victoria 
Square. 
  Our correspondent has informed us that at this hour only the 
representatives of the Alfa Cartel Trade Union Confederation are 
in Victoria Square. Mr. Bogdan Hossu stated to our 
correspondent that his trade union is preparing a communique in 
response to the government spokesman's communique issued last 
night. The Alfa Cartel assesses the government communique as 
biased and irritating, which does nothing except establish 
conditions to push out demonstrators, even by force, from 
Victoria Square. 
  Likewise, we have been informed that buses and cars that 
arrived from Hunedoara, Cluj, and Vilcea Counties are currently 
present in the Victoria Square. The Alfa Cartel spokesman in 
Victoria Square informed us that, at this hour, representatives 
of trade unions in the area of mining and metallurgy have also 
been joined by employees of Bucharest enterprise who are members 
of the Alfa Cartel Trade Unions. 
  Our correspondents also informed us that at around 1210 
local 
time, participants in the Victoria Square trade union rally 
tried to break through the law enforcement bodies deployed 
around Victoria Palace. However, as a result of repeated 
appeals through a bullhorn by the unit commander and Alfa Cartel 
Leader Bogdan Hossu to the demonstrators to refrain from 
violence, the demonstrators gave up the attempt to break through 
the law enforcement unit. Anti-government slogans are currently 
being chanted. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31856 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik Views Bilateral Relations With Hungary </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik Views Bilateral Relations With Hungary </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506194594 Budapest NEPSZABADSAG in Hungarian 14 Jun 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506194594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest NEPSZABADSAG </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Gyorgy Jozsef Farkas: "The Common Historical </F>
Past Also Promises a Common Future--Jozef Moravcik's Interview 
on Slovak-Hungarian Relations"] 
  [Text] An interview that touched upon the issues of 
bilateral relations was published in today's edition of the 
Bratislava UJ SZO with Slovak Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik, 
Gyorgy Jozsef Farkas reported. 
  In the interview given to Deputy Chief Editor Peter Miklosi, 
Moravcik first outlined the gestures addressed to the national 
minorities. He said that one of his government's basic goals is 
to fulfill the obligations undertaken in connection with gaining 
membership in the Council of Europe as soon as possible. "It is 
our intention that the social climate of good relations emerge 
at last among our country's citizens of various ethnic 
backgrounds," Moravcik emphasized, pointing out that this 
includes a full and unhindered application of the name law and 
the establishment of legal conditions for bilingual place-names. 
He also said that they wish to establish the conditions for 
Slovak membership in the European charter of regional local 
governments and national minority languages. However, he assumes 
that the implementation of this will be a task for the new 
government to be formed after the fall elections. He 
nevertheless stated that signing the above conventions is a 
natural interest of the whole of Slovakia. 
  Speaking about the temporary halt of the signs law, Moravcik 
noted that certain people are too worried: If the principle of 
historical names used by the national minorities prevails in the 
case of bilingual signs, this phenomenon might also extend to 
other areas. These worries can be bridged after some time if 
the sides concerned seek the solution through dialogue rather 
than through negative actions. 
  Moravcik pointed out that the Hungarians living in Slovakia 
can express their views in many ways--their representatives are 
present in the government's advisory bodies and the parliament 
and at the meetings of the coalition council. "I see no 
obstacles to the Foreign Ministry creating an ad hoc or even 
permanent committee from the representatives of Slovakia's 
national minorities," he added. 
  The interview discusses in detail the situation of 
Hungarian-Slovak interstate relations. Moravcik does not 
consider it likely that the basic agreement will be completed 
before the fall elections; however, consultations can still be 
held. He also believes that talks on Bos are necessary in such 
a way that the whole dispute be moved to the level of technical 
debate while neither side suffers any lasting damage. In reply 
to whether some easing can come about in bilateral relations by 
the end of September, Moravcik said: "Every day and week that 
passes by without results is wasted.... I am convinced that we 
have to reach what we call historical reconciliation as soon as 
possible. In the future, it is very important for us to pay 
attention to the advantages of our mutual relations rather than 
to our former disagreements. The common past also holds out a 
common future, and it matters a lot what kind of prospects we 
have," Moravcik stated. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31857 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Road-Sign Bill Dispute Unresolved by Council </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Road-Sign Bill Dispute Unresolved by Council </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506135294 Bratislava Rozhlasova Stanica Slovensko Network 
in Slovak 1000 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506135294 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava Rozhlasova Stanica Slovensko Network 
in Slovak 1000 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=105> Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] The Coalition Council held a meeting in 
Bratislava this morning at which Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik 
was present. The aim of the meeting was to find an acceptable 
consensus on the issue of the so-called road-sign bill. 
  At the last council meeting, representatives of Hungarian 
parties suggested that the list of villages with bilingual 
place-names include 13 villages named after Slovak 
personalities. Other members of the council disapproved of this 
proposal. The deputies' clubs of the coalition parties were to 
take a stance on the matter by today. Prime Minister Jozef 
Moravcik briefed journalists on the results of the meeting. 
Ivan Samel was present on behalf of Radiozurnal. 
  [Samel] At the beginning of the briefing, Jozef Moravcik 
announced the result of the Coalition Council deliberations. 
Today, once again, its members failed to agree on a joint 
stance on the road-sign bill. They will discuss a possible 
course of future action on 17 June. The prime minister added: 
  [Begin Moravcik recording] At present, it seems that it 
would 
be appropriate to submit the bill in the form that has been 
discussed and voted on [as heard], and, if 76 deputies sign this 
bill, we will submit it to parliament. It is not clear yet 
whether we will succeed. [end recording] 
  [Samel] When speaking about 76 deputies, Moravcik is 
counting 
on the votes of all Hungarian representatives. He went on to 
say that the controversial 13 villages remain a stumbling block. 
According to the prime minister, it is unlikely that a consensus 
can be reached on this point. In the event that the 
representatives of the coalition parties fail to reach a joint 
stance and the bill fails to obtain the 76 votes needed for the 
road-sign bill to be adopted, the solution to this issue will 
remain the responsibility of the future parliament. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31858 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDL Chairman Rejects Rumors of Split in Party </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDL Chairman Rejects Rumors of Split in Party </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506175594 Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 13 Jun 94 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506175594 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [TA SR report: "Peter Weiss Emphasizes: There Are No </F>
Disputes Within the Party of the Democratic Left"] 
  [Text] Trebisov--The 11 June meeting of the Party of the 
Democratic Left [SDL] Executive Committee in Trebisov dealt with 
the preparations for the local and parliamentary elections, 
especially with the preparation of the lists of candidates in 
the individual electoral districts. 
  Party Chairman P. Weiss said at a news conference held after 
the meeting that the Republican Council will decide on the 
definitive form of the list of candidates and on the themes for 
the election program at its session in Bratislava on 9 July. He 
emphasized that, apart from an election program, the SDL would 
also like to submit a government program to the voters--that is, 
a concept for the kind of government there would be if the 
left-wing coalition were to win the elections. According to 
him, the SDL's policy will not change in the principle policy 
issues. The party has banked on a high level of expertise and 
on ensuring that the changes needed in the economy are 
implemented in a socially tolerable manner. It has banked on 
its ability to cooperate with other political entities and would 
like to make good use of its foreign political contacts to 
resolve Slovakia's problems. 
  Weiss rejected the rumors about an alleged split within the 
SDL and said that they are purposefully nourished during the 
preelection period. "There are no disputes within the SDL; 
there are just differences of opinion on the tactical measures, 
and we are discussing them." The preelection coalition with the 
Slovak Republic Farmers Movement, the Social Democratic Party of 
Slovakia, and the Green Party in Slovakia has merely cemented 
our party. Weiss also rejected the SDL's alleged drift away 
from the workers. "I do not understand speaking to the workers 
in such a way that we make them unfulfillable populistic 
promises. We are merely saying to them that our party offers a 
policy based on expertise. We have a program for economic 
recovery; we have a concept for changes in the social system," 
he underlined and added that the offer of postelection 
cooperation with the Association of Workers of Slovakia, which 
the association turned down, still stands. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31859 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Nuclear Plant Reconstruction Contract Signed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Nuclear Plant Reconstruction Contract Signed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506130894 Bratislava SME in Slovak 11 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506130894 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava SME </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "(popi)": "They Have Concluded a Contract To </F>
Reconstruct the V-1 Blocks"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--The tender process for a contract to 
supply the project to gradually reconstruct the Jaslovske 
Bohunice V-1 power plant--that is, its first two blocks with 
their V-230-type reactors--was completed recently at the nuclear 
power plant. 
  Engineer J. Sidor, press secretary of the Slovak Energy 
Enterprise (SEP), has told us that the enterprise has concluded 
a contract in this connection with the German Siemens company. 
In it, it respects the conclusions reached by the recent 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) mission and also the 
decision made by the Slovak Republic Nuclear Inspection Office 
on the criteria for increasing nuclear safety for these blocks. 
An undertaking by the supplier to ensure that the costs of the 
reconstruction do not exceed 5 billion korunas forms part of the 
contract. The completion deadline is 1997. The reconstruction 
will take place in tandem with the block's operation. The SEP 
official added that, despite the fact that the V-1 should cease 
operating in the year 2000 (under the condition that the first 
and second blocks of the Mochovce nuclear power plant are 
operating reliably), it is worth investing in the reconstruction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31860 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_c_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Stricter Controls Slated for Commercial Banks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Stricter Controls Slated for Commercial Banks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506211794 Prague CT 1 Television Network in Czech 1730 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506211794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CT 1 Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Passages between quotation marks recorded] </F>
  [Text] The Czech Government today approved an amendment to 
the banking law that does not cover insurance on deposits. 
Konsolidacni banka can now be added to the four financial 
institutions whose obligations are currently guaranteed by the 
state. 
  [Prime Minister Klaus] "The insurance of deposits will be 
dealt with in a calmer, unhurried way." 
  According to the prime minister, this is a temporary 
bridging 
amendment until an entirely new banking law is prepared. 
  [Klaus] "We need more time for this new law, some peace, 
which is why we have now opted for a partial temporary amendment 
toward strengthening banking supervision and strengthening or 
tightening the regulatory framework from the viewpoint of the 
central bank vis-a-vis the commercial banks, with the 
unambiguous aim of safeguarding or attempting to safeguard the 
interests of depositors." 
  For example, any bank can be fined up to 50 million korunas 
or have its basic assets reduced for irregularities in its 
activities. To the existing irregularities for which banks can 
be punished by the Czech National Bank are now added engaging in 
banking trade that harms the interests of depositors and having 
nonprofessionals or people who are not civically irreproachable 
[osoby obcansky bezuhonne] in management positions. 
  The amendment also permits the forced administration of a 
bank for up to two years and further extends the powers of the 
administrator. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31861 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_c_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Health-Care Privatization Discussed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Health-Care Privatization Discussed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20862A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20862A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] A debate is currently taking place in 
the Czech Republic on the best way to privatize health care to 
provide better care and operate more efficiently. A HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY article of 22 April indicated that, after privatizing 
most other industries, it is now time to do the same for the 
health-care system. A total of 5,419 projects have been 
recommended for 644 health-care facilities, and 4,000 of these 
still need to be decided on by the Privatization Ministry. A 
total of approximately 10 billion Czech korunas [Kc] of 
health-care properties have already been privatized. 
  Referring to the privatization of health care in another 
article of the same issue, Jan Zamboch noted that "the road 
there is actually a road back." One of the proposals calls for 
a centralized office that would disburse insurance funds and 
control prices for health-care services. Additional service 
coverage would have to be purchased by individuals privately. 
However, according to Zamboch, one objection to this plan is 
that it would prevent competition and that politicians would 
have too much influence over the health-care system; measures 
would have to be taken to keep politicians out of such a 
decision to make it more palatable for the average citizen. 
  An independent Health-Care Commission would decide on the 
extent of critically required health care, regardless of cost 
involved; the insurance would not cover routine health care that 
citizens could provide for themselves. This would make it 
possible for the patient to choose between purchasing services 
directly from a doctor or through a commercial insurance 
company. The resulting competition should make many services 
less expensive. Zamboch rejected assertions that the quality of 
care would deteriorate and argued that the threat to a doctor of 
having an insurance contract canceled should lead to greater 
efficiency. 
  According to an item in LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE of 11 May, in 
which 
a discussion between President Havel and Health Minister Ludek 
Rubas is described, Rubas stressed that introducing nonprofit 
organizations into the health-care system would violate the 
principles of competitiveness between health-care facilities and 
would cut down on efforts to improve the overall quality of 
health care. Rubas conceded, however, that exceptions could be 
made in cases of rehabilitation, child care, and long-term care. 
Rubas assured Havel that no great problems should be 
encountered in the course of transformation; the pace and nature 
of this transformation remains in question. In any case, the 
creation of some nonprofit organizations could be expected. 
  In the DENNI TELEGRAF of 7 May, Rubas also criticized the 
low 
pay of the medical profession, which he said is lower than for 
other professions because wages were still being set by the 
government. Rubas admitted, however, that money for higher wages 
is not currently available. As one consequence, large numbers 
of nurses left the Czech Republic for Austria, although, 
fortunately, the Austrian hospitals now have sufficient 
personnel, and newly trained Czech nurses are entering the 
profession within the country. Also, insurance companies are 
compensating the hospitals at a rate of Kc300 per bed, while the 
actual costs are Kc500 and must be supported by the hospitals 
themselves. Minister Rubas then stated that he feels that the 
main task is to finish privatization of the health-care system. 
  HOSPODARSKE NOVINY of 25 April published an interview with 
Deputy Health Minister Ondrej Typolt by Peter Misur. During the 
interview, Misur expressed concern that, during the past two 
years, expenses for health care in the Czech Republic increased 
with respect to the GDP by almost 3 percent. Misur added that 
an 8-percent rate would create a situation where "there are no 
standard solutions." Typolt responded that a major problem is 
the way government budgets are formed but warned against 
imposing any solution that would only preserve the current 
inappropriate structure of health facilities and lead to 
inflationary increases. 
  In response to other questions, the deputy minister 
indicated 
that changes must be made in capital investments and that many 
of the construction projects will have to cease and more effort 
be placed on restructuring and modernization of the existing 
capacities. Typolt indicated that the "health insurance system 
must be changed from what is really a health tax to a system 
that would compete on the basis of cost containment, not on 
income." The minister said that he supported providing primary 
health care from general insurance but indicated that more 
controls may be needed over the health-insurance system. Typolt 
also said that he expected health care and hospital-care 
insurance to be combined by the year 1996. He concluded that a 
comprehensive legislative proposal for the entire health-care 
issue has been prepared and should completely replace the 
current law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31862 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Daily Cites Zagreb's `Clumsy Moves' on Istria </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Daily Cites Zagreb's `Clumsy Moves' on Istria </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506223994 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2224 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506223994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Ljubljana, June 15 (TANJUG) -- The Ljubljana daily 
REPUBLIKA claims on Wednesday that numerous clumsy moves by the 
Zagreb regime have made Istria Croatia's biggest internal 
problem, and hints at an imminent collapse of President Franjo 
Tudjman's latest strategy in the battle to retain the 
insubordinate peninsula under his territorial and other control. 
Mistrust between Istria and the Croatian leadership or, more 
accurately, their unconcealed rift, has lately been widened by 
the statements of individual Istrian politicians that Zagreb's 
"repressive policy" should be resisted at arms, writes the 
Slovenian paper. Slovenia and Croatia share a border in that 
northern Adriatic peninsula. 
  "Tudjman, who has lost some of his power in his ongoing 
battle with the opposition, is trying to cool the passions 
somewhat. However, one of the hawks in the ruling party, 
Vladimir Seks, has recently made the surprising statement that 
Zagreb will no longer insist on Croaticising Istria," writes 
REPUBLIKA. 
  The daily goes on to explain that just six months ago, 
Zagreb 
was firmly insisting on going ahead with the plan of 
Croaticisation, which would mean "strengthening the awareness of 
belonging" and settling Croats from other parts of Croatia and 
from abroad in Istria. There was also mention of a project of 
settling 10,000 Croats from Romania and the Serbian province of 
Kosovo-Metohija in Istria. Istrians feared that refugees from 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, too, might decide to stay permanently in 
houses where they have been temporarily accommodated. 
  REPUBLIKA writes that the current parliamentary crisis in 
Croatia, where the opposition parties are refusing to take part 
in the work of the bicameral parliament, is being reflected also 
in Istria. 
  According to some leading Istrian politicians -- advocates 
of 
the peninsula's autonomy -- "the situation should be used to 
defeat Croatia's ruling democratic union," and new voices are 
being raised, too, demanding a firmer stand with Zagreb. 
Istria's political core and many of the people already see the 
peninsula as an independent state, not an autonomous region, in 
the near future. This means that they are striving for 
weakening the influence of Zagreb and Ljubljana, as the idea of 
independence includes the Slovenian part of Istria, too, writes 
the paper. Istria was under Italian rule until the end of World 
War Two. 
  REPUBLIKA writes that Tudjman's latest strategy of apparent 
easing of pressure has failed, and quotes in substantiation 
Tudjman's advisor Nevio Setic as saying that "an Istrian more 
has usually meant a Croat less. The same is true today, which 
indicates that political disputes between Zagreb and Istria will 
continue and deepen." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31863 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_b_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   National Assembly Approves Cabinet Changes </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    National Assembly Approves Cabinet Changes </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506165594 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1624 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506165594 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcement of the result of the secret ballot on Prime </F>
Minister Berov's proposed cabinet changes, read by Deputy 
Khristo Markov in the National Assembly in Sofia -- live] 
  [Text] Today, 15 June 1994, a secret ballot was held on the 
personnel changes in the Council of Ministers submitted by the 
prime minister on 14 June 1994. The commission on the secret 
ballot, consisting of Deputies Khristo Markov, Atanas Velchev, 
[name indistinct], Kiril Zhelev, and [name indistinct], 
announces that the result of the ballot is as follows: 
  Total number of National Assembly deputies who voted: 123. 
  Number of ballots cast in favor of the proposed personnel 
changes: 117. 
  Number of ballots cast against the proposed personnel 
changes: 6. 
  Number of empty envelopes: none. 
  Number of blank ballot papers: none. 
  On the basis of the result of the secret ballot, in 
accordance with Article 84, Paragraph 6, [passage indistinct] of 
the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria [passage 
indistinct], the National Assembly decides as follows: 
  First, it relieves Valentin Stefanov Karabashev from the 
post 
of deputy prime minister and minister of trade. Second, it 
elects Kiril Petrov Tsochev to the post of deputy prime minister 
and minister of trade. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31864 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officials Meet With CSCE Delegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Officials Meet With CSCE Delegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506214694 Belgrade TANJUG in English 2128 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506214694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, June 15 (TANJUG) -- Yugoslav Vice-Premier 
Zeljko Simic said on Wednesday [15 June] that political talks 
and diplomatic methods alone could bring about a peaceful and 
lasting settlement of the Yugoslav crisis. Meeting a delegation 
of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (C.S.C.E.), Simic said that the deployment 
of a C.S.C.E. mission to Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro) might be 
considered only under precisely defined conditions, with full 
respect for the sovereignty of Yugoslavia as an independent 
state and consideration of its reincorporation into the 
C.S.C.E., of which it was a founding member, the information 
ministry said. 
  Simic explained that the previous C.S.C.E. mission had not 
been expelled from Yugoslavia, as alleged by the Western media, 
but that its term had expired last summer and that Belgrade had 
expressed a readiness to renew it if Yugoslavia were permitted 
to take part in the work of the C.S.C.E. as a full and equal 
member. 
  Yugoslavia's membership in the C.S.C.E. was suspended in 
July 
1992 because of its alleged involvement in civil war in 
neighbouring Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Yugoslav Republic of 
Serbia, too, is willing to receive C.S.C.E. observers on its 
territory, and the main condition for this is again Yugoslavia's 
participation in the forum, because mutual respect is a 
precondition for dialogue, Slobodan Jovanovic, chairman of the 
Serbian Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee, told the 
C.S.C.E. delegation. 
  The talk brought to light the shared view that the U.N. 
Security Council's sanctions against Yugoslavia have not 
produced the desired effect and that this is the time to lift 
them, said the Serbian Parliament's press service. The draconic 
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions were voted in place on May 
30, 1992, because of Yugoslavia's alleged involvement in the 
Bosnian civil war. 
  In the context of Serbia's southern province of 
Kosovo-Metohija, Jovanovic and his colleagues informed the 
C.S.C.E. delegation that government had several times offered 
dialogue to the ethnic Albanian hardline leaders, who had 
rejected it every time, and explained that the biggest problem 
in the province was that the minority's political parties were 
striving for the province's secession from Serbia and Yugoslavia. 
  Ethnic Albanians have boycotted the country's all 
multi-party 
elections and are refusing to recognise the legitimate 
authorities of Serbia and Yugoslavia, the Serbian parliamentary 
officials said. Kosovo-Metohija has for decades been torn apart 
by a strong ethnic Albanian separatist movement, which is 
striving for the province's annexation to neighbouring Albania. 
  Yugoslav Minister of Human and Minority Rights Margit 
Savovic 
told the C.S.C.E. delegation it was necessary that ethnic 
Albanians should be made to realise that the international 
community does not support their separatist aspirations. She 
explained that the human rights situation in Yugoslavia was no 
different from that in other countries. There are no massive 
human rights abuses, because each individual such case is dealt 
with under the law, the Yugoslav Information Ministry quotes 
Savovic as saying. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31865 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_y_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Rejects Nonaligned Movement Document </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Rejects Nonaligned Movement Document </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1606110494 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1035 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1606110494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, June 16 (TANJUG) -- Egyptian Belgrade 
Embassy charge d'affaires Taysir Husayn was handed Thursday a 
Yugoslav Government note in which Egypt, which hosted the 
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) ministerial conference in early May, 
was requested to officially publish Yugoslavia's reservations 
regarding the document adopted at the conference, especially the 
part pertaining to the crisis on the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia. 
  The Egyptian diplomat was told that the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (F.R.Y.) believes the document was one-sided, that it 
based its conclusions on untruths and that as such aligned the 
movement with one side in the civil war in the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The document blames solely the Serbs for the civil war in 
Bosnia, and totally exonerates from responsibility the Croats 
and Moslems. It was unacceptable for a non-aligned conference 
document to even negate the existence of the F.R.Y. (only Serbia 
and Montenegro, the the F.R.Y. federal units, are mentioned). 
It was also unacceptable to urge maintaining of the sanctions 
against the F.R.Y., although the world was by large discussing 
and considering modalities of their lifting, said the F.R.Y. 
note. 
  The Yugoslav side expressed both regret and disappointment 
that Yugoslavia, as one co-founders of NAM, was prevented from 
participating in the ministerial conference in Caico. As the 
Egyptian charge d'affaires was informed, this was interpreted in 
Belgrade as violation of the democratic practice and tradition 
of NAM. Also, it was emphasized that the statement of Egyptian 
Foreign Ministry spokesman that Yugoslavia had refused to 
participate in the conference was both unfounded and untrue. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31866 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman Reviews Visit to Bosnia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudjman Reviews Visit to Bosnia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506200294 Zagreb HTV Television in Serbo-Croatian 1730 
GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1506200294 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb HTV Television </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President Franjo Tudjman at Zagreb </F>
airport upon his return from a visit to Bosnia-Herzegovina -- 
live] 
  [Text] [Reporter] We are reporting directly from Zagreb 
airport where the president of the Republic, Franjo Tudjman, has 
just arrived. Mr. President, let us please begin. Could you 
comment on your two-day visit to Bosnia-Herzegovina and tell us 
the most important things -- have your expectations been 
fulfilled and what happens now? 
  [Tudjman] I believe I could say on behalf of the Croatian 
state delegation that our expectations have been absolutely 
justified and fulfilled. We held talks with the state and 
political leadership of Bosnia-Herzegovina -- Mr. Izetbegovic 
[Bosnian president], Mr. Zubak [Bosnian Croat leader], Ganic 
[Bosnian vice president], Silajdzic [Bosnian prime minister] and 
their associates. Understandably, the talks focused on the 
implementation of the Washington agreement on the creation of 
both the Croat-Muslim federation and the confederation with 
Croatia. We achieved full unanimity in this respect and we also 
specifically discussed economic and legal cooperation. I 
believe that, in this regard, our visit was completely 
worthwhile. 
  In addition, everything else about the visit was of great 
interest. The very opening of the Croatian Embassy in Sarajevo 
was marked by the presence of many Croats from Sarajevo. It was 
there that we discovered out that there are 120 Croats at 
Sarajevo University. We were pleasantly surprised by the young 
Croats' choir and we also met many other Sarajevans. 
  We and the citizens of Sarajevo attached particular 
importance to our stroll through the streets of Sarajevo -- 
something not so common in these wartime days. 
  Apart from Sarajevo, we visited central Bosnia -- Nova Bila, 
Vitez, Busovaca. What happened in Nova Bila should really be 
seen -- the conditions in which the local doctors worked while 
they were attending the wounded and taking care of the Croat 
population. Although the delegation members and I had been 
informed about this and watched your television reports, to 
witness this in person is a very moving experience. This should 
be written about, told about. I am taking this opportunity to 
appeal to the Croatian public to pay tribute to those people by 
helping them build a new hospital. Instead of an operating 
theater, they are still performing surgery in improvised 
premises at the church, where wooden benches are sometimes used 
as hospital beds. 
  Our encounters with Croats in central Bosnia and later in 
Herzegovina show that the Croat people in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
have accepted the Washington agreements but that there are still 
some open questions. When we explained that everything that has 
been accomplished in resisting Serb aggression with the creation 
of the Croat republic of Herzeg-Bosna, its military units and 
organization of authority, that all this will remain intact 
until the Croat-Muslim federation and the confederation become a 
tangible reality, people both in Herzegovina and in Bosnia 
approved. 
  Wherever we went, Citluk, Capljina, especially Mostar 
[pauses] the visit to Mostar was of great interest to us, but it 
was also important for the citizens of Mostar. We went for a 
walk in the streets of Mostar, we visited the Franciscan 
monastery and the church that was demolished on 9 May, 1992. 
This act of vandalism should be seen -- not only the 
destruction of the church but also the bombing of the library. 
This attests to the determination and courage of the people who 
decided to remain until this day on the frontline in defense of 
their right to remain on this soil. 
  However, we were very impressed by what we found in western 
Mostar, the part under Croat control: About 25,000 Croats -- 
the figure is approximate, about 22 to 25,000 Croats -- are 
living together with 9,000 Muslims and 3,000 Serbs without any 
problems. This means that citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina are 
really prepared to make an effort in the name of peace, that 
they will accept a political solution, and that the Croatian 
authorities in Mostar and in Herceg-Bosna and the Croat 
representation [predstavnistvo] in the entire Bosnia-Herzegovina 
sincerely wish to see that the drafts of the Croat-Bosniak 
federation and a confederation with the Republic of Croatia are 
realized, and that they have the support from the Croatian 
people in all this. 
  [Reporter] I would ask one more question if possible. Mr. 
President, I would go back to the talks in Sarajevo. Certain 
agreements have been reached with President Alija Izetbegovic. 
When do you expect these talks to be implemented in concrete 
terms? 
  [Tudjman] The talks have already begun. As you know, at the 
last session of the constituent assembly the leadership was 
appointed, i.e. Mr. Kresimir Zubak was appointed president of 
the federation, Ganic was appointed vice president, a premier 
designate was also nominated. At the next session of the 
assembly on 21 June work will continue on the forming and 
appointment of the government. Other steps are also being taken. 
Talks are starting on the canton borders. All this depends on 
future talks and solutions which the international community 
will come up with regarding efforts to solve the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina crisis as a whole. 
  [Reporter] If there are no other questions, may I thank you, 
Mr. President. 
  [Tudjman] Thank you. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31867 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_k_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatia-Krajina Talks Hinge on Reporters </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatia-Krajina Talks Hinge on Reporters </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1606095994 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0901 GMT 16 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1606095994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Plitvice, 16 Jun (TANJUG) -- If talks between 
delegations of the republic of Serb Krajina and the Republic of 
Croatia take place, initially scheduled for 16 and 17 June, they 
will start at about 1600 today, a TANJUG reporter has learned in 
Plitvice. 
  The negotiations were expected to start this morning but, as 
is known, they were postponed because the Croatian side demanded 
that the number of attending reporters be higher than the number 
admitted in Zagreb. The Croatian side is demanding that five 
Croatian reporters and all Zagreb-based U.S. reporters come. 
Moreover, the reporters should be enabled to travel by car via 
the border crossing of Turanj near Karlovac. 
  Letters were exchanged this morning, via the UN Protection 
Forces [UNPROFOR], between the governments of the republic of 
Serb Krajina and the Republic of Croatia, thus bringing about a 
possibility of the negotiations taking place at 1600. As is 
known, the negotiations are expected to focus on economic issues. 
  One of the contested issues, as demanded by the government 
of 
the republic of Serb Krajina, is the withdrawal of Croatian 
forces from western Slavonia, Mt. Velebit, and some other areas 
in keeping with an agreement signed on 29 March this year in 
Zagreb. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31868 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Press Office Announces Clinton Visit 6-7 Jul </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Press Office Announces Clinton Visit 6-7 Jul </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1606102694 Warsaw SERWIS INFORMACYJNY PREZYDENTA in Polish 
1755 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> WS1606102694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw SERWIS INFORMACYJNY PREZYDENTA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] 
<H5>  U.S. President's Visit -- Announcement </H5>
  On 6 and 7 July, President of the United States of America 
Bill Clinton will pay an official visit to Poland at the 
invitation of the President of the Republic of Poland Lech 
Walesa. 
  The main goals of the visit are to intensify Polish-U.S. 
political and economic cooperation, as well as to strengthen 
measures for European security, including the security of 
Central and Eastern Europe. 
  President Clinton will be the first head of state to be 
officially welcomed and received at the Presidential Palace at 
Krakowskie Przedmiescie in Warsaw. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31869 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Walesa Meets With Russia's Shumeyko in Warsaw </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Walesa Meets With Russia's Shumeyko in Warsaw </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506163994 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1512 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1506163994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 15 Jun -- "I hope this visit revitalizes our 
relations. The possibilities are much greater, but we do not 
know how to fully utilize them today. The empty fields between 
our countries should be cultivated as quickly as possible. If 
we can help ourselves, then others will help us too," Polish 
President Lech Walesa said, welcoming his guest, Vladimir 
Shumeyko, the chairman of the Council of the Russian Federation, 
the president's press bureau reported. 
  Shumeyko, stressing that Russia regarded Poland as a key 
Central European state on which a great deal depended, expressed 
the hope that a deepening of our still insufficient cooperation 
would be an important result of his visit. President Walesa is 
not satisfied with the results either, and in his opinion, the 
reasons lie above all in Russia's internal problems. Adjusting 
the law to meet the new challenges that the vital need for 
economic cooperation presents us with, could facilitate mutual 
contacts, economic contacts in particular. The need for 
economic contacts was also strongly stressed by Shumeyko: "It 
is the economy that serves politics. Today, more can depend on 
the international division of labor than on military blocs." 
  Speaking about security issues, Shumeyko assessed Poland's 
participation in the "Partnership for Peace" program as a 
positive fact. 
  President Walesa noted that after the collapse of the two 
confrontational blocs, the former Warsaw Treaty countries have 
many problems and questions. "I even prefer difficulties, but I 
want to know what they are," the president said. "Here we do 
not know what can threaten us." "We want to go to NATO not as 
Russia's opponent. The idea is not to be a buffer of the West. 
What we want is to reduce the fields of military and economic 
uncertainty. Poland wants good relations with Russia." 
  "Hard work awaits us. We have to reconstruct everything, 
rearrange the economic system and the way we think of ourselves. 
We have to do this for security, for logic, for the future," 
the president said. "We are living in a period of transition. 
In a period of creating a vision of a new Europe and a new 
world. It will take time and new generations not burdened by 
the past and by longing for the old order for us to succeed in 
creating a new reality without divisions. 
  "Today we need cooperation with both West and East, in order 
to equalize economic levels. Political divisions will then 
lessen too. The road of transformation that we have entered is 
obvious. [passage indistinct] 
  "The period of old mistakes must be closed. We are counting 
on the presence of the supreme authorities at the Warsaw 
Uprising ceremonies. We invite you," President Walesa said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31870 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_i_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian `Provocations' Reported Around Sarajevo </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian `Provocations' Reported Around Sarajevo </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506184194 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 15 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1506184194 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo was not spared the aggressor's 
provocations today either, the Information Service of the 1st 
Corps reports: 
  [Begin recording] There are no longer any naive people among 
Sarajevo citizens, so the report that the chetniks pounded the 
Igman road with antiaircraft machine-gun fire, fired infantry 
arms at Mijatovica Kosa, and targeted the free territories with 
cumulative mortars from Nedjarici, represents no surprise. This 
was only a continuation of enemy activity that had started last 
night when chetnik mortar bombs exploded on the region around 
Vrbanja Most and at Vis. 
  A similar (?torture) was suffered by other regions covered 
by 
the 1st Corps, particularly around Vares where our positions 
were pounded by antiaircraft guns and antiaircraft machine-guns, 
Vratnica was pounded from Cekrcici, and Pljesivica and Visocica, 
near Visoko, were exposed to fire from Vrela. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31871 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_m_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister Details Serbian Border Incidents </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Minister Details Serbian Border Incidents </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606110394 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 16 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1606110394 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Border Violations Do Occur"] </F>
  [Text] During yesterday's press conference, Interior 
Minister Frckovski was asked on the current situation on the 
northern border. He answered this was primarily a question for 
the Ministry of Defense, but did confirm the number of border 
violations has increased lately. He stated the following facts: 
  -- 24 May, unauthorized crossing of border by 17 Serbian 
soldiers and 2 officers, who entered about 150 meters deep into 
Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] 
territory and threatened UN Protection Force units; 
  -- 27 May, Macedonian air space violated by a Serbian 
military plane; 
  -- 30 May, unauthorized crossing of border by two solders 
and 
going 200 meters deep into Macedonian territory; 
  -- 1 June, border again crossed by two Yugoslav soldiers, 
and 
  -- 8 June, tent put up and a trench dug near Kriva Palanka, 
on Macedonian territory by [passage indistinct]. 
  The situation is the same even as we speak, Frckovski said, 
and again pointed out the Defense Ministry is more competent to 
say more on this. In the Defense Ministry, however, they said 
Minister Vlado Popovski was out of town and no one else was 
authorized to issue statements on this. The same answer was 
given by Macedonian Army General Staff officials. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31872 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kovac Discusses Election Campaign, Normandy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kovac Discusses Election Campaign, Normandy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506174794 Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 11 Jun 94 pp 1, 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506174794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague RUDE PRAVO </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slovak President Michal Kovac by Pavol </F>
Minarik; place and date not given: "Former Socialist Countries 
Need Coalition Governments in the Transitional Period"] 
  [Text] [Minarik] The election campaign in Slovakia has 
already begun, and you have warned against its confrontational 
tone. 
  [Kovac] People will be able to make decisions much easier in 
a quiet atmosphere than under the pressure of psychological 
stress. In a calm atmosphere, not only will it be possible to 
present programs but also the public will also have a chance to 
ponder their content. However, if other elements enter the 
preelection atmosphere, the people will logically miss the 
essence of what individual parties are pushing for and the way 
they want to implement things. Emotions and irrationality could 
enter into the forefront when decisions are made. This is why we 
need to exert maximum efforts to at least make the preelection 
atmosphere as civilized as possible. 
  [Minarik] What are the chances, in your opinion, that the 
coalition government of Prime Minister Moravcik will remain in 
power after the elections? 
  [Kovac] I believe that not only Slovakia, but also other 
former socialist countries need coalition governments in this 
transitional period. In other words, they need to involve all 
of the decisive political entities in the historical changes. 
As early as last year, I called for, in no uncertain terms, 
precisely this solution to the internal political crisis in 
Slovakia. I suppose that, even after the parliamentary 
elections in the fall, a situation will arise in the Slovak 
Republic that will force the establishment of a coalition 
government. 
  [Minarik] What place do you foresee for the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] after the elections? It follows from 
the speeches of its chairman, former Prime Minister V. Meciar, 
that he unequivocally assumes that he will return to power.... 
  [Kovac] In my opinion, the HZDS will remain an important 
political force even after the elections. I cannot estimate to 
what extent he will be able to acquire partners for a possible 
coalition government, but it seems at present that the HZDS is 
not exerting any special efforts in that respect. Of course, 
internal development continues within any party and any 
movement, and the HZDS is no exception--the evolution and the 
process of shaping continue. I really do not know and dare not 
guess what shape it will assume for the election in the fall. 
  [Minarik] You participated in the celebration of the 50th 
anniversary of the Allied forces' invasion in Normandy. Was it 
only a commemorative act? 
  [Kovac] It was, above all, an occasion to commemorate the 
Czechs' and Slovaks' active participation in this historical 
battle, by which they helped defeat fascism. This also was an 
occasion to make Slovakia more visible and not just in the eyes 
of the European public. For me, it was a chance to meet 
veterans from the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic who 
fought for Normandy and thank them for the sacrifices they 
endured. Finally, it also was an occasion to speak with supreme 
representatives of some states. 
  [Minarik] What talks were involved? 
  [Kovac] With French Prime Minister E. Balladur, we spoke, 
among other things, not only about certain circumstances 
surrounding the CSFR's partition, but also about the Stability 
Pact. With President F. Mitterrand, we discussed his planned 
visit to Slovakia. He said that he realized that the democratic 
forces in the Slovak Republic had to be supported. President 
Clinton told me that he had noticed certain positive changes in 
Slovakia's development. He spoke with affection and 
appreciation about the current efforts. He expressed, as did 
others, his hope that we would continue to strengthen our 
political stability. 
  [Minarik] You met with President Havel for the third time in 
a short period during the celebrations of the invasion of Allied 
troops in Normandy. 
  [Kovac] I sincerely admit that we did not discuss politics. 
We had a personal and friendly conversation. President Havel's 
attention, and mine as well, was not concentrated on our mutual 
relations. 
  [Minarik] The 50th anniversary of the Slovak National 
Uprising is drawing near. Are you inspired by the meeting on the 
French and British seashore? 
  [Kovac] I watched everything closely because I will be the 
main host at our celebrations, and I want everything to turn out 
well. Of course, it would be proper to use in our celebrations 
part of what we saw in France and Britain. I realize that we 
have a unique opportunity to present Slovakia in a favorable 
light. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31873 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kukan Describes NACC Conference in Istanbul </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kukan Describes NACC Conference in Istanbul </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506194494 Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 13 Jun 94 pp 1, 12 </F>
<F P=103> AU1506194494 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slovak Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan by </F>
Milan Rusko in Istanbul on 12 June: "In Such an Atmosphere, One 
Does Not Look at the Time"] 
  [Text] Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan took part in a 
meeting of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) in 
Istanbul on 10 June. We asked him for an interview before his 
return home yesterday. 
  [Rusko] Mr. Minister, before the conference, it was expected 
that Russia would announce at it when it will join the 
Partnership for Peace (PFP). Why was this expectation not 
fulfilled? 
  [Kukan] According to Andrey Kozyrev, not all of the issues 
involved have been clarified. He did not specify which ones; he 
declared, however, that, although he was born in Brussels and is 
always glad to return there, he does not want to go "step by 
step," but only when everything has been prepared. 
  [Rusko] Did this not have an influence on the atmosphere of 
the meeting? 
  [Kukan] A characteristic feature of the conference was its 
working atmosphere. All of the participants accepted the 
Russian representative's explanation with understanding. They 
realize that Russia would like to have the kind of relations 
with NATO that would correspond to its military and political 
status and geographical position. At the same time, however, 
the NACC members emphasized that there can be no privileges for 
anyone within the PFP framework. 
  Another episode, however, also testifies to the atmosphere 
of 
the meeting. A group of experts drafting the final document was 
working in parallel with the plenary session. It turned out 
that this was the kind of demanding task that could only be 
dealt with by people with ministerial authority. Therefore, the 
talks were transferred to the plenum. However, they took two 
hours longer there than envisaged. This was virtually a 
dialogue between Russia and the other participants. An 
agreement was reached in the end. It was said more than once at 
the meeting that it would be a mistake if the other states were 
to decide on a course of action that would place Russia in 
isolation. Because Minister Kozyrev did not concretize in 
detail his views on relations with NATO, it was not possible to 
give a detailed response to his stance. 
  [Rusko] Does this mean that there were no contentious 
issues? 
  [Kukan] The meeting was oriented not toward specifying them 
but toward expressing a joint point of view on such fundamental 
issues as relations between the states joining the PFP and the 
North Atlantic Alliance, the question of resolving the regional 
conflicts between Armenia and Azerbaijan, Tajikistan and 
Afghanistan, and on the territory of the former Yugoslavia, and 
the observance of international agreements. 
  [Rusko] NATO officials and ministers from some of the member 
countries implied at the news conferences that Russia is 
interested in modifying the treaty on conventional weapons in 
Europe. Was this topic also discussed? 
  [Kukan] Russian representatives are of the opinion that the 
Vienna treaty should be adapted to the new conditions that have 
arisen with the collapse of the Soviet Union, one of the 
signatories to the treaty. During the discussion, the heads of 
the individual delegations pointed out that, in implementing a 
document, a certain flexibility in complying with it cannot be 
ruled out. This must be agreed upon in advance, however, and 
everyone must agree with it. This accommodates the Russian 
demands to a certain extent, while the binding nature of the 
international treaties remains in force. The meeting emphasized 
that it is also necessary to improve the mechanism for 
supervising fulfillment of the treaty on nuclear 
nonproliferation, whose validity expires next year. It would be 
appropriate to make it valid permanently, and, if the NACC's 
efforts proceed in this direction, we will support them. 
  [Rusko] Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev set out more 
than two weeks ago how Russia envisages interlinking the NACC 
and the CSCE. What conclusion did the NACC conference reach on 
this? 
  [Kukan] Everyone, including the Russian delegation in 
Istanbul, emphasized their interest in further strengthening the 
role of the CSCE, especially in the peacekeeping operations and 
preventive diplomacy spheres. According to almost all of the 
participants, however, the NACC remains an important 
consultative body for coordinating politico-security issues. 
The subject of military cooperation should be dealt with within 
the PFP framework. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31874 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDS Deputies Boycott Ballot; Tsochev Elected </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDS Deputies Boycott Ballot; Tsochev Elected </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506181094 Sofia BTA in English 1740 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506181094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 15 (BTA) -- Today parliament elected 
Kiril Tsochev deputy prime minister and minister of trade, by 
117 to 6 out of the 123 MP's in the 240-seat parliament present, 
accepting Valentin Karabashev's resignation submitted on April 
28. The opposition Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) did not 
take part in the vote. According to the parliamentary rules of 
procedure, the proposed cabinet changes are considered accepted 
by a simple majority of 50 percent plus one of the voting MP's. 
"I will protect Bulgaria's interests," was the only thing Mr. 
Tsochev when he was sworn in. Mr. Tsochev, former chief 
executive of Electroimpex and president of the Bulgarian Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry, now is the manager of a private 
consultancy firm. Interviewed by a private radio station a 
month ago, Mr. Tsochev said that though his business was good, 
he was ready to work in the executive branch. Kiril Tsochev's 
candidature was supported by the formerly Communist Bulgarian 
Socialist Party (BSP). 
  "The cabinet's term in office is limited, its life is only 
two or three months, that is why I'm making just the minimum 
necessary changes," Prime Minister Lyuben Berov said, presenting 
Mr. Tsochev's candidature. 
  Kiril Tsochev, a diplomaed engineer who later took a 
postgraduate course in foreign trade, was born in 1947. He 
speaks English and Russian. He worked as an electrical 
engineer, then as director of Energoproekt and Electroimpex, and 
as a commercial representative in Tokyo. Since April 1992 he is 
president of the Mikra private firm. He chairs the 
Bulgarian-Japanese Economic Committee. He is married and has 
two children. 
  The parliamentary group of the SDS, which has been 
boycotting 
the parliamentary sittings for some time now, today appeared in 
the plenary room to take part in the debate and the vote on the 
cabinet changes. Its floor leader Stefan Savov's motion for an 
open vote was defeated by the Socialist MP's and the MP's of the 
ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights and Freedoms (DPS). The 
incumbent cabinet was formed on the DPS mandate. Although they 
had the right to discuss the changes and ask the candidate 
questions, the MP's directly proceeded with the ballot. 
  "Mr. Tsochev will not be able to do anything in two or three 
months' time," ex-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade 
Valentin Karabashev said in the lobbies of parliament. He 
resigned because of the differences he had with Prime Minister 
Berov on the mass privatization policy. 
  The Socialists, who asked the prime minister for structural 
and personnel cabinet changes in order to give him their 
support, now appeared to believe that this sole change was 
enough. "Any changes are pointless, given that there will 
probably be early elections in autumn," BSP leader Zhan Videnov 
told a news briefing yesterday. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31875 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Ministry on Upcoming FYROM Census </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Ministry on Upcoming FYROM Census </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506145294 Sofia BTA in English 1325 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506145294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 15 (BTA) -- European standards 
concerning the free expression of national identity are much 
higher than those operative in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] which are likely to be applied 
in the forthcoming census there, Foreign Ministry spokesman 
Radko Vlaykov told a news conference here today. The official 
documents on the forthcoming census (to be taken June 21-July 5) 
mention a choice of seven nationalities, including even Turkish 
and Egyptian, but no Bulgarian. 
  The Foreign Ministry spokesman said that prior to the census 
the government of Macedonia should take the necessary steps to 
secure free expression for all its citizens, in line with 
European standards. Bulgaria will take a stand on the results 
accordingly. 
  Bulgaria follows with great interest the process of 
democratization in Macedonia and supports its efforts to join 
the community of free and democratic states, Mr. Vlaykov pointed 
out. He reminded that Bulgaria was the first country to 
recognize the independence of Macedonia and clearly declared its 
willingness for close cooperation. It makes efforts to assist 
Macedonia's integration with the international community and the 
recognition of its independence. Bulgaria's efforts to help 
Macedonia overcome its economic difficulties are no secret, 
either, he added. 
  Only 1,500 Bulgarians were registered in Macedonia in the 
latest census. In the forms for the new one the Bulgarian 
nationality has not been included at all. The previous census 
was boycotted by the Albanians for the same reason. Now, unlike 
Bulgarians, they have been included in the forms. Mr. Ilija 
Ilijevski, leader of the Human Rights Party in Macedonia, told 
reporters in Sofia last week that Bulgarians will be deprived of 
the right to free expression of their national identity. He 
also pointed out that the census will be conducted in conditions 
of long-lasting violation of the human rights of Bulgarians in 
Macedonia and that the results will not be objective and 
reliable. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31876 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Former Fund Chairman Refutes Criticism </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Former Fund Chairman Refutes Criticism </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406185094 Prague CTK in English 1612 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406185094 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 14 (CTK) -- Tomas Jezek, the former 
National Property Fund (FNM) chairman, issued a statement today 
on the May 25 government decision concerning the fund's closing 
balance and annual report for 1993. In the statement, Jezek 
cast doubt on some of the arguments the fund's presidium used to 
speed up his deposition from the post. 
  The government did approve the closing balance, and with 
some 
objections also the annual report, but at the same time voiced 
dissatisfaction with the slow pace of putting privatization 
projects into effect, the fund's behavior on capital markets and 
its exercise of ownership rights in companies where it owns part 
of the property. The fund's presidium raised the same objections 
on Friday [10 June] and recommended Jezek resign immediately. 
  The statement CTK obtained from Jezek says that the slow 
pace 
of implementation of privatization projects is not caused by the 
fund, but much more by institutions processing privatization 
projects. "Only around 25 percent of the projects can be 
accepted and implemented as they are," Jezek wrote. 
  He also pointed out that the fund had turned to the 
Privatization Ministry with 1,875 applications for corrections 
and changes in privatization projects. "Of this number, 91 
applications for corrections and 209 for changes missed the 
agreed-on 30-day deadline. Some applications have been lying at 
the Privatization Ministry for more than a year," Jezek said. 
  The government also complained of laziness in taking steps 
against those who acquire privatized property but fail to pay 
for it. "This is really the only problem pointed out in the 
government's statement worth its attention," Jezek admitted. 
However, the fund is practically helpless against non-payers 
due to its "critical dependence on cooperation with the police, 
courts and the land- registry office." 
  Jezek also denied the charge that the fund was destabilizing 
the stock exchange and RM-system in sales of shares held by it. 
"The overall value of sales that the fund effected on both 
markets is very small (0.42 percent on the stock exchange's 
central market and 2.25 percent in the RM-system). There was 
not a single case where the fund negatively influenced the 
admissible price bracket for the following round in the 
RM-system, and as for the stock exchange, it was rather pushing 
the prices up," Jezek claimed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31877 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   ODS Officials Comment on `Conservative Wing' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    ODS Officials Comment on `Conservative Wing' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506195894 Prague CTK in English 1828 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506195894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 15 (CTK) -- Czech Premier and Chairman 
of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), the strongest party in the 
government coalition, said today he had no information about the 
appearance of a conservative faction within the ODS other than 
that from the press and would not therefore take any stand on 
the issue. 
  ODS Deputy Richard Mandelik said in the independent daily 
LIDOVE NOVINY today that the views of a group of about 11 ODS 
deputies differ considerably from those of the rest of the 
deputies, especially regarding their attitude to the Jewish 
property restitutions and the Senate issue. He also said that 
Klaus had allegedly not objected to the "conservative wing." "I 
believe that he, too, prefers conservatism to liberalism," 
Mandelik said. 
  Petr Kohacek, another ODS deputy, today resolutely rejected 
Mandelik's statement. He said that although the discussion on 
every issue usually begins in the ODS deputies' group with the 
presentation of different and often opposite views, after a time 
it results in a joint stand. 
  The chairman of the ODS deputies' group, Jiri Honajzer, in 
an 
interview with CTK today, expressed surprise over Mandelik's 
allegation. He said he did not believe that the appearance of 
party factions, which is usual in large parties in Western 
Europe and elsewhere in the world, was something tragic or bad. 
  It is normal, natural, and legitimate he said that within 
the 
ODS deputies' club, which with its more than 60 members is the 
largest group in parliament, all the questions took more time to 
be discussed than in other clubs. He said there were many 
strong politicians with different views in the group and their 
views should not necessarily always be identical. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31878 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll Shows ODS, Left Bloc Most Popular </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll Shows ODS, Left Bloc Most Popular </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406120794 Prague CTK in English 1111 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406120794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 14 (CTK) -- If elections had been held 
at the end of May and the beginning of June, the Civic 
Democratic Party (ODS) of Premier Vaclav Klaus, the strongest 
party in the Czech Government coalition, would receive 29 
percent of votes, according to a poll conducted by the Centre of 
Empirical Research (STEM) on May 30 to June 3 among 11,674 
respondents. 
  The Left Bloc (LB) party conglomerate was placed second by 
the respondents with 13 percent. STEM included into the LB 
followers of the Left Bloc parliamentary group, the Communist 
Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KSCM), the Democratic Left Party 
and the Left Bloc party. 
  The Czech Social Democratic Party (CSSD), the strongest 
opposition party, would receive 12.9 percent and the Civic 
Democratic Alliance, another coalition party, would get 12 
percent of votes. 
  The Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party 
(KDU-CSL), a coalition party, would get 6.6 percent of support, 
and the extreme-right Assembly for the Republic-Czechoslovak 
Republican Party (SPR-RSC) 4.9 percent, according to the survey. 
Sixty-four percent of the respondents said they would vote 
while 24 percent were undecided. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31879 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Reveals 1993 Arms Export Statistics </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Official Reveals 1993 Arms Export Statistics </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506113194 Prague CTK in English 1049 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506113194 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 15 (CTK) -- Czech arms exports last 
year totalled $167 million, the Czech daily TELEGRAF writes 
today, quoting Bretislav Gregr, director of Special Materials 
Department at the Ministry of Industry and Trade. This year has 
seen a rise in the number of trade licences, the paper says. 
  Gregr's department, dealing with imports and exports of 
arms, 
processes licence applications which are required for each 
individual deal. The ministry issued 258 licences in 1993 for 
exports valued at $167 million and 108 licences for imports 
worth $42 million involving 52 trading partners from across the 
world. Thirty five Czech companies trade arms at present. 
  Almost three-quarters of the trade last year were made up of 
aircraft, including spare parts, and one-tenth of the total was 
made up by surplus army vehicles. Guns accounted for about 
three percent of the trade, with pistols for the Turkish police 
being the largest single delivery. 
  Imports consisted largely of spare parts, while special 
small 
arms for the Interior Ministry were also an important purchase. 
  This year the ministry has issued more licences than in the 
same period a year ago but this is no indication of a growing 
volume of trade since some of the deals may fall through. But 
expectations are that export will grow this year with aircraft, 
aircraft spare parts and surplus army vehicles remaining the 
main contributors. Licencing is subject to approval by the 
Foreign Ministry. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31880 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Uhde, Nastase Discuss CEI </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406121294 Prague CTK in English 1109 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406121294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague June 14 (CTK) -- "Romania could occupy the 
place of a fully-fledged partner in the Central European 
Initiative (CEI)," Czech Parliament Chairman Milan Uhde said 
today at a meeting with Adrian Nastase, Romanian Assembly of 
Deputies speaker, who began a four-day visit to the Czech 
Republic on June 12. 
  Every democratic state as well as a state striving genuinely 
to build a democratic system had its place in the CEI, Uhde 
said. He pointed out, however, that "we seek to prevent the CEI 
from forming firm structures or becoming a "small Europe" within 
a "great Europe." 
  Nastase described Uhde's remarks as an exceptionally 
positive 
comment. He said his statements took into consideration certain 
realities in Central Europe and at the same time corresponded to 
joint interests of the Czech Republic and Romania which are 
orientated towards integration into European structures and not 
the "institutionalisation of antechambers." 
  Uhde stressed that since the collapse of the communist 
systems in Central and Eastern Europe, no problems had arisen 
which would hamper Czech-Romanian relations. He pointed to the 
process of ratification of a Czech-Romanian agreement on the 
prevention of double taxation, which is currently underway, and 
to an agreement on a free-trade zone which is almost ready to be 
signed. The conclusion of a basic Czech-Romanian treaty of 
friendly relations and cooperation can also be expected soon, 
Uhde said. 
  Uhde and Nastase agreed to support cooperation between the 
two countries' parliaments and, especially, cooperation between 
the parliaments' Economy and Foreign Affairs Committees. They 
also supported the exchange of visits by state representatives 
and information on building the legislation and economic reform 
in both countries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31881 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Nastase Hopes For Improved Ties </H4>

<F P=102> AU1406201894 Prague CTK in English 1526 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406201894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 14 (CTK) -- Adrian Nastase, speaker of 
the Romanian Parliament, said he would like to see a greater 
exchange of information with the Czech Republic concerning 
legislative experiences in the processes of democratization and 
economic reform. Speaking at a press conference today he 
conceded that Romanian-Czech relations were as yet on a low 
level. However, Romania, with a population of 23 million and 
access to the Black Sea, could in future become a significant 
trade partner for the Czech Republic. 
  Deeper relations can be promoted by Czech President Vaclav 
Havel's forthcoming visit to Bucharest, he said. Havel will be 
accompanied by a delegation which includes Czech Privatization 
Minister Jiri Skalicky. 
  Nastase began a four-day visit to the Czech Republic on June 
12. Nastase said he had not discussed the question of Romanian 
immigrants living here illegally with Czech politicians. He 
said in this area "serious difficulties that have not already 
been resolved by our ministries practically do not exist". "A 
few marginal matters" should not impede tourism between the two 
countries, Nastase said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31882 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Romania's Nastase Visits, Meets Officials </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Visit Ends; Talks Summarized </H4>

<F P=102> AU1506185794 Prague CTK in English 1513 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506185794 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 15 (CTK) -- Speaker of the Romanian 
Assembly of Deputies Adrian Nastase today concluded his four-day 
visit to the Czech Republic. During his stay he held talks with 
President Vaclav Havel, Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec, and 
Chairman of Parliament Milan Uhde, on whose invitation he came 
to the country. Uhde and Nastase agreed to promote cooperation 
between the two countries' parliaments, especially between the 
parliamentary economy and foreign affairs committees. They also 
supported the exchange of visits by state representatives and 
the exchange of information on building the democratic and 
economic reform in both countries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31883 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Coalition Deputy Prime Minister' Created </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Coalition Deputy Prime Minister' Created </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406123594 Budapest MTI in English 1203 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406123594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 14 June (MTI) -- The Tuesday [14 June] 
round of the coalition talks ended with success as the Hungarian 
Socialist Party (MSZP) and the Alliance of Free Democrats 
(SZDSZ) ended the first stage of talks and agreed on issues 
related to joint government. The agreement includes the 
creation of the post of coalition deputy prime minister to have 
the smaller partner in the government, the SZDSZ, represented. 
  The agreement sets down that the sides will pass decisions 
by 
mutual agreement. If they do not agree on certain issues, the 
matter will go to a coalition coordination council, whose 
members will be the prime minister, the coalition deputy prime 
minister, the chairmen of the two parties, the two parties' 
parliamentary group leaders, plus one member each delegated by 
the two parties. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31884 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Horn Briefs Goncz on Progress of Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Horn Briefs Goncz on Progress of Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406182794 Budapest MTI in English 1601 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406182794 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 14 June (MTI) -- Chairman of the 
Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP) Gyula Horn briefed Hungarian 
President Arpad Goncz on the progress of coalition talks with 
the Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ). Goncz received Horn as 
part of his ongoing meetings with leaders of parties that won 
seats in the new Hungarian Parliament. 
  Following the meeting, Horn told reporters the president had 
welcomed the briefing. He said both the MSZP and the SZDSZ have 
excellent relations with President Goncz, and they have held 
regular consultations with him in the past. The two politicians 
agreed to strive for direct, protocol-free contacts in the 
future as well, with the intention that the new government will 
continuously inform the president. 
  If the coalition agreement is concluded, the new government 
can be formed by mid-July, Horn said. Horn also said he is 
looking forward to receiving the information on the state of the 
country which Prime Minister Peter Boross is to provide to the 
six parliamentary parties on Wednesday [15 June]. He said he 
expects to receive documents regarding the government's 
international and domestic payments obligations, and ongoing 
privatization transactions. He also expects to be informed 
about the country's actual financial situation, particularly, 
how the ministries managed their finances in the last months. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31885 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Coalition Talks on Culture, Media, Minorities </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Coalition Talks on Culture, Media, Minorities </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1606095794 Budapest MTI in English 1853 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1606095794 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 15 June (MTI) -- The special cultural 
committee set up by the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP) and the 
Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ) to prepare the coalition 
agreement between the two parties, held a session on Wednesday 
[15 June]. The committee deals with cultural, educational, 
sports, media, minority, and church policy issues. 
  At a press conference following the session, committee 
Co-Chairmen Gyorgy Janosi (MSZP) and Gabor Fodor (SZDSZ) said 
the two delegations worked in a very constructive atmosphere. 
  As regards the relationship with churches, the coordinated 
position of the committee was that the separation of church and 
state should be implemented in full. 
  The committee discussed the situation of minorities in 
Hungary and agreed that the existing minority law is a good 
starting point from which to determine which tasks relating to 
minorities must be given priority by the government. At the 
same time, they believe that parliamentary representation for 
minorities is an issue which remains to be solved. 
  The committee began discussions about media-policy issues, 
but intends to complete these deliberations only on Friday [17 
June]. A decisive issue, according to both parties, is to 
prepare and work out a media bill as soon as possible. 
According to Fodor, this implies the earliest possible 
enactment of a law on genuinely free radio and television. 
Janosi added that the opposition should be involved in the 
process, in order to reach consensus. He said all parties have 
learned from the events of the previous parliamentary cycle, and 
have appraised the consequences of the lack of legal regulations 
for the media. 
  Speaking to reporters after the session, both Janosi and 
Fodor reacted to the announcement by Prime Minister Peter Boross 
that he would initiate relieving the vice-presidents of 
Hungarian Radio and Hungarian Television of their posts. Janosi 
said that had Boross taken this step earlier it would have 
elicited political recognition and would have received support 
from the media workers. The fact that this step is being taken 
directly before the change in government confirms the suspicion 
that "this is an escape route from extensive economic, 
financial, and labor-rights investigations." According to the 
MSZP politician, such an investigation must be carried out on 
the previous activities of the two media vice-presidents. 
  According to Gabor Fodor, with this announcement the prime 
minister has acknowledged that the two vice-presidents are 
unsuited for the work they have been doing so far. The SZDSZ 
politician added it would have been useful if the step had been 
taken earlier, as it now has little significance. 
  Fodor was also of the opinion that offering to relieve the 
two vice-presidents is a last action to save the two leaders, in 
order for them to escape being held responsible for their 
actions. According to Fodor, it would have been more correct for 
the two vice-presidents to resign, and for the new government to 
evaluate whether or not they had done everything possible to 
create an impartial public service media. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31886 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Boross, Parties Discuss Government Transfer </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Boross, Parties Discuss Government Transfer </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506190394 Budapest MTI in English 1333 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506190394 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 15 June (MTI) -- Prime Minister Peter 
Boross met -- at his own initiative -- leaders of the six 
parliamentary parties in his parliamentary office on Wednesday 
[15 June]. Speaking to journalists after the over two-hour 
meeting, Boross said the informal conversation concerned the 
transfer of governmental affairs, and did not cover the 
coalition talks between the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP) and 
the Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ). 
  He handed a list of bills and proposed resolutions not yet 
passed by Parliament to the party heads, and asked the MSZP and 
SZDSZ leaders to select those they wish to adopt, because the 
government will withdraw the others. 
  At the talks, the prime minister offered to propose the 
president of the republic dismiss the radio and television 
vice-presidents, after it became clear to him that the new 
cabinet wishes to see a new leadership at the two media. On 
Thursday [16 June], Boross will put at the parties' disposal the 
privatization files, a report on state commitments, the balance 
of external and internal debts, and ministry reports on affairs 
in progress. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31887 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ambassador to United States Resigns </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ambassador to United States Resigns </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506183894 Budapest MTI in English 1733 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506183894 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 15 June (MTI) -- Hungarian Ambassador to 
the United States Pal Tar has sent his letter of resignation to 
Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky. In the letter, the 
ambassador pointed out that he had accepted the honorable 
position three years ago, at the request of the Antall 
government; however, his term has ended with the elections in 
Hungary. 
  In his reply, the Foreign Minister said he understands and 
acknowledges the reasons for the resignation, and he accepts it. 
The resignation comes into effect on July 5, 1994, until which 
time the ambassador will continue to perform his official duties. 
  The cabinet chief of the Foreign Ministry, Ferenc Oberfrank, 
commenting on the resignation, told MTI that although there have 
been no precedents over the last years for an active ambassador 
to resign, a decision of this kind cannot be termed exceptional 
in a well-operating democracy. Steps of this kind, when someone 
decides he can no longer identify with the new situation, or 
does not wish to continue on in the position, are very honorable 
in democratic, law-governed states, the cabinet chief pointed 
out. 
  Oberfrank said that while he is not aware of other diplomats 
considering similar steps, this cannot be excluded. The natural 
rotation schedule of ambassadors will mean that some two dozen 
ambassadors will end their tours. New ambassadors were 
appointed in greater numbers in 1990, at the time of the change 
in system, but there were relatively few political appointees 
among them. 
  Ambassadors usually spend four years in their posts, but 
they 
can essentially be called back at any time. When Ambassador 
Tar's resignation takes effect, the senior diplomat in line 
after him will take over the embassy as charge d'affaires ad 
interim until a new ambassador is appointed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31888 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tar Explains Reasons for Resignation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tar Explains Reasons for Resignation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1506202794 Budapest MTI in English 1915 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1506202794 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Washington, June 15 (MTI) -- American President 
Bill Clinton will receive Hungarian President Arpad Goncz and 
Slovak President Michal Kovac, in the framework of a courtesy 
call, in Washington on Tuesday, June 21. This was announced by 
Hungarian Ambassador to the United States Pal Tar, who added 
that the White House has officially confirmed the meeting. 
According to Tar, the friendly and informal meeting has no 
pre-set agenda. 
  Goncz and Kovac will both be paying a private visit to the 
United States at the invitation of the Institute for East-West 
Studies. The institute will confer honours on the two presidents 
in recognition of their activity for international understanding 
and cooperation. 
  Speaking to reporters in Washington, Ambassador Tar 
discussed 
the reasons for his resignation, which has since been accepted 
by the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, and will take effect from 
July 5. Tar said he accepted the post at the request of the 
Antall government three years ago because he felt he could serve 
Hungary with his professional skills, although he had no earlier 
diplomatic or public-service posts. 
  "I agreed with the Antall government's foreign policy, and 
helped in working it out. This period has now ended, and I have 
asked to be relieved accordingly," Tar said. The ambassador 
said his decision does not imply any sort of problem of 
conscience or reservations with the new government now being set 
up, as it will be a democratically-elected leadership that is 
committed to democracy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31889 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officials Congratulate Austria on EU Vote </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Officials Congratulate Austria on EU Vote </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406135894 Budapest MTI in English 1032 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406135894 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 14 June (MTI) -- Hungarian Prime Minister 
Peter Boross sent a telegram to Austrian Chancellor Franz 
Vranitzky expressing his good wishes on the occasion that the 
vast majority of the Austrian people opted to join the European 
Union. 
  Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky on Monday [13 June] 
congratulated by letter Austrian counterpart Alois Mock, on the 
referendum result. The letter, sent to MTI on Tuesday [14 
June], says, "The outcome of the referendum is a clear signal to 
the whole of Europe. Both Austria and the Union stand to benefit 
from Austria's membership, which will also promote European 
unification. To Hungary, it is particularly important that 
neighboring Austria will be in the European Union." 
  Jeszenszy believes Hungary will be able to count on 
Austria's 
support in the EU. Hungary, which has applied to join, is 
confident that both countries will jointly help build a single 
Europe. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31890 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Press Applauds Austrian Referendum Result </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Press Applauds Austrian Referendum Result </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1406140494 Budapest MTI in English 1001 GMT 14 Jun 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU1406140494 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 14 June (MTI) -- Tuesday's [14 June] 
Hungarian national dailies devote extensive coverage to the 
Austrian referendum held on Sunday [12 June] on the country's 
European Union (EU) membership. Commentators stress the high 
voter turnout, and applaud the decisive majority of "yes" votes, 
saying that Austria's EU membership will make Hungary a direct 
EU neighbor. 
  MAGYAR HIRLAP says, "the Austrians saw it as important to 
vote...., and we can draw comfort from our neighbor's EU 
membership." 
  MAGYAR NEMZET also emphasizes the two-thirds support 
declared 
by Austrians for European integration. "The result of the 
referendum may help spur the EU's expansion, and the community 
will move precisely in the direction recently urged by U.S. 
President Bill Clinton at the French National Assembly: to the 
East." 
  NEPSZABADSAG calls attention to a few lessons regarding 
Austria's EU membership. "The Socialist-Conservative coalition 
governing our neighbors jointly led the country into the Union, 
an example worth following. Public opinion did not see joining 
as dependent on party policies, one reason why they supported it 
with such a heavy majority. This is also why Austrian 
anti-integration rightists failed so seriously with their 
arguments against EU membership, so familiar to Hungarian ears." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31891 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Brandenburg President Discusses Cooperation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Brandenburg President Discusses Cooperation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506191794 Warsaw PAP in English 1807 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1506191794 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Poznan, June 15 -- Minister President of the German 
Eastern land Brandenburg Manfred Stolpe told a press conference 
in Poznan on Wednesday that his land is particularly interested 
in cooperation with Poland. "Poland is our third biggest trade 
partner, along with Russia and the Netherlands," he observed. 
  According to Stolpe, the last three years were very good for 
cooperation between Poland and Brandenburg. Now the German land 
wants to increase the import of Polish fruit and vegetables. 
Stolpe also said that the developing suburbs of Berlin will be 
a good market for Polish construction materials for the next 20 
years. Brandeburg also wants to increase imports of Polish 
products of the electronics, metal and electrical industries. 
  Deputy Minister for Foreign Economic Relations Andrzej Byrt, 
also present at the conference, said that Germany is very 
interested in possibilities of building in Poland a network of 
highways and high speed railways leading through the Polish 
territory to Belarus, Lithuania, Ukraine and Russia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31892 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu116__a94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-116-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   IMF To Approve Draft Stand-By Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    IMF To Approve Draft Stand-By Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1506172594 Warsaw PAP in English 1706 GMT 15 Jun 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD1506172594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 15 -- A mission of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) led by Deputy Head of the IMF's European 
Department Michael Deppler has agreed with the Polish side a 
draft stand-by agreement, Deputy Prime Minister and Finance 
Minister Grzegorz Kolodko and Deppler announced on Wednesday. 
It is expected that Poland and the IMF will sign the 18-month 
stand-by agreement end of July, early August, 1994. By the end 
of 1995, Poland is to obtain 900 million dollars for the 
financing of imports and agreements with the London Club on the 
buying back of the Polish debt. 
  Deppler stated that the IMF mission familiarized itself with 
the "Strategy for Poland" economic development plan and praised 
its approach on the issues concerning the agreement with the IMF. 
  The "strategy" is a realistic programme, Deppler said at the 
end of the mission's two-week visit but added that the agreed 
draft is an initial version and the final outcome will hinge on 
the results of talks with the London Club. 
  The draft has to be approved by the IMF managing director 
and 
the Polish Government. Deppler announced that the new agreement 
is likely to be approved by the IMF's board of executive 
directors in early August. 
  Kolodko claimed that the medium-term agreement with the IMF 
will concern the targets Poland wants to achieve, which are also 
included in the "Strategy for Poland," including a fall of 
inflation rate, the budget deficit and the defining of an active 
credit policy plus the level of interest rates. The draft also 
envisages the stability of Poland's foreign exchange reserves, 
Kolodko added. 
  Asked about the agreement's performance criteria, Kolodko 
said the 1994 budget deficit is to agree with the level set by 
the budget law and in 1995 it should not exceed 3.7 per cent of 
the GDP. The inflation rate fixed at 16 per cent is also in 
accordance with the "Strategy" guidelines. 
  Kolodko went on to say that the draft stand-by agreement 
does 
not envisage non-financial criteria but the "implementation of 
monetary targets depends on difficult measures in the sphere of 
social security," the finance minister argued. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

