
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7816 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rift in HSS Discussed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rift in HSS Discussed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0216C Zagreb DANAS in Serbo-Croatian 8 Mar 94 pp 20-21 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0216C </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb DANAS </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ratko Peter: "Belief in God and Peasant Discord"] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Party Splits </H5>
  What is happening on the Croatian political scene? Have the 
convulsions and tensions in political parties even reached the 
Croatian Peasant Party [HSS], the party that was the most 
pleasant surprise in the last zupanija elections, just a little 
more than a year ago? Was it precisely then, as some say, that 
the peasant cart began to go downhill, has peasant concord 
become more and more peasant discord, and has belief in God 
remained the only unquestioned maxim of the party? Is the 
history of the Croatian Peasant Party actually the paradigm of 
historical Croatian discord, which so many times has taken 
bloody tributes from us, of which we are perhaps witnesses even 
today? 
  Yet another intraparty conflict or showdown is taking place 
in the (overcrowded) Croatian political space, this time between 
the top members of the Peasant Party. Although the party has 
been saying (in writing and verbally) that it is a question of 
party squabbles and differing views, there are quite a few 
people who say that this is a naked struggle for power and even 
a split in the party. Following the sharp division in the 
incumbent party, where thanks to Tudjman's strong position and 
intervention they managed to find a "middle" line as a 
compromise of the division into "right" and "left," following 
the open conflicts in the strongest opposition party, when 
Budisa nevertheless "survived" in the position of the party's 
top man, and after the fierce conflicts in the strongest 
regional party, which, it seems, was also the most radical in 
settling "its affairs," it is now the turn of the "Croatian 
peasants" who, judging by all appearances, have applied the 
"Istrian models" in solving their problems. In short, Dr. Josip 
Stojanovic, chairman of the Executive Committee, and Mirko 
Mador, member of the party's presidium and a deputy in the House 
of Representatives of the Croatian parliament, have been 
suspended. 
<H5>  The Kasina Meeting </H5>
  Although both Josip Stojanovic and Mirko Mador say that 
there 
is no split in the party and that they do not want to bring down 
Stipac (although Stipac brought them down, at least for the 
present), one gets the impression that the "peasants" have 
nevertheless been playing games and looking for justice. In the 
village Kasina (not far from Zagreb), there was a meeting of the 
party's Initiative Committee in order to offer, it was stated, 
support to the Executive Committee in its effort to achieve the 
most successful activity and organization of the party, 
especially of its central headquarters. The "Kasina group" of 
some 100 HSS members (some say even less, although that is no 
longer the point) met in the afternoon hours of Saturday, 26 
February, the same day when the party's presidium held a meeting 
in the morning at which the decision was made to "dispatch" 
Mador and Stojanovic, although the "Kasina meeting" still had 
not begun. What is more, according to Mador, that decision was 
made even a day earlier, on Friday. In its meeting, the party's 
presidium adopted a unanimous decision to suspend the two 
members on grounds that "contrary to the provisions of the 
bylaws and without knowledge of the presidium, they organized 
and held a party meeting that same day in Kasina." Mador, on the 
other hand, says that from the legal standpoint it is completely 
legal to hold such a meeting ("After looking at the party 
bylaws, I saw that I was not violating any party regulation by 
holding a party meeting"), and it is also indicative that the 
party's presidium should judge a priori something which actually 
had not even begun. It is obvious that party confrontations had 
been prepared in advance in the apparently tranquil Peasant 
Party. 
  "Since back in February we have been issuing warnings about 
the party's problems, especially the ineffectiveness of its 
central headquarters," says one of the "expellees," Dr. Josip 
Stojanovic. "That meeting in Kasina should have been closed to 
the public, at least until all the materials were turned over to 
Drago Stipac, the party's president, but that did not occur 
because Stipac did what he did. All the criteria and keys to 
election in the party are in the hands of the presidium, and 
those people render judgment, which is evident once again in 
this case." 
<H5>  Gunfire From Wooden Rifles </H5>
  It is quite obvious that in spite of the desire to have it 
all take place "out of the public eye," the party's dirty linen 
has nevertheless come out in public, and the first step was 
actually taken by Mador in his open letter to Drago Stipac. 
"Yes, I wrote that letter during the meeting in Kasina, because 
we already knew about the suspension decision of the party 
presidium. That is in fact why I wrote very emotionally." 
  Still, there is much that is unclear and foggy in the entire 
story. For example, why did Stipac expel only Stojanovic and 
Mador, although the Kasina meeting was attended by some 100 
people, what are really the reasons of the conflict, did it all 
come down to personal animosities, to a naked party struggle for 
power, has the party at this point been equal to the new 
political realities and the increasing number of its members 
(according to certain indications, the HSS is the country's 
second largest party in terms of membership), is this a case of 
unclear ideological definition and unrecognizability, can it all 
be blamed on the "notorious moles" who obviously have not 
bypassed even the 90-year-old Peasant Party? "I still stand by 
what I wrote in the open letter," says Mirko Mador, "and that is 
that the HSS must be a general Croatian party, a party of the 
center, social and democratic. It must be a modern party, the 
wooden guns and hoes with which Macek created the Croatian 
banovina will no longer do, the Croatian peasant must be a 
policymaker, not the object of policy. The main trouble in the 
party is its ideological unrecognizability, in that the problem 
of Bosnia and Herzegovina was put ahead of Croatia in general, 
and it is also the party organization itself, its general 
ineffectiveness, especially that of the central headquarters. 
The party's growth trend, which has been marked, is not in line 
with the work of the central headquarters, and there are many 
things that are unclear concerning personnel and finances. The 
main party problem nevertheless came from outside, with the help 
of certain people within the HSS, and it is thanks to those 
people that the party was some kind of political appendage or 
hanger-on. Within our party, there were and are special-interest 
groups of the incumbent party and the strongest opposition 
party, various emissaries make their rounds, and the party has 
become a highly eligible maiden. All of that is politically 
unclear and morally disgusting. That is why I made my deputy's 
seat available, because my main interest is for the party to get 
on its own right road. So, along with the special-interest 
groups from outside, the main problems of the party are 
contained in the very conception of the party's organization and 
in its ideological unrecognizability." 
<H5>  Suspend Me as Well </H5>
  The conclusion is drawn from all we have said that strange 
things have been happening for a long time now within the HSS, 
something that was mainly unknown to the public before Mador's 
letter, although the question might be put why Mador has hung 
out the party's dirty laundry at this particular point, is this 
nevertheless a struggle for power and the kind of lobbying in 
advance of certain important party meetings (perhaps even a 
party convention?), is Mador actually an HDZ [Croatian 
Democratic Union] mole (that has also been said), or is it after 
all a struggle for some different HSS, as Mador says, "more 
acceptable from the generational standpoint, younger, 
better-trained, and more professional"? It nevertheless remains 
unclear why in his recent press conference Mador did not want to 
expose the alleged HDZ and Liberal "mole" even when the 
journalists insisted several times. 
  Nevertheless, one learns behind the scenes that the names of 
Josko Kovac and Tihomil Radja are being spoken of as the men 
from the incumbent party and Budisa's party, respectively. Kovac 
himself says that in Dalmatia and Split the HSS is supporting 
President Stipac, and that the voices of the two men expelled 
and the group around them are a minority compared to the 40,000 
members of the HSS who stand behind Stipac, and that "Stipac is 
too democratic, because if he were not, Mador and Stojanovic 
would already have been not suspended, but read out of the 
party." Radja, on the other hand, says that all of this is yet 
another attempt of the incumbent party to undermine the work of 
the HSS by provoking a conflict within it, indeed even with the 
help of a high government official ("let him recognize 
himself"). According to Radja, it is a question of HDZ "special 
operatives," i.e., of "members of the HDZ youth groups," while 
Mador's blow was "below the belt." "I openly support Stipac, who 
still has never made a single political gaffe, although that 
does not mean that some of his actions should not be criticized." 
  The split in the party is obvious, there is evidence of that 
in the open letter of Josip Fajdic, the man who chaired the 
meeting in Kasina. According to Fajdic, the party central 
headquarters is itself the bone of contention, it is a question 
of "fossilized structures" which fall utterly short of the 
current political situation and general situation, as well as 
the needs of the party for more up-to-date political activity. 
So, in spite of the party's ideological unrecognizability ("let 
us move on, Mr. President, from Busovaca"), Fajdic concludes his 
letter with the request "that you suspend me along with the rest 
from the party, because I truly belong to that part of the HSS." 
<H5>  An Impermissible Gaffe </H5>
  Is the HSS really facing perhaps its crucial and fateful 
moments, is Josko Kovac really right when he says that it is a 
question of "marginalized structures," or have Mador and 
Stojanovic only started an avalanche of malcontents who, as we 
see, have now been joined by Fajdic, but also by Nikica 
Novakovic, the first president of the revived HSS, also 
"dissatisfied with the way the party has been led by Drago 
Stipac, and with methods that have nothing in common with the 
doctrine of the Radic brothers"? We should also mention that the 
Medjimurje chapter of the party also favors reorganization of 
the HSS. On the other hand, however, Drago Stipac does not want 
to debate through the media the "accidental fellow travelers" in 
the party, he obviously wants to work this out behind the doors 
of the party, although the door is already cracked open. The man 
who is said to lead the party in an authoritarian way, who is 
said to be too old to lead the party, and who is said to be 
responsible for the party's ideological wandering, in which the 
valley of the Lasva has frequently been more essential than 
crucial problems in Croatia, and who is said to have committed 
certain impermissible political gaffes (in SRPSKI GLASNIK, 
Stipac talks about a federal Croatia and about the Serbs as a 
constituent nationality), will nevertheless have to respond very 
quickly to the charges which are becoming more and more frequent. 
  Is the party too much submerged in populist and folklore 
rhetoric, has it become a kind of "peasant trade union," are its 
president and the seven vice presidents really "used up," people 
whose traditional HSS values simply have no place in a time that 
is half a century after Macek and the Radic brothers. There are 
many questions, but one thing is still quite certain: The party 
split in the HSS is obvious, the divisions run deeper than it 
seems at first, the only question is how, whether through a 
party convention, with full-scale preparations, or on the other 
hand "behind the scenes," the HSS will get its new victorious 
image. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7817 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Implications of Election Law Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Implications of Election Law Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0217A Zagreb DANAS in Serbo-Croatian 8 Mar 94 pp 16-17 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0217A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb DANAS </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gordan Nuhanovic: "The Will of the Voters Has </F>
Been Deceived"] 
  [Text] Whether the voters will recognize in the most recent 
amendments and supplements to the Law on Election of Deputies to 
the Assembly of the Republic of Croatia a fundamental betrayal 
of their will in the recent elections in August 1992 has at 
least become a question because the most recent legislative 
amendment destroyed the so-called principle of the first 
unelected deputy on the state election slate. Some legal experts 
see in that enactment, which no longer exists, a legal loophole 
that cannot be filled by any authentic legal interpretations, 
but the present article, which was supposed to resolve the 
perplexity, seems to have managed in a very subtle way to ignore 
the will of the voters when it comes to deputies listed on the 
government slates. 
  Because rotation into various positions in the government is 
altogether normal among parliamentary deputies of the incumbent 
party, their alternates are coming to take their places in the 
parliament. While the law is altogether clear about deputies who 
come to the parliament elected as candidates in their own 
electoral units, because every candidate had as his alternate a 
specific individual, deputies elected on the government slates 
were deprived of that unambiguous provision in the law. The 
election law tried to solve the problem of the "alternates" of 
deputies elected on government slates "by personal replacement 
of deputies from the government slate." When Mladen Vedris gave 
up his deputy's seat, his place was taken by Simun Saulic, who 
ran as the 36th candidate on the government slate of the 
Croatian Democratic Union [HDZ]. When he gave up his seat to 
take a post which was incompatible with being a deputy, he was 
replaced by Borislav Beslic, the 37th deputy on the government 
list of the HDZ. Thus, for all practical purposes Beslic 
replaced two deputies, but only one deputy seat was made vacant 
when the duties of deputy ceased to be performed. In exactly the 
same way, Dr. Boris Segota, 40th candidate on the government 
list of the HDZ, is the alternate of Dr. Jurje Njavra, who in 
this legal arrangement should have been replaced by Vesna 
Girardi- Jurkic, M.A., who is now a minister and who because of 
her post in the government also had to take a leave of absence 
from her office of deputy. Boris Segota, whom we mentioned, just 
like Beslic, freed only one deputy's seat when he left the 
office of deputy, in spite of the fact that he was the 
replacement of two deputies. This example taken at random of 
deputies elected on the government slate best illustrates the 
shortcoming of the so-called pairing of deputies and their 
alternates, because it is quite certain that should the reasons 
disappear for the deputy's leave of absence, some of the persons 
mentioned above might simply be put in a position of not being 
able to call upon the law. The practice of "pairing" also ceases 
to have meaning in case of an election success, that is, as was 
the case of the incumbent party, whose government slate obtained 
31 seats in the August election. Each government slate has 60 
candidates for deputy, so that every candidate of the HDZ who 
was elected did not have his personal alternate, because the HDZ 
slate would have had to have 62 candidates for deputy so that 
each would have his alternate. 
  Nevertheless, in the amendments and supplements we have 
mentioned to the Law on Election of Deputies to the Assembly, 
the Committee for Legislation, a well-known working body of the 
Assembly, instead of overcoming this legal loophole, has 
actually "taken a step backward." In the final version, the 
paragraph of Article 1 of the amendments and supplements to the 
Law on Election of Deputies to the Assembly reads: "A deputy 
elected on the state slate who accepts a post incompatible with 
the office of deputy shall be replaced by that unelected 
candidate on the government slate on which the deputy was 
elected, to be determined by the political party whose 
government slate is in question." This seemingly harmless legal 
wording, say some of the legal experts, essentially disavows in 
its last clause ("...to be determined by the political party 
whose government slate is in question") the election slate and 
instead of the "personal replacement" inaugurates a so-called 
intraparty consensus as to appointment of the replacement of 
deputies whose seats have been vacated. Thus, on the basis of 
this legal wording, which has been adopted, the possibility is 
opened de jure, for example, for the incumbent party, to which 
that amendment of the law pertains the most, to promote as 
replacement for a deputy who has taken a government post a 
candidate who on the government slate of the HDZ was, say, 58th, 
while at the same time a large number of candidates ahead of him 
on the state slate would simply be ignored. In the opinion of 
those who have a superb knowledge of election law, that 
amendment, obviously imposed on the Assembly, infringes the 
political will of the electorate. In voting for candidates on 
the government slates, the voters were guided by the order 
presented from one to 60, and in presenting the candidates, the 
party took care to put at the top those individuals it felt 
should be those who would carry the slate. Thus, the sacred will 
of the voters has in a sense been neglected. It is difficult to 
escape the impression that the most recent amendment to the law 
on election of deputies to the House of Representatives is 
actually being used to pay off old intraparty scores in the 
incumbent party, whereby a small group of people is legally 
keeping away from the benches of parliament "undesired" 
alternates, that is, candidates who ran on government slates. 
The very bitter debate that developed over adoption of this 
amendment to the law distinctly indicates how essential this 
relatively unassuming paragraph of the law is to its initiators 
and proponents, a paragraph which along with everything else 
opens up the possibility of manipulating some of the deputies 
and their alternates on the government slate. Leaving it to the 
party to decide who will be a member of parliament makes things 
cloudy in political life and, just like the institution of 
abeyance of the deputy seat, sets a certain precedent concerning 
the parliamentary benches in the House of Representatives. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7818 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_k_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Disputes Among War Volunteers Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Disputes Among War Volunteers Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0217B Zagreb DANAS in Serbo-Croatian 8 Mar 94 pp 17-19 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0217B </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb DANAS </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Edvard Popovic: "Mercep's Knin Brigade"] </F>
  [Text] In its second convention, held in Zagreb on 26 
February of this year, the Association of Croatian Volunteers of 
the Homeland War (UHDDR) ceased to exist in the form it has had 
since its founding on 19 February 1993. It was conceived as an 
association outside and above political parties, and, as its 
founder and first president Zvonimir Trusic spelled it out in 
his introductory address, "as a nongovernmental organization 
that would bring together those who went to war and took their 
status into their own hands without waiting for a call from the 
government. Rejecting the role of the government "from the other 
side of the mirror" and the role of the extended hand of any 
party or group within any party ("the volunteers did not intend 
and will not establish any parallel government...for us the 
CROATIAN STATE is sacred...we have not and will not take into 
our hands anything for which there exists authorized government 
bodies and agencies...we do not allow and will not allow 
ourselves to be taken over by anyone, to be included in any of 
the current political conflicts"). In his introductory address 
to the Association Trusic defined it as a kind of (moral) 
proofreader: "Because of the many bad things happening around us 
now, the Croatian Volunteers are resolutely joining the fight 
against war profiteering, we condemn criminal acts of robbery of 
government property, we demand confiscation of property gained 
through war profiteering and theft." 
<H5>  Threats and Outbursts </H5>
  In order to achieve the stated goals and to define other 
goals that will cover the broadest interests of the membership, 
the Association had to be reorganized and bylaws adopted and a 
new president and members of working bodies elected, which was 
the job to be done in the second convention. The initial 
constructive and ceremonial enthusiasm of the convention, 
however, turned into a verbal gunfight that caused a majority of 
the delegates to leave the Vatroslav Lisinski Auditorium even 
before the vote. An unpleasant impression was left both by the 
uncontrolled outbursts from the speaker's stand and in the 
corridors (there were threats against those gathering 
signatures, Trusic said), and also by the "tussling for the 
microphone and denial of the right to speak to certain 
distinguished members and guests (that right was denied Mile 
"Hawk" Dedakovic, Branko "Younghawke" Borkovic, Brother 
Vjekoslav Lasic, and a hundred others who had something to say). 
A new president was elected (Tomislav Mercep), vice-presidents 
(Juraj Njavro, Dario Kordic, Stjepan Spajic, and Pajo Simic), 
and members of the central committee (Branko Miloloza, Marijan 
Sola, Djuro Brodarac, Dusko Cikan and Kresimir Cop). The by-laws 
were not adopted, concern for the general interests of the 
volunteers remained in the background on this occasion, and, 
judging by the departure of a goodly portion of the those 
present before the convention was over, the first big convention 
of the UHDDR might well have been the last. 
<H5>  "Occupation" of the Association </H5>
  One gets the impression, and this was pointed out by 
Zvonimir 
Trusic, that it broke down over the attempt of one current 
within the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Union] to turn the 
Association into an instrument and use it as a powerful lever 
for promotion of its own political objectives. The whistling, 
the hooting, the dissatisfaction and departure from the hall 
during the speech of Vuco Vukojevic and certain others showed 
that some of the volunteers refuse to allow the interests of the 
Association to be subordinated to the interests of this or that 
political grouping. Although it was said in the HDZ corridors at 
the convention that that group of malcontents were actually 
politically aligned with the HOS [Croatian Defense Force] and 
the Rightists, when mutual accusations like this are made, the 
truth is always somewhere in the middle. But things are not so 
unambiguous, and this stormy convention shows that the conflict 
within the HDZ, postponed at the last convention of the HDZ, 
broke out in the convention of the UHDDR, that is, that the 
faction which withdrew for tactical reasons in the HDZ 
convention (as it itself put it at the time) attempted to 
'occupy' the Association of Volunteers as a springboard for 
future political showdowns. SLAVONSKI OBZOR of Vinkovci confirms 
that these are not mere empty speculations by recalling 
withdrawal of the nomination of Branimir Glavas, Vladimir Seks 
and Tomislav Mercep at the HDZ convention referred to. Recalling 
as well the words of Tomislav Mercep, who explained his own 
withdrawal and the withdrawal of most of the right wing of the 
party in terms of a "desire to once again take a step out of 
good will, but it will not last beyond 1 April 1994." that was 
the deadline given the president of the state and HDZ, it is 
said, to "do what he has promised the party and the people." 
<H5>  Respected and Armed </H5>
  Has that current, then, chosen this association of Croatian 
volunteers for its (possible) backup base? If so, why? there are 
several reasons for this choice. The attitude of most of the 
Croatian public toward the UHDDR is full of respect, emotional, 
often altogether uncritical, which is precisely why the 
Association was a prefect shield for promoting political 
interests of any option or party provided they could swallow it 
up. The job of the current of the HDZ, it is assumed, would be 
easier because Mercep, one of its fair-haired boys, enjoys a 
passable reputation and has the support of a large number of 
members of the UHDDR. What is more, the UHDDR, which has about 
6000 registered members, in spite of certain organizational 
deficiencies, is a compact entity bound by solid ties of 
solidarity in wartime and alleged political extremism. And 
something else, a sizeable portion of the members of the UHDDR 
who remained outside the Croatian armed units, whether the army 
of the police, are armed and represent an experienced military 
force that must command respect. 
  Something of the kind was first stated in public by Tomislav 
Mercep when he was a guest on the program of Croatian Radio-TV 
"Latin Writing." He mentioned the Knin Brigade, which numbers 
6,500 armed fighting men, but he did not go into the details. 
Toward the end of last year, we were told by Gen Martin Spegelj, 
at the convention of Croatian Veterans of the Homeland War 
(HVDR) in Kutina a representative of the Kutina chapter of the 
UHDDR welcomed establishment of the sister organization, but 
declined the possibility of collective membership of the UHDDR 
in the HVDR, justifying this in terms of the fact that a brigade 
was just then being formed to be commanded by Mercep, and all of 
this supposedly with the consent and knowledge of a high 
official of the defense ministry, who will arm the brigade and 
fully equip it. 
<H5>  Reason Prevailed </H5>
  Be that as it may, the emotional outbursts (Mercep, Sosic), 
politicized to the extreme on certain occasions (Vukojevic), 
were more suitable to political gatherings in which the 
electorate is mobilized than to meetings whose job is to resolve 
very serious problems like the problems of the Croatian 
Volunteers. There is evidence that reason nevertheless prevailed 
in the end in the speeches of volunteers who declined the 
possibility of politicizing the association (a good example of 
this is the speech by a volunteer from Ogulin) and pointed to 
current problems, beginning with the "endemic" problems of the 
volunteers all the way to the general problems like war 
profiteering or the attempt to establish a parallel army and 
government. 
  The convention of volunteers fell apart at the end. The 
calculation that the volunteers would serve as a stick that 
could be used in the postponed showdown within the HDZ proved 
rather hollow. The volunteers let those who counted on their 
"political emotions" and their "extremism" know quite clearly 
that their emotions are reserved for the Croatian state and 
Croatian interests, and their "extremism" is directed 
exclusively against the occupier and cannot be used for internal 
showdowns between Croats. 
  In an interview with SLOBODNA DALMACIJA Tomislav Mercep, the 
new president of the UHDDR, took a sporting view of the thing: 
he said that the convention was right and proper and it is the 
right those who lost to be angry. Zvonimir Trusic, former 
president, thinks quite differently and is announcing 
establishment of a new association. The best comment on the 
meeting came from those who left the hall before the end of an 
event which was supposed to be their convention, but turned into 
a political game and verbal exhibition by those who are too 
often inclined to privatize the interests of Croatia as a whole. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7819 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_k_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Camp for Non-Croats Near Zagreb </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Camp for Non-Croats Near Zagreb </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0223A Belgrade POLITIKA in Serbo-Croatian 9 Mar 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0223A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade POLITIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Arsenic: "Revelation From Letter to Split's </F>
FERAL TRIBUN: Genuine Camp for Non-Croats Near Zagreb"] 
  [Text] The "foreigner reception center" in Dugo Selo 
is actually a classic camp where non-Croat citizens are taken to 
await deportation under inhumane conditions, without any court 
decision, in makeshift shacks, despite the fact that they have 
had a regular residence and houses in Croatia for as long as 
several decades. 
  Zagreb, 8 Mar--A letter that arrived recently at the 
editorial office of FERAL TRIBUN in Split, one of the rare 
independent newspapers in present-day Croatia, has raised quite 
a stir among the local public, because it provided first-hand 
confirmation that there exists a genuine concentration camp in 
this republic. 
  The facility in question is the foreigner reception center 
in 
Dugo Selo, near Zagreb, which is on the level of the very worst 
camps in terms of its organization and treatment of detainees. 
<H5>  Letter From Camp Inmate </H5>
  Those citizens of the Republic of Croatia [RH] who were not 
issued certificates of citizenship and whose residence permits 
were not extended are taken to this camp in handcuffs. They 
include many people who have spent several decades in Croatia 
and have property and permanent addresses there. Naturally, they 
are all "non-Croats," because as we know--under the current 
law--all Croats are regarded as citizens of the Republic of 
Croatia, regardless of where they are and where they were born. 
  The letter from an inmate at the aforementioned "center" 
states the following, among other things: "We are at the 
foreigner reception center in Dugo Selo (across the road from 
the `Gorica' tableware factory, middle shack). These dwellings 
are that in name only, and I can tell you completely reliably 
that this is a classic camp, that we did not even know that such 
things existed in this state, and that we are shocked at the 
very knowledge of their existence." 
  The letter goes on to say that the number of prisoners 
varies 
from 15 to 25 people, mostly citizens of the RH, many of whom 
have lived in Croatia for 10, 20, or even 30 years, and 
deportations are carried out over a period of 10 to 20 days: 
Muslims rounded up in Zagreb are taken to Tomislavgrad for 
exchange, Albanians from Kosovo and Macedonia are taken to 
Rijeka to be placed on a ship for Durres, and so forth. 
  Many people spend up to several months under literally 
inhumane conditions (there are no bed linens, the blankets are 
never changed, the prisoners are not given soap or towels, and 
they do not change their clothes the whole time they are at the 
"center"), and there are some who are there--without changing 
their bed sheets and clothes--for six to seven months. Hygiene 
is nonexistent, nor is there any health care provided, so that 
scabies, lice, and so on are ordinary occurrences. In a 24-hour 
day, only one hour is spent outside--under guard--and all the 
rest of the time is spent in a closed shack encircled by wire, 
with makeshift windows. 
  The Croatian Helsinki Committee [HHO] (chaired by Ivan 
Zvonimir Cicak) sent its team to take a look at what is going on 
there, and they confirmed everything that the letter said. 
Moreover, besides the "classic" camp lodgings, the prisoners 
have undergone corresponding treatment, and have often been 
mistreated; the atmosphere in which this has taken place is 
illustrated by their testimony to the Helsinki Commission, when 
they said that one night two members of the HV [Croatian Armed 
Forces] were turned loose among them, who asked the familiar 
question before they had even made it in the door: "Who here is 
a Serb?" 
  It is interesting that none of the government officials 
approached by the HHO knew about the existence of this camp in 
Dugo Selo. The chairman of the Assembly Human Rights Committee, 
Ljubomir Antic, the chief of staff of the minister of labor and 
social welfare, Ivan Ujakovic, and the minister of health, Dr. 
Andrija Hebrang, were amazed that such a thing exists. 
  Under the current Law on Movement and Residence by 
Foreigners 
(Article 68), shelters for foreigners are set up and looked 
after by the Ministries of Health and Labor, but no one at the 
ministries in question had any knowledge of this "center." It is 
maintained by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
<H5>  Even Father of First Croatian Pilot Is in Camp </H5>
  The type of people encountered by the HHO delegation headed 
by I.Z. Cicak in the fenced-off shack is indicated by several 
examples: Zoran Petrovic was born in Kraljevo, but has lived in 
Zagreb for a number of years, with a regular residence and 
apartment. He was among the first athletes to appear under the 
Croatian flag at a competition in Germany, but that did not help 
him to obtain a certificate of citizenship or an extension of 
his residence permit. He has not been punished, but he has been 
at the "center" for 103 days now. He was transported by plane to 
Skopje in handcuffs, but the Macedonian authorities refused to 
accept him. A member of the Croatian Armed Forces has already 
moved into his apartment at Lj. Posavski Street 19, and 
Zoran--who is neither guilty nor to blame for everything that he 
is undergoing here--began a hunger strike on 31 December. No one 
was interested. 
  Edib Sejfovic, born in Novi Pazar, was a major in the JNA 
[Yugoslav People's Army], but was "dismissed" at his own 
request. He has lived in Croatia since 1967, he lived in 
Vinkovci for 26 years, and his wife is a Croat and the mother of 
"the first Croatian pilot of Bukusic, who died in Vukovar." He 
has been imprisoned in the camp for four months now. 
  Also here is Ramzi Mahmud from Iraq, who has lived in 
Karlovac for the past 15 years. Since the beginning of the war, 
he has spent 15 months in the Croatian Armed Forces. 
  All of these people are being held at this camp--as the HHO 
delegation confirmed--without any decision by a competent court. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7820 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Adbic Sets Condition for Joining Federation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Adbic Sets Condition for Joining Federation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604154594 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1222 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0604154594 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 6 (TANJUG) -- The Moslem Autonomous 
Province of Western Bosnia (APWB) would join the Moslem-Croat 
federation in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
only if the Bosnian Serb republic (R.S.) joined it, APWB 
President Fikret Abdic has said. 
  Abdic told the Yugoslav magazine SVET that he welcomed every 
step towards a lasting peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina and that the 
Washington Moslem-Croat agreement was positive on condition it 
was not another Moslem-Croat coalition against the Serb people. 
  He said the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina would not stop until 
all three warring sides -- Moslems, Serbs and Croats -- were 
brought to the negotiating table to reach an agreement on just 
and lasting peace. 
  Abdic set out Izetbegovic was to blame for the two-year 
bloodshed in Bosnia-Herzegovina, although the world had without 
any proof largely demonized the Serb people. 
  Izetbegovic is not interested in peace and his 
fundamentalist 
policy is aimed solely at creating an Islamic state in the 
Balkans, Abdic set out and said his departure from the political 
stage would be a relief to everyone, most of all Moslems, said 
Abdic. 
  Abdic stated that his policy was mainly aimed at achieving 
peace. He said that the APWB and the R.S., the state of Bosnian 
Serbs, had signed an agreement on the cessation of hostilities 
and establishing of cooperation in the fields of economy, 
culture and sport. 
  The APWB had also signed an agreement on cooperation with 
the 
republic of Serb Krajina (R.S.K.) 
  The R.S.K. was proclaimed in 1991 on the ethnic and 
historical territories in the former Yugoslav republic of 
Croatia in response to Croatia's forcible secession from the 
former Yugoslav federation. 
  Abdic had also signed with the state of Bosnian Croats -- 
Herceg-Bosna, an agreement of the same content. 
  According to the Moslem-controlled Sarajevo Radio, some 500 
Moslems were killed and over 2,000 were wounded so far in the 
clashes between Izetbegovic's and Abdic's over the past six 
months. 
  A moderate Moslem politician, Abdic, opposes the belligerent 
policy of fundamentalist Moslem leader Alija Izetbegovic and has 
proclaimed the Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia (APWB) last 
September. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7821 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslim, Bosnian Croat Leaders View Federation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslim, Bosnian Croat Leaders View Federation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604145094 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1300 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604145094 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Top officials of the governments of the 
Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna led by Prime Minister Jadranko 
Prlic and of Bosnia-Herzegovina led by Deputy Prime Minister 
Edib Bukvic discussed the implementation of the Washington 
agreement and documents regarding the setting up of the 
federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina in Mostar. Zdenko Vranjes 
reporting from Mostar: 
  [Vranjes] How to coordinate regulations of the government of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the government of the Croat republic of 
Herceg-Bosna which are still in force in the interim period 
until a final solution on the future of Bosnia-Herzegovina is 
reached and all federal bodies are established and regulations 
adopted. This and other tasks stemming from the documents on the 
setting up of the federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina were 
discussed by representatives of the two governments, or two 
administrations as they are defined in the constitution of the 
federation. 
  A concrete result of their talks is the setting up of joint 
expert teams to deal with several aspects of the reconstruction 
project. A team of experts who are to coordinate financial and 
customs systems which are in force on the territories of the two 
governments has also been set up. They also spoke about the 
reconstruction of roads and railways, the Sarajevo-Ploce railway 
line in particular, telecommunications, and the communal 
infrastructure on the territory of Mostar. 
  Representatives of the Bosnia-Herzegovina government and the 
government of the Croat republic of Herzeg-Bosna have also 
agreed joint tasks in the resolution of the problem of refugees 
and displaced persons as regards their return, in which, as they 
concluded, it will be necessary to obtain wider support from 
international organizations. They also spoke about media, 
particularly about the responsibility of the media on both sides 
for the strengthening of peace and the restoration of trust 
between the Croat and Bosniak nations. They have also agreed 
meetings between ministers of the two governments which are to 
take place soon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7822 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDA: Izetbegovic Should Be Federation President </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDA: Izetbegovic Should Be Federation President </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504134794 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0504134794 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Today, the first session of the Executive 
Committee of the Party of Democratic Action [SDA] was held after 
its number was filled at the last convention of the party on 25 
and 26 March. 
  The implementation of the Constitution of the Federation of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina -- adopted at the recent session of the 
Constituent Assembly of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina -- 
was discussed, inter alia, at the session. It was concluded 
that Mr. Alija Izetbegovic should be incorporated into the 
institution of the presidency of the future federation, and he 
would have the first presidential mandate. The SDA Executive 
Committee believes that there are very significant reasons -- 
arising from political and moral interests of the Bosniak Muslim 
people -- that demand such a solution. Regional and communal 
committees of the SDA in Bosnia-Herzegovina will be informed 
about this decision. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7823 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Civilian Areas Shelled </H4>

<F P=102> AU0604144694 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604144694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Enes Murtovic from Gorazde] </F>
  [Text] The siren sounding general danger (?shows) that 
there is no peace in Gorazde again today. The chetniks [words 
indistinct] are shelling civilian areas and the defense lines. 
The highest caliber shells are again destroying the Gorazde 
region that borders Foca, Cajnice, and Rogatica. In the course 
of the day, several howitzer shells landed on the town. Even 
though the residents of Gorazde are in shelters all the time, 
the casualty figures are nevertheless [passage indistinct] (?41) 
women and old men. [words indistinct] arrival of General 
Michael Rose, commander of the UN forces in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
separated the chetniks from their (?deadly) weapons for only a 
moment. As we send this report, explosions are once again being 
heard in the town's suburbs. The chetniks are also attacking 
the town itself. 
  The [word indistinct] and the suffering of the population in 
the protected zone of Gorazde is continuing before the eyes of 
the international community, which again is not taking [word 
indistinct] measures to stop the latest offensive by the 
chetniks. 
  This is Enes Murtovic reporting for Radio and Television 
Bosnia- Herzegovina from the Press Center of the Gorazde region. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7824 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Mladic on Talks With Rose </H4>

<F P=102> LD0604151194 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1351 GMT 6 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604151194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 6 Apr (TANJUG) -- The commander of the 
main headquarters of the Srpska republic army, general Ratko 
Mladic, said today that "the Muslims' mad venture in the Gorazde 
area has failed". 
  "I hope that they have learned a lesson," Mladic said. 
Explaining the talks today with General Michael Rose, the 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] commander for former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Mladic stressed in a statement for TANJUG 
that an agreement had been reached to send some military 
observers to Gorazde. 
  We suggested to Rose that he organize a meeting of the 
warring sides because we have nothing to discuss with them, 
either about Gorazde or about anything else. We are not at war 
with UNPROFOR, but we are open to discussion on all issues, 
including the discussion of Gorazde with the Muslim side, with 
UNPROFOR's mediation, general Mladic said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7825 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Muslim Offensive Checked' </H4>

<F P=102> LD0604163294 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1605 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0604163294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zvornik, April 6 (TANJUG) -- An all-out Moslem 
offensive on the Bosnian Serb republic goes on, but the Bosnian 
Serb army has checked Moslem onslaughts along all directions, 
Major-General Milan Gvero, assistant supreme commander of the 
Bosnian Serb army, said on Wednesday. 
  The most intensive Moslem offensive actions are still in the 
Gorazde area, a Moslem enclave in eastern Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Gen. Gvero told TANJUG. 
  Gen. Gvero believes that, after a series of military 
defeats, 
the Moslem side will realize that the problem of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina can only be resolved through negotiations, to 
the end of which the Serb side has been making continued efforts. 
  Bosnian Serb army sources said that Serb localities and 
Bosnian Serb army positions in the Sava valley, northern Bosnia, 
have been attacked from mortars and other weapons along a number 
of directions, while Brcko came under multiple rocket-launcher 
fire. 
  In northern Bosnia, Moslem attacks continue on Bosnian Serb 
army positions and Serb localities in Mt. Ozren and Vlasic, the 
Doboj area, and so do offensive actions from the broader area of 
Orasje, a town in northern Bosnia. 
  Moslem attacks from the direction of Prus on Serb defence 
lines in the Vrbas valley, central Bosnia, have been intensive, 
while fighting in the direction of the Kupres plateau and Bihac 
in western Bosnia has resumed. 
  In Sarajevo, Moslem provocations from infantry weapons on 
the 
Serb-populated sections of the city, do not cease. 
  The Bosnian Serb army is successfully preventing frequent 
attempts of infiltration of Moslem terrorist-commando groups 
into the the Serb forces' rear, Gen. Gvero said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7826 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    UN Observers Arrive </H4>

<F P=102> AU0704101894 Paris AFP in English 0928 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704101894 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, April 7 (AFP) -- A team of 11 UN 
observers and liaison officers arrived in the eastern Bosnian 
Moslem enclave of Gorazde Thursday, a United Nations spokesman 
said. 
  UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) spokesman Major Rob Annink 
said eight armed UNPROFOR officers and three unarmed military 
observers had reached the enclave, where more than 60 people are 
reported to have died since a Bosnian Serb offensive began 10 
days ago. 
  The team, which set out from Sarajevo, was stopped by Serb 
forces at Rogatica, around 40 kilometres (25 miles) from 
Gorazde, the spokesman said. 
  They were held up for several hours for administrative 
formalities despite having received all necessary authorisation, 
Annink said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7827 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    UN: `Gorazde No Longer Under Attack' </H4>

<F P=102> AU0604165794 Paris AFP in English 1637 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604165794 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, April 6 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serbs 
besieging the Moslem enclave of Gorazde in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
stopped their shelling late Wednesday [6 April], a UN spokesman 
said Wednesday. 
  "Gorazde is no longer under attack since 1800 local time," 
the spokesman, Joe Sills said. 
  Sills said that the UN representative in Bosnia Yasushi 
Akashi had received assurance from the Bosnian Serbs that the 
attacks would not resume. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7828 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Attacks `Abated Somewhat' </H4>

<F P=102> AU0704091994 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704091994 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 0800 GMT on 7 April carries in its 
regular 8-minute newscast two reports on the current situation 
in Gorazde and Bihac. 
  Gorazde correspondent Enes Musovic reports that "after 
yesterday's extremely dramatic day, the aggressor's artillery 
fire and infantry attacks abated somewhat overnight. However, 
information from the farthest points of Gorazde's outskirts 
confirms that fierce fighting for the still free Gorazde is yet 
to come. The chetniks have been regrouping their forces all 
night in the areas of Peljin, Potkozara, Priselje, Trebinjaca, 
Postaja, and Rogatica. The aggressor is continuously bringing 
in fresh manpower and deadly weaponry. Over 350 mortars and 
howitzers, 46 tanks, and a supporting tank battalion already 
encircle Gorazde, while the aggressor, undisturbed, in full view 
of the international community, continues to kill and torture 
the civilian population in Gorazde, destroy residential and 
industrial areas, torch (?schools), destroy bridges." 
  Reporting from Bihac, correspondent Mirza Sadikovic says 
that 
"today marks the second month of the Serbian aggressor's 
fiercest offensive at the Bihac Commune. The offensive attacks, 
which began last night, continue this morning. Karadzic's 
terrorists used howitzers and tanks to shell Bihac [words 
indistinct]. They also intensified their artillery attacks at 
the defense lines on Grabez and the Grmusko-Srbljanski plateau." 
  "The attacks of the paramilitary forces of the so-called 
Kladusa autonomy at the outskirts of Cazin have been going on 
all night and have continued this morning. The autonomists are 
attacking Hadzici and the wider areas of (?Krivaja) and 
(?Tajici) with 60-mm and 80-mm mortars, armor-piercing weapons, 
and antiaircraft weapons, while infantry provocations have been 
reported on all the other demarcation lines. It is evident that 
the chetniks and the autonomists continue to coordinate their 
attacks [words indistinct] at the wider area of (?Osmaka) on the 
Buzim part of the front." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7829 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Turnabout' in Battle </H4>

<F P=102> AU0604165894 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604165894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jelena Dabarcic from Gorazde region] </F>
  [Text] A turnabout took place on the section of the 
battlefields between Gorazde, Cajnice, and Foca yesterday. 
Serbian fighters who managed to break up the strong Muslim 
offensive from Gorazde, despite cold weather today continued 
expelling Muslim soldiers from the remaining bunkers and 
strongholds in the direction of Viskovici and Gorazde. A 
veritable chaos is reigning in the units of the so-called Army 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina in this region and some mutual showdowns 
have taken place among them, that is, between those people who 
want to cross the Drina from its right bank to the left bank and 
the police forces who are making this impossible. Fighters from 
the units of the army of the Srpska republic are very carefully 
clearing the minefields that the Muslims have set everywhere. 
  Major Andjelko Milicevic from the Command of the Joint 
Serbian Forces said this morning that Serbian fighters, starting 
from the directions of (Faljika) and Trebinjaca yesterday 
neutralized all enemy's firing positions without having suffered 
any losses themselves and took control over some typically 
Serbian places that were occupied by Islamic fanatics. The 
Serbian village of (Kirin), only half a kilometer away from 
Viskovici, was thereby liberated. 
  The Command of the Joint Serbian Forces points out that the 
Muslim Army has suffered great losses, thereby denying Muslim 
[Sarajevo] radio reports that there were casualties among 
civilians. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7830 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Battle for Gorazde Continuing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Battle for Gorazde Continuing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    16 Serbs Killed </H4>

<F P=102> LD0604214294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604214294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Enes Musovic from the Gorazde Press Center for </F>
Bosnia-Herzegovina Radio-Television] 
  [Text] Chetniks today continued their bloody offensive 
against Gorazde unhindered and with their ferocity unabated. 
They are getting closer and closer to the center of the town. 
The chetniks are destroying and torching everything in their 
path along the road which they had previously showered with 
shells. They are destroying house after house in Vitkovici, 
Baljci, and Zupnici. A stream of refugees is pouring in the town 
itself and its residents do not know where to go or what to do. 
Many people, mostly women, children, and the elderly have 
remained among the ruins, on the charred remains of their homes 
under the chetnik boot, which is blind to everything but a 
desire to kill and conquer. 
  They launched their most ferocious offensive using tanks and 
other weapons against (?Bilin). From one of their notorious 
strongholds -- Cajnice Kozara -- they are trying to organize a 
tank and infantry breakthrough toward Donja Potkozara and 
Zupcici in order to further tighten the ring around the town 
center. 
  Members of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army, under the command of 
the eastern Bosnian operational zone and units of the Gorazde 
MUP [Ministry of Interior], are putting up a remarkable 
resistance to the aggressor. Even those with light injuries -- 
having received first aid -- are returning of their own free 
will to help their fellow fighters in order to save the free 
Gorazde territory. 
  Mature and younger women are willingly joining our army 
units. Their message is that they will defend this free 
territory to the last. The latest reports, which we received 
just before this bulletin from the furthest locations on the 
front -- Dobrijevici, Cador, and (?Vrazalici) -- say that the 
situation here has been infernal both in early evening and 
throughout the day. On several occasions the chetniks launched 
combined artillery-infantry attacks in an attempt to break 
through the defense line, but Gorazde's courageous defenders 
repelled all attacks inflicting heavy losses on the enemy. 
  Heavy fighting was today also reported on the front between 
Kopaci and Ustipraca, where Bosnia-Herzegovina Army fighters 
repelled the aggressor's attacks in an efficient action. 
  This afternoon, chetniks attempted an infantry breakthrough 
toward Uhotici Brdo, but were taught a real lesson when our 
defenders responded with efficiency, putting 16 chetniks out of 
action and wounding a large number of them. 
  Gorazde citizens were today awaiting General Rose's arrival 
as a ray of hope and salvation, but the conscience of mankind 
has once again failed the test and Gorazde is once again dying 
alone. 
  Rijad Rasic, the president of the region's assembly, and 
Gorazde Mayor Ismet Briga, today sent an open letter to the U.S. 
President, NATO, the chairman of the UN Security Council, the UN 
secretary general, the president of the ICO [Islamic Conference 
Organization], the EU [European Union], the president of France, 
the prime minister of Great Britain, and all world media. 
  The letter reads: Dear gentlemen, you who know about the 
difficult and dramatic situation in Gorazde caused by the 
several- day-long offensive against the town by the Serb and 
Montenegrin aggressors, you have allowed a high-ranking UNPROFOR 
[UN Protection Forces] officer, General Michael Rose, and the 
aggressor's side to play with the fate of thousands of people. 
You denied us the right to self-defense two years ago when you 
introduced the arms embargo, and your officers -- in open 
cooperation with the aggressor's side -- are now denying us the 
right to live. 
  While the (?surroundings) and the valley of Gorazde are in 
flames, and shells are destroying the town, high-ranking 
UNPROFOR officer, Gen. Michael Rose, is using cheap tricks to 
avoid visiting Gorazde, thereby deliberately making it possible 
for the aggressor to destroy what has not been destroyed yet and 
to kill who has not been killed. Gen. Michael Rose's failure to 
come here has not come as a great surprise to the Gorazde 
residents. We are now certain about something we guessed at 
before: The international community has taken part in the plot 
against this nation only because it has its own culture, its own 
past, and its own religion different from the religion of those 
who are killing us and those who have the moral and legal 
obligation -- assumed by international conventions --- to help 
us. 
  You, who promised a just peace to the protected zone of 
Gorazde, are now enabling the aggressor to kill innocent 
civilians every day, to destroy the town, the industrial 
infrastructure, and the homes of those who have survived the two 
years of trauma caused by the aggressor's shells. 
  The Gorazde residents have sent appeals to the international 
community on several occasions, asking it to halt (?repeated) 
massacres in the valley of the Drina River. Now we can see and 
feel that it was all in vain. This is why we are addressing you 
for the last time, warning you that our suffering will lie on 
your conscience. Dear gentlemen, we will no longer remind you 
of your resolutions referring to the UN Protected Area of 
Gorazde. Let the future generations judge your attitude, and 
everything you had to do but failed to do for this nation. 
  This is stated in an open letter by Gorazde Assembly 
President Rijad Rasic and Gorazde Mayor Ismet Briga. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7831 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb-Muslim, Inter-Muslim Fighting Resumes </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb-Muslim, Inter-Muslim Fighting Resumes </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604223394 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2200 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604223394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The 59th day of the Serb aggressor's offensive on 
the Bihac region was marked by fresh attacks on civilian 
targets, industrial areas, and defense lines. The industrial 
area in Bihac was hit by a number of artillery shells and one 
woman was killed. The Serb aggressor shelled defense lines on 
Mount Grabez and the Grmusa-Srbljani plateau throughout the day. 
However, the soldiers of our army destroyed yet another 
aggressor tank in an energetic counterattack. 
  Members of the paramilitary units of the so-called Kladusa 
Autonomy [Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia -- declared by 
Fikret Abdic] used mortars to shell the Cazin municipality [area 
loyal to Izetbegovic]. One person was killed and another one 
seriously wounded. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7832 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karadzic Says Serbs May Concede Some Territory </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karadzic Says Serbs May Concede Some Territory </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604163194 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604163194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marica Lalovic from Pale] </F>
  [Text] Radovan Karadzic, president of the Srpska republic, 
held talks with Yasushi Akashi, special envoy to the UN 
secretary general, in Pale today. Akashi said afterwards that 
the talks mainly focused on the situation in Gorazde and the 
corridor leading toward the town. He expressed the hope that 
the United Nations Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] will visit the 
town soon in order to acquaint themselves with the real 
situation in the field and the (?possible) level of damage that 
was caused in the most recent battles. At the same time, he 
said that UNPROFOR will strive to do everything with a view to 
establishing a cease-fire [words indistinct] of the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. For a complete and whole peace in this 
region, the agreement between the Croats and the Muslims will 
not suffice. The third -- Serbian side -- must be included with 
a view to establishing a lasting peace and a lasting solution. 
On the basis of an agreement of all three sides, one should 
build peace and demilitarization of the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Akashi said. 
  Radovan Karadzic pointed out that Gorazde and the territory 
surrounding it is only a small part of the front and the great 
Muslim offensive that is taking place on all sections of the 
line of separation with the Serbian forces. The Serbian side 
offered to the Muslims peace and to have the battles stopped on 
all sections of the battlefield, as one cannot solve the 
conflict partially -- that is, where it suits the Muslims. We 
are ready, Dr. Karadzic said, to make it possible for military 
observers to enter Gorazde so they can see for themselves that 
the town is not endangered and that battles are waged only where 
Muslims attacked the Serbian forces. At the same time, he 
stressed that the Serbian side does not want any more 
territories, that it is ready to concede certain percentages of 
what it currently has under control, and one should believe the 
Serbs when they say that offensives and war are not in their 
interest. However, if the Muslims attack, they run the risk of 
gambling with their own territory and their lives. They may 
lose much more than they could win with peace, Dr. Karadzic 
said. At the same time, he demanded that the international 
community not help the Muslims feel secure in regions where they 
do not have a military advantage or to help them where the Serbs 
have a military advantage so that they may again feel more 
secure there. 
  Therefore, one needs an equal treatment and warning sign to 
the Muslims that through gambling and war, they could lose a 
lot. When such large-scale battles are being waged, percentages 
do not mean anything, Karadzic said, and reiterated that we are 
ready to give a part of the territory, but only in exchange for 
a lasting peace. He demanded that members of the peace forces 
pay attention to the possibility of survival of the Muslim-Croat 
federation and the Serbian entity on these regions. The Serbian 
side has nothing against this federation, as long as it is not 
directed against them. We have our own territory; we have our 
republic, which is a reality, and we should be allowed to 
survive. With time, these two states -- the Srpska republic and 
the Muslim-Croatian federation -- will establish some kind of 
relations to the extent that the peoples would want and would 
allow. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7833 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karadzic Order on Investigating Prijedor </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karadzic Order on Investigating Prijedor </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0304182294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0304182294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 3 Apr (TANJUG) -- President of the Srpska 
republic [RS] Radovan Karadzic today issued an order to all 
bodies of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, military security 
bodies, and control points in the RS to urgently investigate the 
crimes in Prijedor and to secure full safety and freedom of 
movement of personnel of the International Committee of the Red 
Cross [ICRC]. 
  The order, forwarded to TANJUG, says: 
  In keeping with our obligations to international 
humanitarian 
law I order the following: 
  To take all necessary measures to investigate crimes 
committed in the Srpska republic, particularly in Prijedor; 
  To take all other actions needed to suppress extremism and 
secure the safety of members of national minorities who wish to 
stay in our republic; 
  To remove all administrative obstacles to free movement of 
civilians who wish to leave in an operation organized by the 
ICRC; 
  To secure police escort for all ICRC convoys, especially in 
the Prijedor area; 
  All our bodies have the duty to provide full safety for ICRC 
personnel and civilians who decide to leave the RS under ICRC 
protection. Any objections to the conduct of the ICRC personnel 
must not be used as a pretext to threaten their safety. The 
office of the president of the republic is to be informed about 
any objections to the ICRC's conduct; 
  To secure free passage across the Srpska republic borders to 
all ICRC convoys announced in advance and to exercise routine 
control; 
  Failure to comply or fully to comply with the order entails 
the highest degree of accountability. 
  A copy of the order will be forwarded to the ICRC to be used 
at checkpoints to avoid any possible misunderstandings. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7834 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mostar Refugees To Be Repatriated by Croatia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mostar Refugees To Be Repatriated by Croatia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604201394 Paris AFP in English 1954 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604201394 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, April 6 (AFP) -- Around 15,000 people who 
fled fighting in Mostar, south Bosnia, are to return home from 
refugee camps in Croatia, according to a Croatian Refugee Office 
statement issued Wednesday [6 April]. 
  Croat authorities decided on Tuesday to withdraw refugee 
status from those concerned, who were forced to flee fighting 
between Moslems and Croats in the Mostar region in spring 1993. 
  The authorities said hostilities in the region between the 
two sides had ceased some time ago. 
  The statement said the repatriation followed "a growing 
number of requests from people from Mostar" and did not involve 
sending back "invalids, sick people and all those whose houses 
or apartments have been destroyed." 
  According to the statement, the refugees will return home 
gradually and with the full collaboration of the local 
authorities in Mostar. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7835 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Women Blocking French UN Troops </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Women Blocking French UN Troops </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604154194 Paris AFP in English 1514 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604154194 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, April 6 (AFP) -- A convoy of French UN 
peacekeepers has been held up for a week by around 100 Serb 
women in a village near Sarajevo, a spokesman for UN Protection 
Forces [UNPROFOR] said here Wednesday [6 April]. 
  The women who have blocked 34 military staff and 16 army 
vehicles since March 31 in the village of Hadzici are demanding 
the release of their husbands, held captive by mainly Moslem 
Bosnian government troops. 
  The convoy from the French Second Battalion was travelling 
from Sarajevo to Split when it was held up in Hadzici, 20 
kilometers (12 miles) west of the Bosnian capital. 
  "They are in constant contact with their unit, either in 
person or by radio, the situation is very calm and they are not 
at risk," Lieutenant Colonel Richard Pernod, spokesman for 
UNPROFOR in Sarajevo, told AFP. 
  Top-level negotiations to free the convoy were continuing 
Wednesday after a week of fruitless talks. 
  UNPROFOR civil affairs chief for former Yugoslavia Sergio 
Vieira de Mello tried to find a breakthrough Tuesday when he met 
Nikola Koljevic, deputy leader of the Bosnian Serbs, in the Serb 
headquarters at Pale near Sarajevo. 
  But Koljevic said the Pale authorities had no real control 
over Serbs in Hadzici, UNPROFOR spokesman Rob Annink said 
Wednesday, adding that Mello believed the convoy would be 
released soon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7836 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Data on Bosnian Serb Army </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Data on Bosnian Serb Army </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0219A Ljubljana DNEVNIK in Slovene 8 Mar 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0219A </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana DNEVNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zeljko Katancic: "Accumulated (Obsolete) </F>
Equipment"] 
  [Text] According to published data, the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia [FRY] has spent half a billion dollars 
for the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina; the guerrilla battalions, of 
which they are reportedly 26, are the most dangerous to the 
peacekeeping forces' units. 
  In a certain sense, the present situation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina could also be considered as a cat playing 
with a mouse. The Serbs already thought that with Russian 
backing they had escaped the West's excessively severe pressure, 
but they were obviously mistaken. By shooting down four 
aircraft, the West proved that it was nevertheless serious about 
it, and consequently what the Bosnian Serbs are doing now is 
perhaps extremely risky. Obviously the spokesman for the 
international peacekeeping forces in Sarajevo did not say too 
loudly that the Serbs had renewed their attacks within the 
20-kilometer protected zone around Sarajevo and were also using 
heavy weapons in doing so. The guarantee by General Rose that 
trucks would take humanitarian aid throughout Bosnia without 
asking anyone at all for permission also had its purpose. 
Perhaps something even worse than the downing of the four 
aircraft may really happen during the coming days. 
  It will therefore not be superfluous to know what the NATO 
aircraft and the international peacekeeping forces' infantry 
will have to deal with if they do decide to punish those who are 
challenging them too much. The loudest and most dangerous among 
them are the Bosnian Serbs, who are also the best armed. 
  Western intelligence services have surely collected quite 
solid data on the positions that they would have to destroy. 
There are somewhat fewer than 3,000 such targets on the Bosnian 
Serbs' side. They include 460 tanks, 300 armored personnel 
carriers, 50 self-propelled howitzers and 30 self-propelled 
cannons, 77 multiple rocket launchers for Plamen missiles, six 
missile launchers for the more powerful Orkan missiles, and 10 
missile launchers for the already known Luna missiles, of which 
one missile launcher is near Sarajevo. 
  In about 180 barracks and military posts, there are 
approximately 80,000 military conscripts, many of whom were only 
recently called up. Approximately 50,000 of them are soldiers 
from the permanent forces of the army of the self-styled Srpska 
republic. 
  The Serbian air defense has old short-range, medium-range, 
and long-range missiles and artillery systems. Western military 
experts are quite familiar with them, and consequently it will 
not be difficult for their pilots and infantry to find and 
destroy them. According to some information, there are supposed 
to be 67 positions with the Dvina and Neva missiles, better 
known by the Western designators SAM-2 and SAM-3, and Cub 
missiles, or SAM-6 according to their Western designator. There 
is probably a missile launcher with three missiles at each 
position. 
  Also quite probable is the fact that every year about 80,000 
fresh conscripts from the Serbian-Montenegrin army and its 
reservists complete at least part of their military service, if 
not all of it, as reserves in the army of the Srpska republic. 
  The Serbian guerrilla battalions are still the most 
dangerous 
to the infantry and armored units of the international 
peacekeeping forces. There are reportedly 26 such battalions, 
with from 550 to 780 soldiers in each of them. That means about 
20,000 well-trained and hardened Serbian warriors. 
  That army operates with very good coordination with the 
Serbian rebels in Croatia. Fresh conscripts and reservists from 
the Serbian-Montenegrin army also perform part of their military 
service in the so-called Serbian Krajinas. Every year about 
40,000 of them discharge their "patriotic" duty in the army of 
the self-styled republic of Serbian Krajina. 
  According to published data, last year and this year the 
Serbian-Montenegrin Yugoslavia spent a full $1.5 billion for the 
war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and approximately an additional $650 
million to aid the people of the Krajinas in Croatia. The 
Serbian armies in Croatia and Bosnia receive approximately 40 
percent of even more of everything produced by the rebuilt 
defense industry of the former and present Yugoslavia. The 
Serbian armies in Croatia and Bosnia consist of 130,000-160,000 
soldiers. Most of them are reservists who were called up 
recently. 
  The latest events have also pointed out the Serbian armies' 
quite strong air force. According to some information, the one 
in Bosnia is supposed to have over 50 combat aircraft. They are 
deployed at three of the eight airports that are on the 
territory controlled by the Serbs in Bosnia and in Croatia. 
  All of the former Yugoslavia was thoroughly prepared for 
some 
sort of general popular war. On its territory there were about 
3,000 areas that were suitable for mobile military airports, and 
about 100 of them are on the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
The Bosnian Serbs' air force has its main bases in Mahovljani 
and Zaluzani near Banja Luka, and at temporary airports near 
Bosansko Grahovo, and there are also some Serbian aircraft in 
neighboring Croatia near Udbina. 
  Until now, the army of the self-styled republic of Srpska 
had 
75 aircraft and helicopters. About 20 helicopters were intended 
for transportation and communications. The aircraft include five 
MiG-21's, 12 Jastrebs that are already old, and 16 G-4 Super 
Galebs. The Bosnian and Croatian Serbs are supposed to have 
about 14 of the larger and more powerful Orel fighter-bombers. 
Intelligence services have observed 17 MI-8 and 17 Gazelle 
helicopters, and eight Gama military helicopters. The latter are 
most often observed in the vicinity of Bihac and the Cazin 
Krajina. 
  Some intelligence data also mention 12 MI-8 transport 
helicopters, which are mostly under repair. These are older 
helicopters whose service life has already expired. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7837 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Future War Activities in Bosnia Discussed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Future War Activities in Bosnia Discussed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0227A Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 p 14 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0227A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Jovanovic: "March Toward the Drina"] </F>
  [Text] Even though it seems to some people that peace 
is coming to Bosnia, soldiers, above all the strategists of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army, do not think so at all. 
  It is not yet known whether the agreement between Sarajevo 
and Zagreb will also mean a renewal of the Croatian-Bosnian 
military alliance against the Serbs. Press agency reports talk 
about a resumption of "low-intensity" combat "in central Bosnia 
and in the Neretva Valley." Although the agreement provides for 
the establishment of a unified military command--which means 
that the HVO [Croatian Defense Council] would also have to be 
placed under the command of the Bosnian generals--it appears 
that the time is not yet ripe for such an outcome. U.S. General 
John Galvin's mission will probably be aimed in that direction. 
  Serbian military sources, however, report certain movements 
by Bosnian forces in the direction of the Drina front and toward 
the broader Doboj region, which is the key to controlling vital 
transportation routes in northern Bosnia. The story about a 
Bosnian "spring" offensive, which has been announced ever since 
last October, is still current. 
  It appears that the key moment in consolidating the Bosnian 
army's ranks was Haris Silajdzic's becoming prime minister in 
Sarajevo. At that moment (at the end of September 1993) about 
nine-tenths of Sarajevo residents (according to Radio 
Bosnia-Herzegovina) did not support the policy of a military 
solution to the problem of Bosnian access to the sea and the 
Sava. 
  Is the firm course, however, changing things radically? The 
Croatian forces were destroyed in central Bosnia and in November 
Vares fell, thus territorially linking the Tuzla region with 
Zenica. The Bosnia-Herzegovina Army is organized into six corps: 
the First (Sarajevo) Corps, the Second (Tuzla) Corps, the Third 
(Zenica) Corps, the Fourth (Mostar) Corps, the Fifth (Bihac) 
Corps, and the Sixth (Travnik) Corps. Several independent 
brigades have also been formed, the most combative of which is 
the Seventh. There are also operational groups that function 
under special conditions. 
  The officer corps consists mainly of former JNA [Yugoslav 
People's Army] officers, only two of whom have finished the War 
(Generals') School: General Rasim Delic, commander of the 
Bosnian General Staff, and his deputy, General Jovan Divljak. 
The Bosnian army is estimated to have about 200,000 soldiers. 
The General Staff is located in Sarajevo, and commands are 
conveyed primarily through satellite communications. 
<H5>  Quality and Quantity </H5>
  In a Bosnia-Herzegovina TV interview, Alija Izetbegovic said 
on 24 February that "we are capturing weapons from the enemy, we 
produce some, and we are trying to import them through certain 
paths and mountain passes," but undoubtedly weapons are being 
independently produced to the greatest extent. Belgrade military 
sources claim that certain weapons are procured within the 
framework of the "airdrop operation." Clearly, however, that 
these are negligible amounts. The conflict with Croatian 
units--which was resolved to a considerable extent in Bosnia's 
favor--brought Sarajevo control over significant defense 
industry resources in Konjic (a munitions factory), Travnik 
(cannons), Bugojno (detonators for artillery weapons), and also 
in Gorazde, Zenica, and Tuzla. 
  After the successful operations against HVO units in 
November, there were certain disagreements between Bosnian 
politicians and individual high-level Bosnia-Herzegovina Army 
officers. Apparently rotations have been frequent because of 
that. A person who militarily ensured that the area of the Bihac 
region would remain mainly (two-thirds) under the central 
government's control, Col. Ramiz Drekovic, was withdrawn a bit 
mysteriously, to be replaced by Col. Atif Dudakovic. Drekovic is 
now the commander of the Mostar Corps. An officer credited with 
succeeding in keeping part of Mostar under Bosnian control, Col. 
Arif Pasalic, is currently Bosnia-Herzegovina's deputy defense 
minister. It is believed that Pasalic is one of the supporters 
of an assault, a southern Bosnian Reconquista, toward the 
Adriatic Sea. It is claimed, however, that there is a plan, 
prepared as early as last year, to break through to the Peljesac 
peninsula by mid-May! 
  Are the latest events changing things radically? The 
demilitarization of Sarajevo is freeing up at least 45,000 
soldiers in the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army's Sarajevo Corps, and 
those forces, according to many sources, are already being 
deployed on other fronts. If there is some kind of peace between 
the Croats and Bosnians--with American guarantees, perhaps in 
the form of the demilitarization of Mostar and some cities in 
central Bosnia--then offensive operations by the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army against Serbian positions are quite 
possible. 
  A possible Croatian-Bosnian peace will probably renew the 
establishment of Sarajevo's ground corridors with the sea, and 
thus the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army's arms build-up could become 
more intensive. 
  The war is declining in quality (armament) and gaining in 
quantity (the mass nature of the armies). The forces of the 
republic of Srpska [RS] are stretched over an enormous front: in 
the west, up to Bosanska Krupa, to the eastern enclaves along 
the broader zone of the bank of the Drina, and in the north to 
Brcko, and to Popovo Polje in the south. Because of the crisis 
over the airport near Tuzla, the headquarters in Pale issued a 
mobilization order. In spite of that, it is estimated that the 
Serbian forces do not have enough personnel. 
<H5>  Stormy Reaction </H5>
  Serbian control over eastern Bosnia is currently perhaps the 
most critical: three enclaves (Zepa, Srebrenica, and Gorazde) 
are arousing the Bosnian General Staff's hope that a military 
breakthrough to the Drina is possible. It was heard last week 
from well-informed Belgrade sources (Warlord Seselj) that the 
"surrender" of those three enclaves was being considered. That, 
however, implies Bosnian territorial continuity--and there is 
still no support for it in Pale (and the commands inside the 
bunkers in Han-Pijesak). 
  Things are changing with incredible speed. The treacherous 
mutual tapping on the shoulders of the Serbian and Croatian 
sides culminated at the end of January in the Milosevic-Tudjman 
military pact. According to that plan, the RS army was supposed 
to penetrate the Bosnian defense near Olovo and proceed along 
the valley of the Krivaja River in order to join up with its 
forces on Ozren mountain, southeast of Doboj. The Croats would 
transfer a large number of Croatian Army regular troops to the 
Lasva valley in order to intensify the pressure and thus 
facilitate the RS army's action. On the other hand, from the 
Croatian enclaves near the central course of the 
Bosna--Zavidovici and Zepce--HVO units were supposed to strike 
at the Bosnian army from behind when the latter moved to prevent 
the Serbs' breakthrough along the Krivaja River. 
  The purpose of the operation was clear: to break up the 
territory under Bosnian control into three parts, thus 
accelerating principally a bilateral partition of Bosnia, and 
thereby a happy conclusion of the war as well. In the 
intelligence field, this would mean encouraging new Muslim 
autonomist ambitions (like Fikret Abdic). The West, however, is 
reacting stormily: It is raising a fuss over the hitherto 
nonexistent problem of the Tuzla airport, with the intention of 
frustrating the Serbian army's possible intentions of beginning 
a strike against this city, and thus extending the three 
critical kilometers of the corridor near Brcko into the 
interior, toward the south. The Croats were seriously threatened 
with sanctions, and the (perhaps unplanned) demilitarization of 
Sarajevo is freeing up enormous Bosnian troops from and around 
Sarajevo, which are repelling the Croatian offensive against 
Gornji Vakuf and in the Lasva valley.... 
  Military assessments now indicate that in the long term, 
Sarajevo has been militarily lost to the Serbian side. The 
announced "normalization" of life in the city and its vicinity 
will probably mean the establishment of transportation links 
between the Bosnian capital and Zenica through Visoko and with 
Tuzla through the northern Olovo-Kladanj route. It is believed 
that there are about 650,000 people in that region, mostly 
refugees from Zvornik, Bratunac, Bjeljina, and so forth. The 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army's military forces in Tuzla, however, are 
relatively poorly armed, but it is believed that it would have 
to be the future nucleus of a massive strike against the Serbian 
front lines on the left bank of the Drina. 
<H5>  [Box, p 15] </H5>
<H5>  Secret SAS Mission </H5>
  The London Sunday Express reported last week that an elite 
SAS [Special Air Service] British Army unit had been sent to 
Bosnia on a secret mission to discover Serbian, Bosnian, and 
Croatian heavy weapons. It is believed, however, that the number 
of missions for which this unit was sent to Bosnia is much 
higher. The SAS consists of the 21st, 22d, and 23d Regiments, 
the 264th Communications Company, and the Commando-45 
Paratrooper-Reconnaissance Regiment. It is most likely that 
parts of the 22d Regiment, located in Herestford with black 
berets, were sent to Bosnia. SAS units also successfully passed 
a test in the Falklands war when their commands reported on 
enemy movements and positions. In "Desert Storm," they proved to 
be more successful than the U.S. "Green Berets." 
  Their arrival in Bosnia is being associated with Serbian 
politicians' and generals' serious threats against the Blue 
Helmets in the event of international military intervention. The 
Serbian General Staff in Bosnia is now located in Han-Pijesak in 
eastern Bosnia, in a bomb shelter. Orders are issued from it by 
cable to units in all parts of the battlefield. This avoids the 
possibility of radar interference or the interception of command 
instructions. 
  The SAS's biggest success during the Gulf war, however, is 
considered to be putting out of commission the underground 
communications cables between the Iraqi units in Kuwait and the 
command post in Basra. SAS units are infiltrated deep into the 
enemy's rear in order to capture or liquidate high-level 
politicians or officers. They are transported there by 
helicopters with special navigation equipment. During one 
characteristic attack against the Iraqi rear an SAS strike group 
blew up a bomb shelter in which there were 450 Iraqi soldiers 
and officers. The commander of the UN forces in Bosnia, General 
Sir Michael Rose, is a member of the SAS. 
  The Bosnian Serbs also have special units, the best known of 
which are the "Panthers" from Bijeljina. The HVO commander, 
General Ante Ros, was a member of the French Foreign Legion. 
Before assuming his present position, he was chief of the 
Croatian Army's Special Forces Command. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7838 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mladic's Link to FRY Military Leadership </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mladic's Link to FRY Military Leadership </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0227B Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 p 16 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0227B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dragan Cicic: "The Old School"] </F>
  [Text] It is believed that Ratko Mladic is a champion 
of part of Yugoslavia's military leadership which is using him 
to ensure its autonomy from political structures on both sides 
of the Drina. 
  Three weeks ago, during the withdrawal of the Serbian 
artillery from the vicinity of Sarajevo, rumors appeared that 
General Ratko Mladic's "career was over." The same 
sources--people close to the military and political leadership 
of the republic of Srpska [RS]--quickly denied their own story. 
Few people, however, failed to notice that General Mladic has 
been seen less and less often in public, and that his chief of 
staff, General Manojlo Milovanovic, is speaking up more and more 
often. 
  In the latter's appearances, a certain "dropping of the 
ball" 
has been evident, that is, a certain spirit of conciliation that 
has underlined Mladic's uncompromising attitude even more. After 
all, the acceptance of NATO's ultimatum, wrapped up in the guise 
of a Russian diplomatic initiative, had to appear to Mladic like 
a personal defeat. On 10 February 1994, he stated to the 
newspaper VOJSKA (the Army of Yugoslavia's organ): "As far as I 
am concerned, the war will symbolically be over for me when the 
Muslims surrender their weapons to me in the same Volunteer 
Street (the center of Sarajevo) in which they committed a 
disgraceful attack and crime against the former JNA's [Yugoslav 
People's Army] military column." 
<H5>  Theoretician </H5>
  Mladic showed that he had not given up this position just a 
few days before the expiration of the ultimatum, when he 
suddenly came out with the assertion that the RS army, which had 
then already begun to withdraw, would not withdraw. 
  The episode with the ultimatum, in addition to being a good 
illustration of Mladic's attitudes, also indicates the outlines 
of the extent of his influence. Specifically, the final 
withdrawal could not be started, in spite of Karadzic's 
acceptance of the obligation, before Mladic talked with Vitaliy 
Churkin in Belgrade in the Federal Assembly's offices on 
Thursday, 17 February, three days before the expiration of the 
ultimatum. They say that the general was very furious and quite 
unpleasant to that emissary, who made it clear to him that he 
had to withdraw or suffer very serious consequences. In the end, 
however, he had to accept the demand. 
  Where does Mladic get so much power that international 
negotiators' direct contact with this general is essential for 
the success of an agreement that has already been accepted by 
the RS's political leadership? The fact is that Ratko Mladic is 
a legend among the Bosnian Serbs. He began to gain his fame back 
during the war in the Krajina by carrying out rapid and harsh 
offensive actions. He also used the same approach in pushing 
through the corridor that was a sine qua non for the survival of 
the RS. There is no doubt that Mladic is a competent officer. He 
is considered to be one of the few people in the former JNA who 
studied Clausewitz, Sun Tsu Wu, and other theoreticians in 
detail. He did not limit himself to just planning operations, 
however: He often sat in an armored vehicle himself and led the 
attack. With these and similar steps, he succeeded in 
establishing himself among the people as "a Serbian officer of 
the old school." 
  Back in Knin he was also inclined toward political 
maneuvering, and he continued to follow that course after his 
transfer to Bosnia. Many people think that he most used his 
influence for political purposes during last year's Bijeljina 
session, and then the Pale session, of the RS Assembly, when the 
Vance-Owen plan was rejected. At that time Zeljko "Arkan" 
Raznjatovic showered Mladic with abuse, accusing him of 
"ordering the deputies to reject the plan" accepted by Slobodan 
Milosevic and the Serbian leadership. 
  The fact that all of that did not shake Mladic's position 
shows that no matter how skillful he is, this general is not 
just acting on his own behalf. Sources close to the RS military 
and political leadership claim that Ratko Mladic is actually a 
very direct champion of part of the Army of Yugoslavia's 
military leadership. According to those sources, Radovan 
Karadzic's influence over the RS army is negligible. Allegedly, 
through Mladic part of Yugoslavia's military leadership is 
ensuring that it keeps considerable autonomy from Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia political structures. 
  If influential circles in the Army of Yugoslavia really want 
to keep at least partial political influence and relative 
independence from the civilian authorities, there is nothing 
more useful for those purposes than the existence of the war 
conflagration in Bosnia. Those circumstances immeasurably 
increase the army's importance and ensure that it has influence 
over the adoption of political decisions that depend to a great 
extent on the assessments offered by military circles. 
  The downing of the aircraft over Bosnia is introducing new 
elements in this story. Although it turned out, according to the 
UN's findings, that the four aircraft took off from the Udbina 
airport in the republic of Serbian Krajina [RSK], it is hard to 
believe that it all happened without the RS army's involvement. 
<H5>  Airport </H5>
  Furthermore, several hours after the aircraft were shot 
down, 
artillery fire was opened against Tuzla. There was a fierce 
response to it, at a time when a political agreement on opening 
the Tuzla airport was already on the way. That was later 
confirmed in Moscow, once again in spite of Mladic's explicit 
opposition. "In connection with the story about intervention, 
people are asking me why I did not allow UNPROFOR [UN Protection 
Forces] tanks to come to Bosnia and why the Serbian side is 
opposing the opening of the Tuzla airport.... But when they land 
planes in Tuzla, that will be an open threat against Belgrade as 
well! It is a `step by step' occupation," Mladic told VOJSKA. 
  In spite of everything, however, there are no signs that any 
sort of campaign is being started against Mladic. In a way there 
is still a sort of balance of power and the conflict is not too 
severe. One analyst has described all the recent steps by the RS 
that do not follow Milosevic's and Karadzic's policy as "petty 
malice." The military structures both here and in the RS will 
hardly venture to engage in any more serious confrontation. 
Their financial position, in fact, is such that they are 
extremely dependent upon the state budget. The bond announced a 
month ago for the RS army has allegedly collected 200,000 German 
marks. The amount appears large, but it is only enough for a 
tank battalion (27 tanks) to operate for two days. 
  On the other hand, Mladic's popularity and the support of 
part of the military establishment are securing his position for 
the time being, provided that there is no serious clash with the 
Serbian leadership. "Someone will hardly make a decision to 
replace Mladic as long as the war is going on," says one person 
familiar with the situation in Bosnia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7839 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Super Dinar in Krajinas Seen as `Untenable' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Super Dinar in Krajinas Seen as `Untenable' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0227C Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 p 27 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0227C </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Mladen Ivanic of the Banja Luka Economic </F>
School: "Theoretically Untenable"] 
  [Text] In a similar way the Krajinas "have already 
been" in Germany's monetary system, because they could have 
German marks--by exchanging other currencies or by exporting 
goods and services--just as is the case now with Yugoslavia and 
the dinar. 
  More than a month has passed since the new economic program 
was launched on the territory of the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia [FRY]. At the same time, on the territory of the 
republic of Srpska [RS] and the republic of Serbian Krajina 
[RSK], there has been virtually no money of any kind for three 
months now (except for the German mark, naturally), and so the 
economies of these areas have functioned without their own 
money. It is not necessary to talk about what kind of fatal 
consequences this has had for the state of fiscal discipline. It 
is interesting that that situation has been explained by the 
authorities, which in normal conditions would quite certainly 
have lost their position long ago because of the absence of 
money, wages, and taxes, in terms of the need to create the 
preconditions for union with Serbia and Yugoslavia, by failing 
to issue their own money. 
  That logic would mean that the economy should be put in a 
difficult position so that inclusion in the FRY's monetary 
system would be a cheap solution. It is necessary to recall, 
however, that even at the moment that this article is being 
written, the dinar has not fully functioned in the areas west of 
the Drina, even though those in power have announced that 
several times. It seems that "Mother Serbia" is much more 
reserved toward her daughters, than the daughters' desire for 
their mother to take them back under her auspices. 
  That is also demonstrated by several facts. 
  First, the RS and the RSK do not appear in the program 
anywhere. All the balance-sheets for public and budget spending 
have been created for the FRY independently, and one of the 
tasks was reducing "aid" to the Krajinas to 5 percent of the 
social product. 
  Second, not one economist from the countries west of the 
Drina participated in creating the program, nor was the state of 
the economy in those areas a subject of interest to the 
economists who worked on the program. 
  Third, although the authorities in both countries west of 
the 
Drina adopted a decision a long time ago on inclusion in the 
monetary system, it is still not functioning, primarily because 
of fear in the FRY that inclusion of the Krajinas would disrupt 
the system's stability and jeopardize the program. 
  We have already stated that after lengthy and arduous talks 
and numerous political problems, however, a decision was made 
(apparently reluctantly) that the new dinar would also function 
on the territories of the RS and the RSK. The precondition for 
that was that they would deposit foreign exchange funds in the 
National Bank's foreign exchange treasury. Faced with the lack 
of any other alternative, the authorities in these two republics 
agreed, and withdrew the last of the foreign exchange from their 
otherwise already empty foreign exchange reserves and sent it 
across the Drina. In the case of the RS, that is estimated to be 
about 20 million marks. Those funds, which were difficult to 
find, are not even enough for a month for all the budget 
beneficiaries. The Krajinas were not in a position to provide 
more, however, because they simply do not have it. 
  Whether it is decent to demand foreign exchange from areas 
that are at war, even for an amount of dinars that will in any 
case remain in the Krajinas and thus not burden demand in 
Serbia, is a completely different question. One thing is 
certain: In a similar way the Krajinas "have already been" in 
Germany's monetary system, because they could have marks--by 
exchanging other foreign exchange or by exporting goods and 
services--just as is now the case with Yugoslavia and the dinar. 
  After the initial purchase, the economy and the budget 
should 
secure the necessary dinars from regular transactions. For an 
economy laboring under the war and enormous public spending, and 
which is operating at 15-20 percent of capacity at most, that 
position is both theoretically and practically untenable. 
Therefore, and especially because of the situation with state 
finances, Avramovic's program will have very negative 
consequences for the economy of both Krajinas. Naturally, the 
program is not responsible for this, but rather the situation in 
the economy is such that it is fascinating how people have 
succeeded in financing the war so far. The program will lead to 
a more rapid collapse of the inflationary illusion that the 
economy is functioning. 
  The concept for the RS's and RSK's inclusion in the monetary 
system provided for several control mechanisms by which the FRY 
tried to protect itself against a possible lack of financial 
discipline, which in a way could also be insulting to those in 
power in the countries west of the Drina. Thus, in practice, the 
national banks of these future "republics" of Yugoslavia are 
disappearing; the auditors of the federal payment transactions 
service are beginning to monitor the work of the local services; 
through the "unified record account" the influx and outflow of 
money from the Krajinas to Yugoslavia and vice versa will be 
monitored daily, weekly, and monthly. One can assume that the 
formula of a "unified record account" could also serve as a 
pretext for possibly blocking payment transactions in the event 
that the account is overdrawn. 
  Furthermore, it has been realized in the Krajinas that the 
whole concept of the program has to be transferred consistently, 
and thus laws and decrees are being almost literally copied. To 
the best of the professional public's knowledge, not one of the 
members of the team or the state officials who are working on 
its implementation in the FRY has been present in these areas, 
or has suggested any sort of solutions. 
  Even everything said so far would not be that much of a 
problem if the degree of economic unity were complete, and if 
the budgets of all the republics were prepared and supplied 
according to the same principles. In this way, the monetary 
system is unified; for the time being customs duties are still 
in operation; the fiscal system is different, with the income 
side, since the regulations have been adopted, dependent upon 
measures in the FRY and Serbia, while the expenditure side of 
the budget has been left to the local governments. 
  All of this indicates that the implementation of the current 
program will have very difficult consequences for the economy 
and state in the RS and the RSK. Instead of a magic wand, the 
waving of which would ensure a miraculous leap into a society of 
abundance (which retirees, the army, education, and health care, 
which have not received wages for a long time now, are expecting 
anyway, under the influence of the media), these areas will be 
affected by a further decline in production and even more by an 
empty state treasury, with all of its repercussions for a 
country at war, whose expenditures are quite certainly twice as 
high as the available social product. Any other situation would 
be equivalent to a miracle. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7840 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik, Schmoegnerova on State Budget, GDP </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik, Schmoegnerova on State Budget, GDP </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604222394 Bratislava STV 1 Television Network in Slovak 
1945 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604222394 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava STV 1 Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Pressclub" program] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Announcer] Good evening, esteemed television 
viewers. This week's live relay of our Pressclub roundtable is 
taking place on a different day because the Cabinet, headed by 
Jozef Moravcik, held its fourth session one day later than 
usual. The main point on their agenda was an extraordinarily 
important document--a draft government program statement. After 
discussing it in detail, the Cabinet approved it at today's 
session. 
  I welcome our guests, who are in the studio to brief us 
about 
today's session: Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik and Deputy Prime 
Ministers Brigita Schmoegnerova and Roman Kovac. I also welcome 
our colleagues, the journalists who accepted our invitation. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Announcer] Mr. Prime Minister, could you please assess 
realistically the situation and risks you took into account when 
drafting the starting analysis of the program document? [passage 
omitted] 
  [Moravcik] From the economic viewpoint, the macroeconomic 
viewpoint, the most serious problem is probably maintaining the 
budget--that is, the budget's deficit--on a certain acceptable 
level. [passage omitted] 
  What is the situation in this sphere? One considerable 
negative element is last year's high deficit of the state 
budget. It amounts to roughly 6.8 percent, if I remember the 
figure correctly. This means 23 billion korunas [Sk]. If we 
add other state budget debts, the overall state debt amounts to 
Sk60 billion. This is a big figure, which indeed represents a 
certain risk for the future development of our economy. 
[passage omitted] 
  The decline of last year's GDP was roughly 4.1 percent. This 
is also a negative factor in developing our economic policy. 
  A big discrepancy, a big difference between our export and 
import, is something very negative, and the Cabinet has to 
tackle it, to face this problem. Last year our export fell and 
our import increased. [passage omitted] 
  [Announcer] Deputy Prime Minister, what are the main 
macroeconomic objectives of the government's policy statement? 
[passage omitted] 
  In the present economic situation, where are the possible 
sources for the development of the economy? 
  [Schmoegnerova] As to the first part of your question, we 
have agreed that in our policy statement we would define the 
basic macroeconoic objectives in a relatively explicit way. We 
pledged that we will try to achieve zero growth of the GDP, keep 
the deficit at the level envisaged for this year, and try to 
keep inflation within 10 to 13 percent, at most. Also, 
unemployment must not exceed the limit envisaged in the budget 
for this year. 
  Further, we have pledged that, in cooperation with the 
National Bank of Slovakia, we will try to create conditions to 
keep foreign currency reserves at a level that will allow normal 
internal convertibility without any additional measures. Our 
experience with such measures taken at the beginning of the last 
year was rather unfavorable. 
  We have also pledged to retain a positive balance of 
payments. 
  [Announcer] Deputy Prime Minister, I would like to ask you 
what the problems linked to our stand-by loan are. [passage 
omitted] 
  Do you think we will succeed and reach an agreement [with 
the 
IMF]? 
  [Schmoegnerova] I think we have never in our history enjoyed 
such a favorable situation as the current situation we succeeded 
in bringing about. [passage omitted] 
  Our current attitude toward the IMF is built on a totally 
different basis than was the case in the past. This is the 
first time in our history that we have put forward our own 
economic policy outline. We have analyzed the risks linked to 
this economic policy, and we have also presented measures 
intended to eliminate those risks. This is a different approach 
from that in the past. 
  Up to now, it was always the other side that presented us 
with proposals, and the government accepted them in a passive 
way. I am not saying that it was a totally passive acceptance, 
but, in substance, it was passive. This, unfortunately, has 
applied also to our past dealings with the World Bank, not just 
with the IMF. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7841 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_d_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Prime Minister's Past Reexamined, Revealed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Prime Minister's Past Reexamined, Revealed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20582A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20582A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Peter Schutz, Kosice-based correspondent 
of the Prague right-of-center daily DENNI TELEGRAF, claims in 
his 17 March commentary that Jozef Moravcik, who replaced 
Vladimir Meciar as Slovakia's prime minister, had been 
considered "a potential alternative to Meciar" well before his 
appoinment on 16 March, possibly as early as a year ago. To 
correct the "erroneous" characterization of Moravcik as "one of 
the 1968 men," Schutz also mentions a number of biographical 
details, "which quite likely will not be found in Moravcik's 
official resumes." 
  Some commentators, writes Schutz, may have been surprised by 
the emergence of Moravcik as the prime minister. After all, as 
late as 12 March, halfway through the "hectic" coalition 
negotiations, [chairman of the Christian Democratic Movement] 
Jan Carnogursky still believed that, while it looked like 
[former Deputy Prime Minister] Roman Kovac might be the next 
Slovak prime minister, Lubomir Fogas [a prominent Party of the 
Democratic Left deputy] was still in the running, because "the 
SDL was fighting hard" for Fogas's candidacy. Nevertheless, 
"knowledgeable observers" were not amazed when Moravcik was 
finally chosen as the consensus appointee. They remembered, says 
Schutz, that the March 1993 governmental crisis, which resulted 
in the ouster of Milan Knazko as foreign minister and his 
replacement by Moravcik, caused certain circles, "particularly 
the circle around the Castle" [i.e., around President Michal 
Kovac], to be alarmed by Meciar's increasing authoritarianism 
and to begin thinking about replacing him. The choice ultimately 
fell on the new foreign minister, Moravcik. As an article in the 
weekly DOMINO EFEKT, 26 March 1993, quoted by Schutz, explained: 
"It seems that certain influential circles are preparing [Jozef 
Moravcik] to succeed Meciar. These are the same pressure and 
interest groups that previously sanctioned Meciar's liquidation 
of the federation, that supported by all available means his 
ascent to power, and that assisted him via the information 
media. Moravcik's joining the government gives him now an 
excellent chance to start building and then to consolidate his 
[political] base and offers him enough room for maneuvering 
until such moment when his time will come." That time, 
concludes Schutz,"is now." 
  Schutz argues that it is false to claim, as Moravcik's 
supporters sometimes do, that he played a role in Alexander 
Dubcek's 1968 effort to democratize the communist system--the 
so-called Prague Spring. While Dubcek's actual supporters were 
expelled from the party, Schutz points out, Moravcik remained a 
party member and "did not renounce his membership until the end 
of January 1990." Even as the communist regime was foundering 
in the winter of 1989-90, Moravcik was "still trying to convince 
people from Public Against Violence [the post-1989 Slovak 
anticommunist movement] that the Communist Party represented the 
only road to a bright tomorrow." Schutz also notes that, 
"shortly before November 1989, together with the StB [Communist 
Secret Service] officer Igor Cibula, who today heads Slovak 
intelligence, [Moravcik] established the Club of the Leninist 
Iskra (Spark) [an allusion to the name of the newspaper 
published by Lenin while in exile], an association of Slovak 
reform communists that was tolerated by the [former] regime. 
Moravcik sheltered the club at the Bratislava University Law 
School, where he taught." 
  It seems likely that Schutz's charges will be exploited by 
the Meciar forces to score points in the coming election 
campaign. This is indicated, for instance, by an unsigned 
editorial that appeared in the pro-Meciar daily REPUBLIKA on 16 
March under the title "Founder of Leninist Iskra Club Becomes 
Prime Minister of Slovakia: Jozef Moravcik and His Developmental 
Turns." 
  The editorial presents Moravcik as an ambitious and 
opportunistic politician with the gift of predicting and 
calculating the course of political developments. Moravcik is 
alleged to have developed and honed this gift while "the founder 
and leading personality of the Club of the Leninist Iskra." It 
was there that he learned "the methodology of calculation," a 
methodology focused on "the ultimate goal itself--the grabbing 
of power"--and driven by "the spirit of Leninist and Bolshevist 
methods, which had been validated by the success of the 
legendary October Revolution" of 1917. According to the 
editorial, Moravcik's interest in gaining power can be traced 
back through his entire political career. He is said to have 
made his calculated move first in the Club of Leninist Iskra, 
when he bet on the Communist Party's turn to reformism, then, 
while a member of Public Against Violence, when he sided with 
Meciar's "centrists," and again later, when he assisted Meciar 
in founding the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia. Allegedly, 
it was this propensity for calculation that motivated also his 
very latest move and drove him "to negotiate, behind the back of 
his movement [i.e. the HZDS] with President Michal Kovac and the 
leaders of the opposition in order to defeat the government of 
which he was a member." Thus, writes REPUBLIKA, "with the help 
and support of college-educated Marxist-Leninists from the Party 
of the Democratic Left [former Communist Party]," Moravcik has 
finally reached his goal, "which he had coveted as early as 
1989, when he, humble-visaged, huddled at the Leninist circle's 
bonfire in [the Bratislava] Law School. His development has its 
logic. From the point of view of Marxist methodology, it is 
faultless. It is even faultless from the point of view of the 
power ambitions of those who have put together the current 
government according to the principle: Shake before use, discard 
after use." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7842 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_d_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDL Chairman Views Political Situation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDL Chairman Views Political Situation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704070294 Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 30 Mar 94 pp 1, 5 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704070294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague DENNI TELEGRAF </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Peter Weiss, chairman of the Party of the </F>
Democratic Left, by Robert Casensky and Michal Musil in 
Bratislava; date not given: "We Are the Only Alternative to 
Meciar"] 
  [Text] Peter Weiss, chairman of the Party of the 
Democratic Left (SDL), is currently one of the most important 
players on the Slovak political scene. His party has managed to 
get into the government, yet Weiss himself stays in the 
background. We asked him about the prospects of future 
political developments in Slovakia. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] The SDL has managed to get into the 
government. How would you react to the statement that the 
communists have returned to power? 
  [Weiss] It does not bother anyone in the Czech Republic, nor 
is anyone frightened by the fact that Mr. Dlouhy and Mr. 
Kocarnik, both of whom are former communists, have now been in 
power for two years. When, however, communists who have created 
a new political party assume power, it instantaneously bothers 
everyone. I would like to hear about a single nondemocratic 
step ever asserted by the SDL or at least one objection that our 
economic program is directed against transformation. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] What are you going to do when the Movement 
for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] wins the elections again? Are 
you afraid of Vladimir Meciar's return to power? 
  [Weiss] The momentary rise of electoral preferences for the 
HZDS is associated with the wave of emotions that arose in the 
wake of Vladimir Meciar's dismissal from the post of prime 
minister following the president's speech and the former prime 
minister's speech. However, in the elections, citizens of the 
Slovak Republic will have to express themselves clearly about 
which path Slovakia will embark upon: whether it will follow the 
line of "Civil war rather than the president" [one of the 
slogans chanted by Meciar's supporters after his 
dismissal]--that is, the path of political revenge against those 
who had the courage to democratically pass a vote of 
no-confidence in the prime minister, the path of populist 
movements that constantly promise something but never keep their 
promises, or the path of normal cooperation among political 
parties that exist in the West. Precisely therein lies the 
alternative to populist and excessively nationalist policies, 
confrontational and intransigent policies, the policy of 
searching for an enemy, a policy that reaches into the arsenal 
of political techniques applied under the previous regime, by 
which I mean the evocation of an atmosphere of conspiracy and 
the labeling of political adversaries as enemies, traitors, and 
saboteurs. This alternative is represented by the social 
democratic grouping made up of the SDL, the Social Democratic 
Party in Slovakia, the Farmers Movement, and, possibly, the 
Green Party, with respect to which there exists a realistic 
chance that it will join our coalition. In addition, there is 
also the Association of Workers of Slovakia, which reflects 
mainly the sentiments of workers disillusioned with the fact 
that the promises given to them by Mr. Meciar two years ago have 
not come true. Even if this association does not join the 
preelection coalition, postelection cooperation is very 
realistic. Hence, we do not consider ourselves defeated in 
advance and are no pessimists. Quite the contrary, we see a 
realistic chance in this lineup of being able to play at least a 
drawn game with the HZDS. 
  Of course, there exists yet another possibility in the form 
of the Christian Democratic Movement [KDH], possibly an alliance 
with the Democratic Party, which, in terms of membership, is 
identical to the former Civic Democratic Union. I do not think, 
however, that the majority of voters would decide in favor of 
this alternative. It also remains to be seen what chances the 
emerging bloc of small liberal-oriented parties of Messrs. Roman 
Kovac and Jozef Moravcik, Mr. Cernak, and Mr. Knazko will be 
able to create for itself. If this grouping managed to gain 
seats in parliament, it would represent a natural partner for 
the social democratic political grouping. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] There is talk of disagreements within the 
SDL, however. There is talk about the existence of a faction 
that has the support of the members' base and that rejects the 
SDL's coalition with the KDH. 
  [Weiss] This is Mr. Meciar's wish. Some zealous 
correspondents have started spreading it and started to write 
about a split in the SDL. The fact is that the SDL is the last 
entity on the political scene that has not split. The first to 
fall apart was the Public Against Violence movement [VPN], which 
was followed by the split of the HZDS, the KDH, and the Slovak 
National Party. Someone evidently objects to the fact that 
there exists a consolidated political entity with a clear 
programmatic orientation and headed by politicians who rise 
above personal ambitions and do not let themselves be provoked 
to commit some foolishness just to get into the government for a 
few months. What is being strangely labeled as a conflict 
within the SDL was just a normal debate in the party leadership 
and in the Club of Deputies, a debate, conducted at the time 
when the dismissal of former Prime Minister Meciar and the 
calling of early parliamentary elections were being considered, 
about which tactical course of action to choose. The sole cause 
of disagreements was that some members of the Club of Deputies 
and members of the SDL leadership did not feel that the 
guarantees that early elections would be held were sufficient. 
Subsequently, it turned out that common sense and realism 
prevailed in parliament and that deputies reached a unique 
agreement on early elections. The political trauma that the 
government would not remain in power only until the early 
elections and that someone would be trying to extend its 
existence until 1996 ended and so did the discussions within the 
SDL. Now that we have assumed our share of government 
responsibility, we want the government to function and deal with 
problems in a pragmatic way. We have delegated to the 
government, first and foremost, experts and not political 
personalities. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] What kind of economic policy does 
Slovakia need at present? 
  [Weiss] First of all, it is necessary to realize in what 
situation the Slovak economy has found itself, including from 
the viewpoint of the nature of this economy. This economy is 
capable of supplying a far larger market than it has at its 
disposal. From this follows the main task--growth of export 
policy. This means, at the same time, the need to develop 
economic relations with neighbors, European Union countries, and 
other countries in the world. The instruments in the monetary 
and credit sphere must also be oriented so that they promote 
exports and correspond to the needs of exports. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Do you think Slovakia can afford the 
present size of the budget deficit, which is approximately 14 
billion [Slovak korunas]? 
  [Weiss] The deficit projected for this year should be 
adhered to; it should on no account be exceeded. This deficit 
must be used for development targets. The present deficit 
really is unacceptable because we spend it on consumption 
instead of using it to revive the economy. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] What is your opinion of devaluation? 
Leaving aside the fact that this step is within the 
jurisdiction of the bank of issue, do you think Slovakia can 
avoid this step? 
  [Weiss] Let us not brandish devaluation as though it were 
some magic wand, some miraculous device that will resolve all 
problems of the Slovak economy. The wish to stabilize the 
Slovak currency prevails, and the National Bank of Slovakia 
identifies with it. The possibilities of accepting a loan from 
international monetary institutions are being considered, as 
well as the risks associated with the acceptance of this loan. 
Our course of action in talks with the World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund will be based on expert arguments, 
and, at the same time, it must minimize the risks for this 
government. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Do you agree that considerations about 
devaluation are strongly affected by a political factor, the 
fact that early elections are only a few months away and 
devaluation is an unpopular measure? 
  [Weiss] This government's program is not based on 
devaluation at any cost and under any circumstances. It will 
consider all of the macroeconomic and social risks of such a 
step. Moreover, the decision on whether to devalue is made by 
the National Bank--that is, devaluation is not a political 
decision made by the government. The National Bank's tendency 
is to keep the currency stable. Foreign exchange reserves have 
gone up slightly, and, if everything comes off, a new bonds 
issue will be prepared. We are not predetermined by fate to 
experience rapid devaluation. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Wherein lie the biggest current problems of 
the Slovak economy? 
  [Weiss] These are the growing deficit of the state budget 
and the literally critical situation in education and the health 
services, caused by the lack of funds, which the new government 
inherited from the previous one. This government does not want 
to take the path of delaying inevitable rational measures at any 
price, just in view of the election campaign. At the same time, 
however, it naturally does not want to get into a situation 
where it will be blamed for things for which it is not 
responsible. We are now going to conduct intensive talks with 
the social partners. There will be talk of specific figures 
ensuing from the signing of the general agreement. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Which party in other postcommunist 
countries does the SDL resemble most, in your opinion? 
  [Weiss] The SDL has much in common with the Hungarian 
Socialist Party, for example, and there are also similarities 
with the Polish Alliance of the Democratic Left [SLD], though 
the party's transformation took place under different 
circumstances there. We also make no secret of our good 
relations with the Italian Democratic Left Party. Hardly anyone 
knows that the SDL's name came into being two weeks before the 
name of the Democratic Left Party in Italy. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Could you specify in greater detail the 
similarities between your party and the Polish SLD? 
  [Weiss] Many identical features exist--above all, in 
economic 
policy. Like the SLD's policy, the policy proposed by us is 
pragmatic, realistic, and, to a large extent, compatible with 
liberal economic policy. We do not want to fall into the trap 
of promising something that cannot be fulfilled, as occasionally 
happens to social democratic policy. We do not want to continue 
shifting the burden to coming generations. Of course, we have 
ideas about how to make transformation socially more acceptable 
and how to distribute the costs of transformation more evenly 
than has been the case thus far. Some economic burdens that the 
population is asked to carry can be compensated by noneconomic 
steps. Savings in some social payments, for example, can be 
compensated by a greater feeling of safety in the streets. In 
that case, it is possible to expect certain support from the 
population. At any rate, it is necessary to speak the truth and 
not to make any promises. After all, it is not admissible in 
the name of some short-term political aims to bring about, 
within six months, an economic situation for the recovery, from 
which the state will need four years. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Which party in the Czech Republic is the 
nearest to you? 
  [Weiss] The party nearest to me is the Czech Social 
Democratic Party. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] A part of your members base supposedly 
calls you a right-wing radical. How do you feel about that? 
  [Weiss] This is not what the members base says but what some 
uninformed correspondents write. The members base knows me 
well, and it voluntarily chose the path I proposed in late 1990, 
which led to the founding of the SDL at the beginning of 1991. I 
am in regular contact with party members and do not ascribe 
great importance to such claims. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] What do you think about communism? 
  [Weiss] It was a social experiment that defied the 
principles 
on which it was built and that foundered for that very reason. 
It was a method of organizing society that did not manage to 
produce either greater productivity of labor or a higher 
standard of civilization or technology and that was even unable 
to fulfill the proclaimed values of liberation of man and the 
democratization of society. Quite the contrary, it was 
precisely in the sphere of human rights that the greatest 
failure of the communist regime and the greatest denial of the 
declared humanitarian principles made themselves felt. Our 
decision to create the SDL was given by the fact that this 
social experiment simply failed, that the kind of political 
parties that operated in the former existing socialist societies 
on the basis of the principle of leading role lost their raison 
d'etre and justification and that there was no sensible reason 
to keep them alive. The crisis of communist parties in Western 
Europe proved us right. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] According to Viliam Plevza's book 
Gustav Husak Spoke, after November 1989, you and 
Pavol Kanis used to visit the, by that time already isolated, 
president of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic at Prague 
Castle. What did you discuss with him, and what are your 
recollections of those visits? 
  [Weiss] I did not see him regularly. In the course of the 
then developments, we quite clearly recommended to President 
Husak his immediate resignation. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] What kind of foreign policy should Slovakia 
pursue, and how should Slovak foreign policy approach the 
question of NATO membership? Are you afraid of developments in 
Russia in this context? 
  [Weiss] The SDL was the first Slovak party to adopt a 
comprehensive foreign policy program, and, together with current 
Defense Minister Kanis, in this program we uncompromisingly 
pushed through the idea of rapprochement with NATO up to 
Slovakia's membership in this organization. Our pro-Western 
orientation is quite unambiguous. After the decision of the SDL 
congress in Zilina in May 1993 [to advocate Slovakia's NATO 
membership], public opinion regarding the question of joining 
NATO has changed in a very positive way. The number of 
advocates of this solution to Slovakia's security situation has 
increased, while the number of opponents has declined. 
  We are naturally watching developments in Russia and are not 
pleased with the manifestations of extremism and the new wave of 
Greater Russian nationalism. For this reason, we also agree 
with the Partnership for Peace project. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] During its talks with Slovak Social 
Democrats, the Czech Social Democratic Party let it be known 
that it would propose the formation of a Czech-Slovak union. 
What position did you assume on this proposal? 
  [Weiss] The division of the CSFR was caused by the 
unwillingness of the Czech political elite to accept truly equal 
coexistence of the two nations and a fundamental transformation 
of the federation. This was the concept that was offered by us, 
but we did not find any allies for it, neither in the Czech 
Republic nor in Slovakia. That is why we see the CSFR's 
partition as a fact and the independence of the two republics as 
a reality that it is pointless to change. Both states have been 
recognized, so there exist neither foreign political nor 
domestic political conditions for the restoration of what 
existed here before. We are a party that is interested in good 
and literally privileged relations with the Czech Republic 
because it is not possible to simply throw out of the window the 
74 years of coexistence and the specific economic but also 
cultural and family ties that have been formed. While the older 
generation and the middle-aged are still emotionally tied to 
many elements of coexistence in the common state, the young 
generation already perceives things differently. 
  [DENNI TELEGRAF] Had you become prime minister, would the 
talks with the Czech Republic have taken a less conflict-ridden 
and calmer course than, for example, the property talks with 
Vladimir Meciar's government? 
  [Weiss] They would have definitely taken a more civilized 
and businesslike course. From the viewpoint of expertise, 
however, we would have surely been tougher partners than the 
previous government. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7843 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_d_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economics Minister on Tasks, Problems </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Economics Minister on Tasks, Problems </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604165694 Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 31 Mar 94 p 
3 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604165694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Minister of Economy Peter Magvasi by Karol </F>
Bohunicky; place and date not given: "Trade Must Have the 
Decisive Word"] 
  [Text] In the state administration, there is probably no 
other sector like the Ministry of the Economy, on which all 
others are dependent. To put it differently, if we are 
successful in the economic sphere, we will be successful in the 
other spheres, too. Such is the "package" of responsibilities 
of the new minister of economy, Peter Magvasi. At the beginning 
of our interview, we were interested in his first impressions as 
minister. 
  [Magvasi] This ministry has been administered by 
industrialists. They are used to making rational decisions, 
without unnecessary emotions. In the interests of this sector, 
this continuity should be preserved even after the personnel 
changes. This is what is really happening, thanks to the correct 
course of action taken by my predecessor, Mr. Ducky. We have 
projects and tasks that go beyond the time horizon of one 
government. I will pass on to my successor many of the things I 
inherited recently. This is the nature of the sector I have 
taken over while searching for as much information as possible. 
  [Bohunicky] What are your priorities? 
  [Magvasi] From the viewpoint of the overall concept of the 
activity of the ministry, I will focus, above all, on foreign 
trade. Foreign trade as an "institution" did not exist in 
Slovakia for well-known reasons. Of course, we have several 
starting points here, but the process of gradually establishing 
foreign trade must become much more intensive. This is what I 
want to focus on as much as possible. In the past, this 
ministry's main task was to administer industrial sectors. This 
trend will be replaced with trading activity. In the final 
effect, this will essentially influence the activity of said 
sectors and make them more efficient, I believe. 
  [Bohunicky] What are your problems? 
  [Magvasi] One of our greatest problems is trade with the 
Russian Federation. This is the cardinal problem of the Slovak 
Republic's trade balance because the deficit we have is mainly 
caused by trade with Russia. I consider a solution to this 
problem to be a strategic condition for economic efficiency of 
the Slovak Republic. At the same time, I am aware of our need 
for permanent and advantageous raw-material resources from 
Russia. 
  [Bohunicky] Are these problems as serious as the problem of 
the Customs Union [with the Czech Republic]? 
  [Magvasi] Certainly. This is another sphere that is 
exceptionally important for the Slovak economy. Personally, I 
am extremely interested in its better functioning. I have to 
say, however, that the Customs Union is (or should be) a two-way 
street. We need Czech partners, and the Czechs need Slovak 
partners. Unlike other European countries that can boast of a 
high degree of mutual cooperation, we have a unique advantage: 
Our technological standards are absolutely identical, which 
represents a high degree of integration. A technical drawing is 
as readable in Cheb [Czech Republic] as in Svidnik [Slovak 
Republic]. This gives us very valuable technological links that 
we should not fail to make use of. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7844 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mladic's Career, War Crimes Reviewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mladic's Career, War Crimes Reviewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0228A Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 pp 28-29 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0228A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gaja Petkovic: "Guarantees of the Almighty"] </F>
  [Text] In connection with a column presenting an 
interview with General Ratko Mladic (NIN, 7-18 January 1994), we 
were contacted by reporter and military commentator Gaja 
Petkovic, the former chief and managing editor of NARODNA 
ARMIJA. We are publishing his somewhat abridged and edited 
contribution. 
  In April 1992, NARODNA ARMIJA informed its readers that 
"because of the successful conduct of war operations," 13 
colonels had received special promotions to the rank of general, 
that 519 active military officers had received special 
promotions to higher ranks, and that 2,040 members of the 
Yugoslav People's Army [JNA] had been decorated for wartime 
services, 226 of them posthumously. Most of them, certainly, 
were honorable people, competent officers and heroic soldiers 
(although many of them did not know the goals of the war, nor 
could they understand, at least in the beginning, that the war 
that they were waging was not actually "their" war). 
Unfortunately, there were also those others.... 
  The explanation of Colonel Ratko Mladic's special promotion 
said, among other things, that he was being granted the rank of 
general "for exceptional conduct and action in carrying out 
combat missions of particular importance for the armed forces 
and the country's defense, as well as for successful command and 
leadership, initiative, and personal bravery." 
  At that time Ratko Mladic was chief of staff of the JNA's 
Knin Corps. What that "exceptional conduct and action in 
carrying out combat missions" looked like in practice is best 
illustrated by a detail from a book by Misha Glenny, a prominent 
BBC correspondent for Eastern Europe, The Fall of 
Yugoslavia, published in London in 1992. 
  ``After he showed a weapon that he had personally captured 
from the defeated Croatian and Slovene fighters, General Mladic, 
who obviously enjoyed the attention of his listeners, giggled 
while he prepared to play us a recording of a recent telephone 
conversation between him and the head of the Croatian Ministry 
of Internal Affairs in the nearby port of Split, one of the most 
militant HDZ [Croatian Democratic Community] bases. Although 
they had not expected each other in the places they were in, it 
turned out almost immediately that they were old acquaintances: 
  `Is that you, Mladic?' 
  `Yes, old enemy, what do you want?' 
  `My three guys disappeared somewhere near here... so I would 
like to know what happened to them.' 
  `I think they are all dead.' 
  `One of their parents is here in connection with it. Then I 
can tell them for certain that they are no longer alive?' 
  `Yes, certainly, I give you my word. By the way, how is your 
family?' 
  `Well, not bad, thanks. And yours?' 
  `Fine, we are doing well.' 
  `I am quite glad to hear it. By the way, since we are 
already 
in touch, we have about 20 bodies of your people here near the 
front; we killed them. We put them in a mass grave, and now they 
are stinking to high heaven. Could you perhaps come to collect 
them, because they are becoming really unbearable....'" 
  "The friendship between the opposing merchants of death on a 
large scale was one of the most horrible phenomena that I 
observed during the war," Glenny commented. 
  Who actually is General Mladic? 
<H5>  Tito's Apprentice </H5>
  Ratko is a war orphan. He was born in the village of 
Bozinovici, near Kalinovik, in March 1943. He does not remember 
his father, but feels clearly, and today stresses emphatically, 
that he died a heroic death in 1945, attacking the village in 
Herzegovina in which the Croatian fascist leader Ante Pavelic 
was born. Mladic began his military career in an unusual way--by 
apprenticeship. As a 15-year-old, he left village life and 
headed for Serbia, for Zemun, where he graduated from a defense 
industry school, and then (when it was possible) enrolled in the 
ground forces' military academy. The military career of Second 
Lieutenant Ratko Mladic began in 1965. He was a platoon 
commander in Skopje, a battalion commander in Kumanovo, a 
brigade commander in Stip, the Pristina Corps commander's 
assistant for logistics, chief of staff of the Knin Corps, and 
then its commander. In all of those duties Mladic displayed 
impeccable loyalty to the communist regime, its commander in 
chief Josip Broz, and Yugoslavism, and he always successfully 
met high standards of moral and political suitability, which 
made possible for him an exceptionally rapid rise through the 
ladder of the military hierarchy. At that time Mladic did not 
talk about any sort of "Serbdom," about "Serbian military 
traditions," the "Serbian national interest," or a "unified 
Serbian state." He was clever and morally adept enough to know 
what he should say at what time. 
  When he had completed all his military work in Croatia, on 
orders from the JNA military leadership he was transferred to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, in order to fight on his native soil as a 
born Bosnian (since Yugoslavia "did not participate in the war" 
in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina), and in order to "liberate" 
it heroically, as an already proven fighter without fear or 
fault. 
  The fact that it is claimed now and then, especially abroad, 
that while fighting in Croatia Ratko Mladic "remembered the 
past, his deceased father and his unhappy childhood, and let 
loose his inborn sadism" can but does not have to be accepted. 
The same thing could also apply to the claims that for 
everything that happened "in Gospic and Zadar, as well as other 
areas in which his units fought, Mladic is one of those most 
responsible for the war crimes that happened on the territory of 
Croatia." With respect to the war in Croatia, however, it 
remains an indisputable fact that the former Yugoslavia's 
Secretariat for National Defense, responding in writing to a 
report by the international organization Helsinki Watch on 
violations of the rules of humanitarian law by the JNA (whose 
general Ratko Mladic was), admitted that such violations had 
occurred, and "that those violations in this conflict were 
committed by individual members of the JNA or members of other 
armed units under the JNA's responsibility...." The response 
then states that proceedings had been initiated before military 
courts against several dozen military personnel "who had 
committed robberies," "crimes against the civilian population," 
"rapes of women of Croatian nationality," and so forth. 
  The above-mentioned response by the Federal Secretariat for 
National Defense to Helsinki Watch also contains other 
admissions of violations by the JNA of the rules of humanitarian 
law. Thus, among other things, it is emphasized that a multitude 
of camps were formed for the "reception" of prisoners, that 
those camps were also located "outside of Serbia... in Knin, 
Bileca, Stara Gradiska," that "one cannot deny that (in those 
camps) there were cases of excessive behavior and attempted 
physical abuse of the prisoners," and that "several individuals 
who performed guard duties were replaced" for that reason (!). 
The military leadership also admitted that "the report states 
quite correctly that during the armed conflict in Croatia many 
religious and health care facilities suffered (churches, 
hospitals, and so forth)," and that the same situation as with 
Vukovar also existed "in many other places (Zadar, Sibenik, 
Vinkovci, and so forth)." 
  Can Ratko Mladic, like many other conceited warlords in this 
war, really believe that he will succeed in evading his 
undoubted responsibility for the crimes of members of the army 
that he led throughout the war in Croatia and which he headed? 
In response to a question from NIN's reporter (on 12 February 
1993), however, about whether he was upset by the fact that the 
Americans, Croats, and Muslims had declared him a war criminal, 
Mladic said: "I would be concerned if a list were published in 
France or the United States of the war criminals who committed 
crimes near Dien Bien Phu, in Vietnam, in Cambodia, and in other 
places." Such careless reasoning is simply striking, when he 
virtually equates his actions in the war in Bosnia and Croatia 
with the crimes that were committed so many years ago by 
professional killers in Vietnam and Cambodia! 
<H5>  "The Burning of Sarajevo" </H5>
  It was only when he arrived in Bosnia as a JNA lieutenant 
general that Mladic liberated all his destructive energy and let 
loose his warlike passions. Everything contributed to that 
behavior of his. Two magnates, Slobodan Milosevic and Franjo 
Tudjman--the inviolate "gods of war" in this region of ours--had 
already (according to many reliable claims) reached an agreement 
on the partition of Bosnia-Herzegovina. A third magnate, Alija 
Izetbegovic, balancing between the international community, 
primarily the Americans, and Islamic fanatics, and often 
courting Tudjman as well, decided that he would not allow them 
to do anything like that. The Serbian side found an executor for 
its destructive business in a God-given figure for something 
like that--Ratko Mladic. 
  During the initial period of the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
the Serbs were superior in heavy artillery. Mladic's army was 
the only one that had (truly respectable) heavy artillery. 
Naturally, the militant general could not help but make maximum 
use of that chance. Everywhere around Sarajevo, he deployed 
dozens of large-caliber steel barrels (76, 105, 122, 130, and 
155 millimeters, 128-millimeter Plamen and Oganj multiple rocket 
launchers, and 60, 81, 82, and 120-millimeter mortars), and, in 
accordance with the plan of vengeance whose ideological creators 
sat in Belgrade and in Pale, he began the long-awaited war feast. 
  Actually, Mladic knew quite well that no one, objectively, 
was in a position at that time to offer him any serious 
resistance, and so he roared where it was actually necessary, 
and also where there was no military or any other justification 
at all for anything like that. The cost of destroying Sarajevo 
was no longer important at all. What was important was to "teach 
a lesson" to Alija and his followers. That is why Sarajevo was 
destroyed, burnt, and demolished for months, and its people were 
butchered and killed. In moments of rage, and even instinctive 
hatred of the enemy, the air force was also summoned "to help." 
And the enemy? To the extent to which he was capable of doing 
anything serious at that time, he did not turn the other cheek. 
  Muslims, Serbs, and Croats suffered equally from Mladic's 
artillerymen and their shells. In the beginning, admittedly, the 
JNA used its transport aircraft to save citizens of Sarajevo, 
primarily those of Serbian nationality and the family members of 
active military personnel. Close to 100,000 Serbs, however, were 
left in their homes in Sarajevo to attempt, sharing the fate of 
their fellow citizens of other nationalities, to await the end 
of the war. Mladic's artillerymen were thus also the killers of 
their own people. Together with their general, they also earned 
awards, decorations, and promotions on the basis of Serbs' 
wartime suffering. If he ever does answer for the war crimes on 
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, however, the most 
serious accusation against Mladic, of course, will be because of 
Sarajevo. 
  According to the testimony of an officer responsible for 
organizing communications in Pale, Mladic taped many of his most 
unpopular measures in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Thus, often 
carried away by the rage and brutality characteristic of him, he 
invented the previously unknown commands to artillery units: 
"Burn," "roast." 
<H5>  "Idiotic Statements" </H5>
  Mladic's behavior almost infallibly leads to the conclusion 
that he is a person who, when the military situation requires, 
can be both a cynic and a sadist. Here is one example: "Even one 
life lost in this insane war is a lot. The losses on our side 
were not high.... I do not know about the casualties on their 
side, but I think that they were massive.... They would have 
been even higher if we had not spared them!" 
  After the failure of British Lord David Owen, cochairman of 
the Conference on Yugoslavia, to persuade the leadership of the 
Bosnian Serbs in the Bosanka villa in Belgrade to accept the 
Vance-Owen maps (on the partition of Bosnia-Herzegovina into 10 
provinces), General Mladic, in response to a reporter's comment 
that Owen had left the meeting quite angry, said "with a 
characteristic sly expression on his face," "Not at all, he was 
a refined and mild person, who cannot get angry. It must be that 
this Belgrade sun got in his eyes, and so it seems to you that 
he is angry." And in response to a reporter's question about 
what was the biggest obstacle to peace, Mladic said: "The 
biggest obstacle to peace is war!" 
  The law always lay in a mace for Ratko Mladic. He knew how 
to 
draw it even when political decisions were involved. As the 
already "glorified" commander of the Knin Corps and a person who 
had learned not to listen to anyone, as soon as he arrived in 
Bosnia, in Pale, he demanded "that the political leadership of 
the Bosnian Serbs immediately and unconditionally put itself 
under his control and not adopt any political decisions without 
the permission of (his) military command" (!). Somewhat later, 
when the Americans and the EC, because of the more frequent 
shelling of Sarajevo, requested permission from the UN Security 
Council for carrying out airstrikes against the Bosnian Serbs' 
artillery positions, Mladic threatened nothing more or less than 
"bombing London and Washington"! General Manojlo Milovanovic, 
chief of staff of the Serbian army in the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, took his militant commander under his 
protection. Milovanovic said that General Mladic was not 
thinking of a conventional bombing of the capitals of the United 
States and Great Britain, but was instead talking about bombing 
"from within." Serbian "kamikazes" had already been "installed" 
in the above-mentioned areas and were only awaiting instructions 
from Pale, the general concluded! 
  Because of his generals' "idiotic and irresponsible" 
statements, as he called them, Karadzic suffered a great deal of 
unpleasantness. On 17 May 1993 he was forced to refute Mladic 
publicly. He said that the general "reacted emotionally when he 
stated that he would bomb London and Washington, and that he was 
not authorized for anything like that." 
  After the successfully conducted operation Lukavac-93 
(Mladic 
would say of it, "it encompassed the area from Gorazde to 
Ivan-Selo; its goal was to link Herzegovina with the other areas 
of the republic of Srpska and territorially link up the Serbian 
people from Kupa and Korana to Timok!"), the general triumphed 
again. In July 1993 he sent the Muslims an arrogant message: 
"They should not dream that anyone else will protect them. They 
will protect themselves if they abandon their weapons! If they 
give them up, they can live in the territories that we leave 
them. Even that is a lot for them.... It is up to Alija and 
those who advise him to think about what they will do. I have 
left Sarajevo for last!" 
  In all of his statements, in any case, almost every inch of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is originally Serbian! In February 1994 he 
would also utter this judgment regarding Srebrenica: "It has 
been a big Islamic and Turkish stronghold since their arrival in 
this region.... That settlement was erected on Serbian land, and 
so by the rule of inheritance (!), it does not belong to them 
(the Muslims), even though they were the majority population 
there.... If it had not been for the interference of the 
international community, they would have paid the price for 
everything that they have done to the Serbian people until 
now.... The Srebrenica Turks committed the biggest crimes 
against the Serbian people in the suppression of the rebellion 
against the Turkish governor!" Or: "We had very strong clashes 
for the village of Osmace," Mladic recalled on the same 
occasion. "It was a large Muslim village in which no Serb had 
ever set foot until we liberated it." 
  Mladic was able to say of the Serbian, Croatian, and Muslim 
mothers who protested against his hatred, sadism, and wartime 
madness and those of all the others, as well as of the 
organizers of antiwar demonstrations: "During that time (from 
1991 to 1993--author's note) a terrible destructive movement 
developed... attempting to embody some sort of love movements, 
mothers' movements... They were allegedly some sort of 
conscience of the Serbian people.... They are well-rehearsed 
quasipolitical animals" (!). 
<H5>  Warlord Stepa's Cap </H5>
  Generals, whose political outlooks as a rule are very 
limited, who rely in every matter primarily upon military force 
and power, often try to interfere in politics and to have the 
main say in it. Such people usually hang up their epaulets very 
soon. Political history is full of such examples, but the 
freshest ones are precisely those which have to do with the 
fates of some of the generals in the UN forces on the territory 
of the former Yugoslavia. Will Ratko Mladic also suffer that 
fate? 
  Radovan Karadzic, we would say, did not completely succeed 
in 
curbing Mladic from publicly stating his own views on the war in 
Bosnia and talking about its cases very frequently. 
  Two statements which are, to put it mildly, unusual, are 
associated with his first (and probably last) official visit to 
Geneva: "During my visit to Geneva," Mladic said, "I watched 
various West European TV channels. They have a very controlled 
system. In the first part of their news broadcasts, they give 
everything that is wonderful in their country.... And poverty in 
the West is even worse, but they do not show it. The West has 
realized that the human brain has limited capacity and so it 
moulds it like well-mixed dough." 
  The general's second statement has to do with his "concern" 
about the fate of the world: "During my visit to Geneva, in the 
negotiations, I noticed (!) great concern among ordinary people 
over what is happening in our country. People are frightened.... 
The war which happened to us can easily spread to them, 
especially if there were some sort of foreign military 
intervention in our region." 
  Finally, let us also say this. General Mladic was also able 
to offer these "international guarantees" to the head of an 
internationally recognized state (more or less), Alija 
Izetbegovic: "What I guarantee (you) is the same thing as when 
the Almighty gives you a guarantee." 
  At one time, when politicians on both sides of the Drina, 
and 
also many outside this area, assessed that at the given moment 
it was advisable--politically, diplomatically, and 
militarily--to accept the Vance-Owen plan for Bosnia, because 
any subsequent solution could be both worse and more painful for 
the Serbs in Bosnia and Yugoslavia, General Mladic was asked (as 
we have learned from the well-documented book by Dragoslav 
Rancic, Dobric Cosic, a President Without Power) to 
be among the first to speak in the Republic of Srpska Assembly, 
and to use his prestige to influence the militant delegates to 
accept the plan. In contrast, those who know claim, "during his 
45-minute speech he advanced the `crowning arguments' and 
definitively destroyed all doubts in connection with the fate of 
the peace plan." Mladic, they say, personally prevented Republic 
of Srpska Assembly deputies from going to Belgrade and 
participating in the work of the "all-Serbian parliament" at 
which a decision was being made on the same issue. 
  The extent of Mladic's hotheadedness and willfulness, but 
also of his insufficient ability in maters in which the mind 
prevails, is very illustratively confirmed by these few 
sentences from Cosic: "...The military leadership of the Bosnian 
Serbs also bears the responsibility for Herzegovina. They did 
not give the people of Herzegovina everything that we sent them. 
Mladic even wanted a counteroffensive, which would make the 
situation in Herzegovina worse...." Asked what influence he had 
over Karadzic and Mladic, Cosic answered, "Modest, 
insignificant. Many of my efforts have failed so far. We were 
able to reduce some disasters. No war has ever been rationally 
conducted, however, including this one. Peace is a vital 
interest for us. The longer the war, the more dishonorable the 
compromise." How visionary these words of Cosic's were, which 
were uttered almost a year ago, is best confirmed by today's 
events (February 1994). Mladic, however, wanted war then, as 
always before. And he has had it! For how long? 
  In mid-August 1993, the well-known English reporter Robert 
Fox published a lead article in the London Daily Telegraph about 
the 30 most dangerous "warlords." "Some of them," Fox said, "see 
themselves as saviors of their nations, others are common 
gangsters, and yet others are sadistic opportunists...." As many 
as 16 well-known international correspondents were involved in 
the compilation of Fox's list of "warlords," which also included 
five of "ours." One of the places also belonged to General 
Mladic: 
  "Ratko Mladic: based in Pale; territory 65-70 percent of 
Bosnia; forces 70,000-100,000 men, plus tanks, artillery, and 
aircraft.... The person who decides on war and peace in Bosnia. 
A tactical genius, but according to officers who have negotiated 
with him, also a madman. One representative of the UN describes 
him as a sadist, a psychopath, and an extremely dangerous 
individual...." 
  At one time Vuk Draskovic asked, "Do we really want the 
world 
to understand us through such politicians and such conduct of 
the war? I will not admit that Serbs are the ones who put 
Warlord Stepa's cap on their heads and then think that they also 
have Warlord Stepa's head under the cap, babbling from TV 
screens, `We do not take prisoners, we kill them all!'" Although 
I do not care for Mr. Draskovic, I must admit that there is 
nothing to add to this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7845 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   National Bank Governor Interviewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    National Bank Governor Interviewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0220A Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 7 Mar 94 pp 19-21 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0220A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Dragoslav Avramovic, governor of the </F>
National Bank of Yugoslavia, by Dimitrije Boarov; place and date 
not given: "The Governor of the Hard Dinar"] 
  [Text] Following the surprisingly good start of the 
anti-inflation operation, Dr. Dragoslav Avramovic, who headed 
the team of experts that drafted the Program for Reconstruction 
of the Monetary System and Economic Recovery, was last week 
easily elected governor of the National Bank of Yugoslavia [NBJ] 
in the Yugoslav Assembly (in both houses on 1 and 2 March). We 
talked on that occasion with Dr. Avramovic about the broader 
"systemic" issues related to the Yugoslav economy's 
transition. 
  [Boarov] Mr. Avramovic, in a short time more people have 
rallied around your superdinar than all the political parties 
together can command. Are we looking at a widespread "hunger for 
stability," or did the old inflationary model collapse by 
itself, so that the superdinar was "fated to succeed"? 
  [Avramovic] I do not know whether there is a difference 
between those two views. During the first week the desire to 
finally arrive at a stable currency was mixed with great 
anxiety. People were saying -- this is fine, but are they able 
to negotiate a turnaround? After a week, people began to believe 
that something good had been undertaken, although there was 
still fear. 
  To be honest, I personally had become convinced that there 
was absolutely no other solution. In the end, we had only one 
choice: the choice between distribution of the remaining foreign 
exchange reserves and a new currency. The first solution would 
have only been a band-aid, while the latter offered a chance of 
radical remedy. The desire for stability is, of course, immense, 
because people have become frightened. In recent weeks, 
hyperinflation has seemed like profound social disintegration of 
a very serious kind. 
  [Boarov] Even though real reconstruction of our system is 
only beginning, do you accept the argument that it is now 
evident in our country that real transition from a state economy 
to a market economy begins with a sound currency and the view is 
wrong that it should come only at the end of the reform? 
  [Avramovic] A sound currency was an absolute precondition 
for 
anything else. I do not believe that we could have had even a 
nonmarket economy under the inflationary flood. It would have 
meant, for example, taking food from the farmers by force, which 
is what befell Russia in the 1920's. An extreme policy was not 
one of the choices. 
  However, it is not easy to answer the question of what our 
market economy will look like in its further development. If I 
were making the decisions about that, I would say that the 
economy has to function according to very traditional 
principles. And that means: sound money, performance of 
contractual obligations, no price controls (except for pure 
monopolies), total equality of the private, government, and 
cooperative sectors, and so on. For me, those are categories 
which must be beyond political discussion. 
  Only the future can show whether such a system would be 
predominantly a system of private ownership or not. The 
Socialist Party would probably want the volume of government 
intervention to be very broad, and some people would want 
something else. Perhaps a consensus could be arrived at 
concerning a significant role of the government in the economy, 
because it has not been proven that the private sector is 
inherently superior. 
  What must not be allowed is for the government to be 
involved 
in setting prices, establishing rebates.... Nor can it be 
juggling interest rates; that is, it can influence them only up 
to the level to which a central bank normally influences the 
banking system. But here again there is a limit. 
  [Boarov] Let us turn to the occasion of our meeting. How do 
you perceive the election as governor? Some interpret this as a 
concentration of responsibility for the possible failure of the 
superdinar, while others welcome this as a logical move. 
  [Avramovic] I hesitated to accept the post of governor. That 
was an open secret. I thought the main thing was to draft the 
program, because I am not an administrator. I do not like 
administrative responsibilities. However, I would not like to 
see the whole thing go to ruin. 
  Whether I can carry out that program better than someone 
else 
is a question others have answered. In any case, the argument 
that all the responsibility is now being thrust on me is not 
realistic. I do not think it is a question of that. No one can 
thrust everything on one person. There will always be such 
attempts if it all goes crazy. But I personally have no fear in 
this regard, although everything is possible. The main reason 
why I hesitated is that I am not the commander type, and we are 
talking about the system of the NBJ, which amounts to two 
Russian divisions--10,000 people. 
  Nevertheless, I believe that I now have a chance to do what 
I 
think should be done in the way that I think it must be done. I 
am, of course, referring to what is in the jurisdiction of the 
NBJ. Within the limits of what can be done, and I have a precise 
opinion of what it can do and what it must not do, but also what 
it must do. 
  The central bank cannot solve our tax problem, for example. 
Nor can it directly change a number of other things. But a firm 
dinar can do wonders in various sectors. That I have seen. 
  [Boarov] There are already debates about the hard dinar in 
connection with the so-called stimulation of production. Is this 
a contradiction in your program; after all, market demand is 
usually primed with "soft money"? 
  [Avramovic] Well, that is the most interesting question. In 
economic policy, the ideal is by instinct and skill to succeed 
in finding the "point of equilibrium" among the levels of wages, 
the foreign exchange rate, the price of credit, and the cost of 
government. Those are the four price blocks, and an economy is 
always some price or cost which has to be set properly, and 
everything hangs on that. A sound currency is the condition for 
that success. Germany, Japan, and Korea have demonstrated that. 
  The foundation in all these examples was an absolutely firm 
fiscal policy. Incidentally, the Germans also had a firm 
monetary policy, but for decades the Japanese had a policy of a 
low price of credit, but they had a budget which was treated 
like Almighty God. It is not a question of any particular 
belt-tightening, the Japanese have been borrowing a great deal 
for the government on the domestic money market, but confidence 
in the yen was immense. You thus had a fantastic situation, you 
dropped the parity from 360 yen to the dollar to 100 yen to the 
dollar, and your credits were cheap. Loose money is a substitute 
for mistakes in setting basic prices. 
  If you have a firm fiscal situation and a sound currency, 
then your possibilities in the field of social services are 
immense. Germany has proven that with its social welfare system. 
The great tragedy is that now they are tearing it down. Schmidt 
was a leftist, but a very serious man. He is not my ideal, but 
perhaps he resolved that contradiction among a hard currency, 
good social welfare, and a favorable market. 
  Our situation is additionally burdened, after the 
catastrophe, by the problem that unfortunately it is very easy 
to move from stability into a new inflation. As soon as you have 
a more lasting stability, you need not be so orthodox. But at 
the outset, you must. 
  [Boarov] You spoke about setting basic prices in some 
equilibrium. There are those who believe that it is very 
dangerous when the government touches those basic prices, and 
especially that basic basic price--the price of money. 
Particularly because Yugoslavia does not have built-in 
"controllers" of economic policy, by which I mean the money 
market, the market for capital, and other financial markets. 
  [Avramovic] That is a key issue. For example, we will not 
solve the problem of financing our public services until they 
become economic units with a foreseeable profit of 10 to 12 
percent, which in turn would make it possible for them to go to 
the market for capital. 
  And what are the basic preconditions for setting up our 
financial markets? One is a firm currency, and another is 
resolving the issue of old foreign exchange savings. The latter 
is important not only from the humanitarian standpoint, but 
would be evidence that this government pays its obligations 
after all the mistakes that have been made. Savings depositors 
are aware how much the government can realistically pay at 
present, that it cannot pay much. But some arrangement must be 
devised to show that the government wants to discharge that debt. 
  When those preconditions are met, you have an ideal position 
for the finance minister. First, issue a bond for two years or 
three at 10- percent interest. And when the price of that bond 
jumps to 110, 120, then you are on the move, all doors are open 
to you, then you can conduct a policy of low interest rates 
without forcing things. 
  Unless we foul up in the next three or four months, we can 
arrive at a good foundation. At the same time, we should not 
forget that a blockade is a blockade. Money, however, "does not 
smell," and if you have a reputation of absolute solidarity, if 
the value of the dinar stands unwaveringly, and if you have an 
interest rate 2 or 3 points higher than neighboring states, and 
your wages are at the African level, capital will come. 
  [Boarov] You talk about solidarity, and it occurs to me to 
ask about the first "adjustment of the projection" of monetary 
policy which calls for issuing 1 billion dinars in the first 
quarter. That is, twice or three times as much as was planned at 
the outset. Were you consulted about that? 
  [Avramovic] No, I was not told about that adjustment. But I 
will simply tell you that I do not believe in any monetary 
projections. I think it is a disaster to project monetary policy 
in advance, and the IMF has been spreading that disaster. All 
those projections are based on assumptions about the rate of 
circulation of the money. From Friedman on down there is no 
expert who has invented a reliable method of guessing the rate 
of circulation of the money. 
  There are a fantastic number of variables. We have been 
"turning over" the social product of the FRY with 60 million 
German marks [DM], while two years ago we did it with DM2.2 
billion. To be sure, the economy almost died because of the rate 
of circulation. 
  Before those monetary models were invented, the policy of 
the 
central banks, the Bank of England, for example, was to work 
with small foreign exchange reserves. Every noontime, the board 
of the central bank meets in London and decides what to do for 
the next three days about the movement of gold prices and 
commodity prices. After all, this is not the budget, which 
requires annual planning. It is disastrous to equate the budget, 
which has fixed obligations, with note-issue policy, which is 
not a fixed thing. At the same level of money, depending on the 
conditions, you can do twice as much at certain points as at 
some other points. 
  I hope, for instance, that if we really restore confidence 
in 
the currency, we will have breathing room of one billion or two. 
For me, those numbers do not in and of themselves mean anything 
(I am speaking in rough terms, they do, of course, have 
significance for someone). But look at the American case: After 
all the disastrous mistakes of economic policy for 30 years, 
half of the dollars issued are sitting in foreign accounts, 
which means that the United States has two central banks. One is 
the Federal Reserve, and the other central bank consists of all 
the central banks in the world. It is much the same with 
Germany, whose currency comprises a fourth of world reserves. In 
such a situation, those countries have a dual financier. And 
what kind of "projections" are we talking about here? We are 
not, of course, either the United States or Germany, but if the 
world gains confidence that this country's leadership is not 
going to play with the money, that is, with the value of the 
currency, that is sufficient. 
  We are not in a situation to be overly orthodox, because of 
employment of the labor force. Our immense plus is that it is 
objectively so cheap. So if we do not manage to stabilize the 
budget as well, at the same time achieving a high rate of 
growth, in spite of the sanctions, we will have to turn the 
country over to the Germans and the Koreans. They will stabilize 
it. 
  [Boarov] Since the initiation of your program, there have 
been malicious comments to the effect that everything has become 
cheap except the government. Is our economy capable of 
supporting the planned 52-percent share of government 
expenditure in the social product? 
  [Avramovic] You know, I do not like those percentages and do 
not use them. None of us knows what the social product of 
Yugoslavia is today. There is no figure on that in the first 
eight pages of the program. Nothing is known with confidence. We 
only know that those miserly $5 billion ($2.6 billion for the 
first six months) are the absolute minimum we could set for 
government expenditure. You cannot pay lower wages, lower 
pensions, you cannot pay the army more miserably than we are 
paying now. How the army is getting by with those $600-700 
million, believe me, I fail to understand. Even if there are 
more policemen here or there, it is all being paid for cheaply. 
Our solution, our key, lies in reconstruction of the tax system. 
  In the fiscal system we have now, there is an obstacle 
which, 
if I might so put it, I have not worked out intellectually. It 
is, after all, terribly illogical. The taxation of business 
firms in our country is not based on income, but on the firm's 
costs. Indeed mostly on the costs of labor, which in our country 
is a factor that exists in abundance. And because labor is the 
cheapest factor, instead of maximizing the use of labor, you 
multiply the price of labor by two because of taxes. So it is 
obvious, then, that there are problems; it is just not clear to 
me how this came about at all, because what is income to the 
worker is a cost to the firm. 
  When wages are discussed, the battle is therefore not waged 
over those 35 dinars, because it is not 35, but 200 dinars. Much 
the same is true of cadastre income, which is really estimated 
at a low level, but it cannot be taxed in advance either. After 
all, when business firms and farmers begin to borrow money from 
the banks to pay their taxes, we are returning once again to 
inflationary financing. This must be changed, the tax cannot be 
paid out of goods that have been produced, but out of goods that 
have been sold. Business firms are still not paying taxes out of 
profit, but are borrowing in order to pay them. 
  [Boarov] I am going back to the question of how to augment 
this unclear social product. 
  [Avramovic] And I go back to that equilibrium of basic 
prices. If we find the point, the plateau, the brake (fren) 
between the price of labor, the price of credit, the price of 
government, the price of public services, and if we solve the 
problem of old foreign exchange savings, and if production does 
not start up under those conditions, then I do not know when it 
will. Even with the blockade. After all, our domestic needs are 
immense. 
  Just one example--we have a million and a half automobiles. 
Half of them are worthless. That is a market to keep Zastava 
going for several years. And so on. Automobile production is a 
very important thing. Germany almost won World War II on the 
rise of the automobile industry. That industry has skilled 
workers, it has 1,500 engineers, that is not something to 
discard. People who talk about going back to a pastoral economy 
do not know what they are talking about. 
  There is exaggeration in these outcries that the government 
should stimulate production. Do they mean that it should be 
buying goods? Before we advocate that the government should be 
ordering products to be produced, presumably there is something 
else that can be done with which your paper will surely agree. 
  [Boarov] You talk about the space on the domestic market. 
What are your views on certain issues of a strategic nature, 
which, it is true, are not on the agenda at the moment? I am 
referring to tariff protection of the domestic market and 
foreign economic strategy (East and West). 
  [Avramovic] As for our export policy, my view is real 
simple: 
Trade with the Devil himself if it pays. 
  There are no ideological issues about going out into the 
world. The main thing is whether you are cheap and do you have 
adequate quality. 
  On the import side, I favor protection. Not protection which 
will turn you into a sick man, not protection that would drive 
inputs of imported supplies for the economy way up, but 
protection. Of course, if something in the country cannot yield 
a profit of 10-15 percent, then it cannot be financed, there is 
no point in protecting it. 
  In principle, if you have a good exchange rate and 
utilization of capacity, you can look at only two prices--the 
rate of foreign exchange and cost. If you have a hard stable 
currency, if you have cheap manpower, and even then you cannot 
produce--then get lost! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7846 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Milosevic Supports Peace Negotiations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Milosevic Supports Peace Negotiations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604190094 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1725 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0604190094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, April 6 (TANJUG) -- Serbian President 
Slobodan Milosevic supported on Wednesday peace negotiations 
between the Republic of Serb Krajina (RSK) and Croatia, voicing 
confidence that their success would mean an undoubted defeat of 
the war option. 
  During his meeting with RSK President Milan Martic and its 
Prime Minister-designate Borisav Mikelic in Belgrade, Milosevic 
underscored that negotiations were the only right way of 
resolving the crisis in former Yugoslavia, it has been reported. 
In this context, Milosevic said an overall normalization of 
Serb- Croat relations was of utmost importance for peace and 
stability in the region. 
  On March 30, the Republic of Serb Krajina and Croatia signed 
at the Russian Embassy in Zagreb an agreement on the cessation 
of hostilities, which took effect on April 4. The 
Krajina-Croatian conflict broke out in 1991 because of Croatia's 
forcible secession from former Yugoslavia and its decision to 
downgrade Serbs to a national minority, after which the Serbs 
proclaimed the Republic of Serb Krajina in their ethnic and 
historical lands. The Republic of Serb Krajina has been a U.N. 
protected area (UNPA) since March 1992. 
  The Serbian president pointed out the danger coming from 
certain extremists who were working against interests of the 
Serb people, and, in this context, mentioned the activity of 
some members of the Serbian Radical Party, an opposition party 
in the parliaments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its 
federal unit, Serbia, and of irresponsible groups and 
individuals in the RSK. "Extremists compensating for their moral 
and political defeat in Serbia by behaving in a barbarous way in 
Krajina are a serious threat to Krajina's interests," he said. 
  The Serbian Radical Party, headed by Vojislav Seselj and 
headquartered in Belgrade, maintains a very strong branch in the 
RSK. Last autumn, Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia -- which 
is the biggest party in Serbia and Yugoslavia -- bitterly 
criticized the Serbian Radical Party for its fascist ideas, 
raising paramilitary units and committing crimes in war zones in 
former Yugoslavia. He said it was necessary as soon as possible 
to push to the margin the extremist forces in the RSK and put 
them under control of the RSK authorities, whereas legal 
proceedings should be instituted against individuals who had 
broken the law and sunk deep in crime. 
  Serbs, who are proud of their heroic past, must not allow 
extremists and criminals to strip them of their honour -- the 
Serbian president underscored. Martic and Mikelic advised 
Milosevic of their efforts aimed at peace and at stabilizing the 
RSK politically and economically. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7847 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Warns of `Extremism' in RSK </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Warns of `Extremism' in RSK </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604144294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1306 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604144294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 6 Apr (TANJUG) -- President of the 
Republic of Serbia Slobodan Milosevic today received Milan 
Martic, president of the republic of Serb Krajina [RSK], and 
Borisav Mikelic, prime minister designate of the new RSK 
government, who informed him about their efforts to stabilize 
Krajina politically and economically, about the successful 
cooperation with collectives in Serbia, and about the peace 
efforts of the RSK leadership. 
  President Milosevic expressed his support for the start-up 
of 
the peace negotiations between Knin and Zagreb, expressing his 
conviction that the peace talks were the only correct way of 
resolving the Yugoslav crisis and that their success would, 
without doubt, be a defeat for those in favor of war. 
  The Serbian president at the same time noted the danger of 
extremists and extremism, which are damaging the interests of 
the Serb people, and in particular he pointed to the danger of 
the activities of some members of the Serbian Radical Party and 
other irresponsible groups and individuals in the RSK. Their 
destructive behavior in the RSK Assembly clearly shows that the 
interests of Krajina are their least concern. The danger of 
extremists supplementing their moral and political defeat in 
Serbia by running amok in Krajina is a serious threat to the 
interests of Krajina. Hence, it is vital that these forces are 
marginalized and placed under the control of the Serb 
authorities in Krajina as soon as possible and that individuals 
who have contravened the law and are up to their necks in crime 
are brought to book as soon as possible. The Serb nation, which 
is proud of its freedom-loving past, should not allow extremists 
and criminals to tarnish its reputation, President Milosevic 
stressed. 
  Stressing that the normalization of Serb-Croat relations as 
a 
whole is of crucial influence for peace and stability in the 
region, the Serbian president wished the new leadership of the 
RSK success in its work and success in the realization of the 
cease-fire agreement between the Croatian army and the RSK army. 
  It was announced that Milan Martic and Borisav Mikelic 
expressed their agreement both as regards the policy of 
resolving disputes by peaceful means and as regards the danger 
of extremism, and they stressed their efforts to strengthen the 
legal institutions and legality. 
  Mirko Marjanovic, prime minister of the Republic of Serbia, 
also took part in the talks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7848 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prime Minister Marjanovic on New Budget Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Prime Minister Marjanovic on New Budget Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604200994 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604200994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Marjanovic by </F>
Ivica Milosavljevic in Belgrade on 6 April -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Milosavljevic] The proposal of the law on budget 
was endorsed at the session of the Republican Government today. 
We asked Mr. Mirko Marjanovic to give an exclusive statement on 
the occasion for the Radio and Television of Serbia. 
  [Marjanovic] Well, this is as follows: The proposal of the 
law on the budget of the Republic of Serbia for 1994 was drafted 
in conformity with the basic program of monetary reconstruction 
and the strategy of economic development of the country, and 
particularly in conformity with the government program adopted 
at the latest session of the Serbian Assembly when the 
Government was approved. One should also stress here that, 
according to the proposal of the law on the budget for 1994, 
public spending in Serbia is lower by more than 30 percent 
compared to the planned level of public spending in the 
consolidated balance on the level of the country. Now here is 
what that means: That means that the planned deficit in the 
basic program has been reduced from 1.9 billion dinars to 780 
million and we can claim with full confidence that we have 
completely realistic sources of income for covering this budget 
deficit. We can also claim with confidence that with this 
reduction of public spending by almost two-thirds we have 
established a basis for a normal program and for the realization 
of the program of economic recovery of the country. 
  I can also stress here that the social program for Serbia 
was 
also included in the budget and that with the basic principles 
and strategy of the budget established in this way, we in fact 
enabled the further removal of the burden on the economy and 
citizens, which should also be pointed out. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7849 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Renewal Movement Predicts Early Elections </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Renewal Movement Predicts Early Elections </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704115294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1057 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704115294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 7 Apr (TANJUG) -- Ivan Kovacevic, 
spokesman of the Serbian Renewal Movement [SPO], said in a 
statement for TANJUG today that it is quite possible that 
federal elections will be held, and added that he believes it 
will be soon. 
  Kovacevic believes this will be "yet another trick" of the 
Socialist Party of Serbia which, he believes, wants to retain 
the existing, completely unjust electoral system. 
  "The Socialists would like to use this move to prolong their 
authority, despite the fact that two-thirds of Serbia's citizens 
do not vote for them," the SPO spokesman said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7850 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Surplus Workers Urged To Return to Villages </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Surplus Workers Urged To Return to Villages </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0220C Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 4 Mar 94 pp 30-31 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0220C </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tanja Jakobi: "When the Illusions Die"] </F>
  [Text] "Approximately 180,000 people, representing the 
technological redundancy in the economy of Serbia, could 
immediately move to the country," the deputy director of the 
republic labor market has said. Dr. Zoran Popov, member of the 
coordinating body for implementing the anti-inflation program, 
who is responsible for social welfare issues, laconically stated 
that those who go back to agriculture will be far better off 
than those who stay in the city. He added that 250,000 out of 
the 2 million employees in the socialized sector of the economy 
possess an average of seven hectares of land. And that, it 
seems, is that: The half-breeds should simply pack their 
suitcases and go back to their native village. 
  Dr. Dragoslav Avramovic, professor, whose team includes Dr. 
Popov, never misses a chance to say that no one will be left 
without a job and put out on the street. Jovan Zebic, federal 
deputy prime minister (responsible for carrying out this 
program), has said that amendments of the law will soon be 
examined making it possible for enterprise directors to rid 
themselves of technological redundancies more easily, but only 
to a maximum of 20 percent of the total labor force. The Serbian 
Government (whose task it is to put the measures in its domain 
in operational terms) has extended the validity of the current 
decree on mandatory leave to 31 March and left it to the new 
government to rack its brain and leave office because of the 
worker dissatisfaction that is in the offing. 
  In the meantime that part of Avramovic's program which said 
that the surplus of employed persons in the economy is estimated 
at a million people has been "edited." Forecasts are now being 
mentioned stating that in the second half of the year 300,000 
people would be on mandatory leave, as many again would be the 
"employed redundancy," accompanied by the cloudy remark that in 
the first half of the year that ratio was somewhat less 
favorable. The suitcases of the half-breeds, then, can stay 
where they are at least two months more. 
<H5>  The Mistake </H5>
  Just as a law was passed a few months ago whereby everyone 
who has a private firm and works in the socialized sector must 
urgently give up one or the other fired up the "small fry" 
(owners of firms that exist on paper) and caused a stampede in 
front of the registration courts, so this idea of purging the 
"sluggish socialist economy" has caused static. The 
half-breeds--fearing to lose their jobs, are saying that the 
land is not actually theirs, and the "city dwellers" are 
exulting in secret. 
  There is some economic and social basis for referring to the 
half-breeds as a category that can be "displaced" from the 
factories most easily and painlessly. An analysis done in the 
Economics Institute in Belgrade shows that in the dramatic 
stratifications of population over the last 15 years, and 
especially over the last three years, the nonfarm and purely 
agricultural households have been impoverished the most, while 
the half-breeds suddenly escaped poverty. Most of the 
half-breeds come from households that have at least the average 
landholding, and very few of them have small parcels. 
  A few other figures support the position of the government: 
In the breakdown of the income of these households, 45 percent 
comes from regular employment, while the remainder is income 
from a shop or from a farm. Ergo, the half-breeds have already 
created a second and stronger source of income. Third, the 
half-breeds by and large have lower qualifications, so that it 
is easier for the firm to do without this kind of manpower. 
Finally, the government (and society), in view of investments in 
their education, is losing less by their return to the country 
than through the "brain drain" of highly trained personnel. 
  "The return of the half-breeds to the country is a frivolous 
idea and completely unfeasible if we preclude repression," is 
the categorical assertion of Dr. Mladen Stojanov, professor of 
rural sociology at the School of Agriculture in Novi Sad. "The 
half-breeds are people who work somewhere and have a bit of land 
or some tie to the country. It is certain that they will 
strengthen their ties to the country, but they will not leave 
the city." 
<H5>  The Misunderstandings </H5>
  The hard logic of capital, Dr. Stojanov explains, says that 
agriculture has been and still is a subsidized sector, and there 
is no chance of its becoming so profitable that it would 
"outstrip" the city. "It is only the airheads and the burghers 
in the city who tend to think: `You have carrots, you have 
potatoes, life is easy for you.' Those are misunderstandings." 
  Professor Stojanov is given indirect support for his 
position 
by Dr. Petar Markovic, another professor who teaches in the 
School of Agriculture in Belgrade. In an open letter sent to 
Prime Minister Kontic, he warns that "rural life is being 
extinguished because for decades income has been taken away from 
agriculture and because of a number of unresolved issues related 
to the status of farmers, land policy, and settlement," and in 
demographic terms rural areas are being depopulated. So, there 
is no economic interest in going back to the country. 
  "All our experience last year," says Dr. Mirosinka Dinkic of 
the Economics Institute in response, "shows that those workers 
who were sent on mandatory leave and had land in the country 
have themselves and without pressure turned to farming, behaving 
in accordance with their own sound economic interest, and thanks 
to that they have preserved their standard of living." 
  When she speaks about the return of the half-breeds to the 
country, Dr. Dinkic is primarily thinking of the smaller cities 
in Serbia and their industry, which was in fact conceived in 
order to employ the rural population. That "subspecies," as we 
might call it, of half-breed (by contrast with those in 
Belgrade, for example, who have built houses on the outskirts of 
the city, but their farms are somewhere in the south of Serbia) 
already lives in the country, has up to now been commuting to a 
nearby city to work in a factory (Gornji Milanovac, Kragujevac, 
Cacak, Backa Palanka), so that it was engaged in production work 
in the first part of the day and farm work in the latter part. 
"Why should these people not devote themselves exclusively to 
farming, at least temporarily, now that the situation in 
industry is so difficult? The idea of the program is not 
repression nor distributing pink slips, but for the person who 
is receiving the minimum compensation from the budget and has 
social security to decide himself whether he will go into the 
private sector, say, or to what is perhaps closer to 
him--farming. In that case, the government could stimulate this 
process by exempting those who return from the tax on cadastre 
income," Dr. Dinkic said. 
  Because the average mixed household has four members and in 
a 
third of such households both adult members are employed in a 
socialized firm, it would be enough for only one to return to 
farming, while the other could maintain ties to the city. In the 
opinion of Dr. Dinkic, there is no reason to overlook Belgrade 
either, because most of the half-breeds are mainly employed 
seasonally on construction work, they usually do not bring their 
family to the capital (so the problem of educating the children 
is not raised), or at the least they have parents in the country. 
  "In order to create space for those people to go back to the 
country, they would have to have plots larger than 50 hectares, 
not three hectares, which is the average for Serbia, and a great 
deal of startup capital, which they do not have," Dr. Stojanov 
said. 
  Prof. Jeremija Simic of the School of Agriculture in 
Belgrade 
points to another dimension of this problem: 60 percent of the 
manpower in Yugoslavia comes from mixed households and for 
precisely that reason they have been able to withstand the 
crisis, and the entire society thanks to them. "Why would any of 
them at this point want to change that position of theirs, which 
is not good, but tolerable, for a position that is worse?" 
Professor Simic asked. 
  "So long as the process of going back to the country is a 
spontaneous and individual act, that is fine. But a large-scale 
return to the country is a process that has not been recorded 
anywhere in the world. Any directive from the government, 
however well-intentioned it might be, would be dangerous. Here 
is why: Let us assume that a worker in a firm has high 
qualifications and land, while another does not have a farm and 
has low qualifications. In that case, is the firm supposed to 
get rid of the expert, only because he has some other income, 
and commit itself to the social welfare approach and hold on to 
the one who is not contributing to the work process, but would 
be a welfare case if he left the firm?" Contrary to the 
proclaimed goal of the anti-inflation program--to move social 
welfare out of the economy, Professor Simic believes that both 
the firm and government must conduct some kind of social welfare 
policy. He cites Sartid 1913, which has turned from castings to 
raising mushrooms, as an example of how the technological 
surplus can be employed, but in close relation to agriculture. 
"Other firms might also lease land for their workers and engage 
in the production of medicinal herbs, the raising of mushrooms, 
or fish farming," NIN's informant proposed. "Aside from the 
natural factors, live manpower is our only resource, and instead 
of the idea of a return to the country, we should turn toward 
production programs which seek intensive activation of manpower." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7851 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Resistance to Military Service Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Resistance to Military Service Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20602A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20602A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] South Slav media have been carrying 
reports that the Yugoslav military leadership has become 
increasingly worried about troop morale. Fewer and fewer 
soldiers are going to war voluntarily, and the authorities in 
Serbia and Montenegro have had to resort to forceful 
mobilization of Serb refugees. Commenting on this issue in a 3 
February interview on Sarajevo radio, Bosnian President Alija 
Izetbegovic said that the Yugoslav military may be suffering a 
"shortage of manpower" and having problems with "the morale of 
that manpower." 
  In the 17 March issue of the Ljubljana daily DNEVNIK, the 
Slovene Press Agency [STA] reports that few conscripts are 
responding to call-ups in Montenegro. Many of them obtain 
medical certificates attesting that they are physically 
incapable of serving in the armed forces. Quoting the Podgorica 
weekly LIBERAL, STA states that such false medical certificates 
are sold by draft officers at a high price, adding that many 
reservists prefer going to jail to enlisting for the "defense of 
the fatherland." According to the report, the military police 
are quite active, picking up draftees on the streets and 
delivering them to military barracks. 
  STA reports that the "action" is supposedly coordinated by 
Major Veselin Sljivancanin, a "man on the wanted list" and the 
"hero of Vukovar." As commander of the 5th Motorized Brigade of 
the Podgorica Corps, he is also in charge of all Montenegrin 
draft boards. According to "well-informed sources," he was sent 
from Belgrade to Montenegro to "put military affairs in order 
and raise the morale of the military." "Other sources" claim 
that his assignment is to prevent the possible secession of 
Montenegro from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, if necessary 
by utilizing the "methods he employed in Vukovar." Examining his 
role in Montenegro, the 5 November issue of the Podgorica 
opposition weekly MONITOR concludes that Sljivancanin, "a lover 
of the Socialist Party of Serbia" and a proven fighter for the 
"Serbian cause," had been sent to exert "federal" pressure on 
the Montenegrin Government. Although he was allegedly received 
"cooly" by his immediate superior, General Milorad Obradovic, 
MONITOR reports, many people feel that Sljivancanin might remain 
in Podgorica permanently, while others believe that his 
assignment must be viewed as a "temporary solution" within the 
context of personnel changes in the Yugoslav Army. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7852 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Life for Serbs, Albanians in Kosovo Contrasted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Life for Serbs, Albanians in Kosovo Contrasted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0220B Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 7 Mar 94 pp 26-29 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0220B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Perica Vucinic: "The Kosovo Academy of the Deaf"] </F>
  [Text] The most recent Serbian-Albanian ambiguity in 
Kosovo: On Wednesday, 23 February, the authorities shut down for 
good the Kosovo Academy of Sciences and Arts [KANU] and moved in 
the association of the deaf. This act was interpreted on the 
Albanian side as "yet another repressive act of the authorities, 
a smothering of the right to authentic culture," while the 
Serbian authorities saw it as a manifestation of the 
law-governed state, that is, implementation of the decision 
under which the KANU is a branch of the SANU [Serbian Academy of 
Sciences and Arts] and under which the title of member of the 
academy is obtained by the standards of the parent academy in 
Belgrade. If the dispute between the directly opposed sides is 
viewed from outside, this creation of an "academy of the deaf" 
seems like cynicism. 
  Life in Kosovo, however, does not take place between those 
two signs. It is in them. Albanian life, which is manifested 
above all in education, the socialization of one's own life, 
sports, and business, and Serbian life--personified in 
administrative authority, the police, financial oversight 
agencies, and the economy, which is mainly in the socialized 
sector and dead. The stories about the "divided corso in 
Pristina" are old and pathetic. The Serbs and Albanians 
promenade in their own sections of the city--the former in the 
center, the latter in Capi (in Serbian--Neck). What they have in 
common is garbage, which seems surreal, there is so much of it. 
And no one is collecting it. 
  Operating in parallel, the self-proclaimed Albanian Republic 
of Kosovo (recognized only by the state of Albania) and the 
Republic of Serbia give the appearance that they are functioning 
and are legitimate, and, one would say, they are making an 
effort to preserve those illusions. In order to protect their 
proclaimed exclusive sovereignty on this territory, the Serbian 
authorities have not terminated the fiscal policy of the 
republic of Albanians, which requires every Albanian private 
operator to pay into the budget 5 to 10 percent of his net 
income, but by way of sovereignty it also collects the tax. In 
the Sami Fraseri High School, teachers are not sure whether 
their work is legal or illegal, and the same dilemma seems to be 
bothering the police, who 100 meters away from the school watch 
the river of children returning from school. 
<H5>  The Law-Governed State </H5>
  "The law-governed state is functioning, Kosovo is 
increasingly stable, public peace and order are better than at 
any time up to now, anarchy has been averted," says Dr. Milos 
Simovic, president of Kosovo Okrug. At the same time, he also 
says that "the Albanians are boycotting the entire system" and 
that "they are internationalizing every problem they have." 
  "The Albanians have conquered Kosovo and Metohija [Kosmet] 
economically. Time is on their side, and we are happy that there 
is no shooting here, that we can say that Kosmet is an integral 
part of Serbia," says Tomislav Sekulic, people's deputy and one 
of the most distinguished Kosovo Serbs, who is dissatisfied. 
  Typically for Kosovo Serbs, both Dr. Simovic and Sekulic 
would say that Kosovo is not lost, but what every Serb shrinks 
from is Albanian capital, which, again "typically for their 
nationality," they estimate at 95 percent. "We had an economy in 
our hands and we gambled it away," Sekulic says. "Trepca is not 
operating, it has turned out that it could operate in the hands 
of the English before the war, in the hands of the Germans 
during the war, in the hands of the Albanians after the war, but 
for all practical purposes it was shut down by the Serbs. In 
actuality, incompetent Serbs." 
  Since a state of emergency was declared by the Republic of 
Serbia, economic facilities in Kosovo have died. Trepca was 
producing 100,000 metric tons of lead in ingots, 40,000 tons of 
electrolytic zinc, about 100 tons of silver, 30 tons of bismuth 
and cadmium.... Depending on the situation on the London 
Exchange, it was earning between $100 and $150 million a year. 
  The economy and the infrastructure, in which, according to 
Sekulic, nearly $10 billion were invested between 1965 and 1990, 
are going to ruin. Kosovo abounds in fenced-off lots in which 
there are only watchmen for the construction cranes which do not 
operate, structures that look like empty stables.... "When what 
was needed was intelligence, the profiteering spirit was 
operative," says Sekulic, who sees the devastated Serbian 
government-owned economy as a victim of private appetites, which 
are gnawing it away. 
  In the process of ownership transformation in more than 100 
of the largest Serbian enterprises in Kosovo over the last three 
years, the Fund for Development of Serbia, without any 
additional investment, has transferred the majority share of 
public capital to the fund or related firms in Serbia, and in 
all the transformations the fund or firms have become majority 
owners. And in a meeting of the fund held in Pristina last 
November, it was concluded that "the technological level of 
installed capacity in Kosovo exceeds the quality of equipment of 
firms in Serbia and exceeds the needs of the Kosovo economy." In 
that meeting, there was an initiative to "move" the 
technological equipment from Kosovo to a "defined space." Since 
control over Kosovo's economy was taken over, more than 100,000 
workers of Albanian nationality have been discharged from the 
government sector on various grounds, according to Albanian 
estimates. Which is why the Albanians are not so careful as 
Sekulic in separating the honest from the dishonest Serbian 
government- appointed enterprise directors. They are more 
inclined to say: "See how the Serbs are running the economy!" 
  The private sector in Kosovo--about 10,000 firms--is mainly 
in the hands of Albanian citizens. According to unofficial, but 
competent sources, last year that sector possessed 8.33 percent 
of the total capital committed in the Kosovo economy and 
produced about 30 percent of the total gross product and 
realized about 45 percent of the total earnings of the Kosovo 
economy. 
  In none of these figures do we see the one about 95 percent 
of the capital being Albanian; however, workers abroad have been 
contributing to overall Albanian wealth. Depending on tactical 
political needs, the number of Albanians living and working 
abroad varies in political statements between 250,000 and 
500,000. According to Naif Zeka, Ibrahim Rugova's adviser for 
the economy, with the 3-percent linear tax which these workers 
pay the so-called Republic of Kosovo, they are furnishing 35 
percent of budget revenues. Aside from the budget, they are 
supporting or helping members of their household who have 
remained in Kosovo. Naif Zeka says that 22,000 families have 
been receiving regular social assistance and 36,000 occasional 
assistance. Nevertheless, most of the money is going to the 
schools. According to the figures of Dr. Dzavid Ahmeti, Dr. 
Rugova's adviser for education, the parallel Albanian-language 
educational process involves 274,000 elementary children, 64,000 
high school students, and 16,000 university students studying 
under about 20,000 teachers. 
<H5>  Settlement </H5>
  The financial superiority of the Albanians is offered to the 
"naked eye" in the form of luxury cars, elegant restaurants, 
exclusive shops, and white satellite antennas which irritate the 
Serbs as they were once irritated by the traditional white 
Albanian skullcap. They say that they were installed to receive 
the satellite broadcasting from Albania. And probably that was 
the motive for buying the antennas, but aside from two hours of 
Albanian programming, the Kosovo Albanian is offered another 
dozen West European channels, whose influence is noticeable in 
the school, on the street, and probably in the home. 
  Demographic growth is the other fear of the Kosovo Serbs. 
The 
estimates of both Serbian and Albanian demographers, which are 
that in 50 to 60 years the two nationalities will be numerically 
equal in the Republic of Serbia--encourage the one and frighten 
the other. That is why the topic "settlement of Kosovo" is the 
most frequent one among Serbs. 
  The Serbian national bloc is seeking a solution by speeding 
up settlement and financial incentives for returnees. In the 
Statistical Bureau in Pristina, we were not able to get a figure 
on migration, because the bureau no longer has jurisdiction over 
that. The last figure on the number of those moving in and 
moving out was recorded by Jedinstvo of Pristina at the end of 
the first quarter of last year. "Incoming" was one (1) greater 
than "outgoing." 
  Dragan Icic, president of the Association for Settlement of 
Kosmet, is announcing a rally for collective settlement. 
"Immense money has been spent to build 184 housing units for 
returnees, but there are neither the housing units nor the 
returnees," Icic says angrily, adding that the closest relatives 
and friends of "the powers that be in Kosovo" have moved into 
those housing units. 
  The president of the association says that the demonstrators 
at their rally will seek accountability for many things. Among 
them, who sold to the Albanians the housing units that were 
purchased and who does not like the program for settlement of 
Kosovo and why? 
  At the entrance to Pec from the direction of Decani, a lad 
has slung a semiautomatic on his back. In his hands are a duffle 
bag and boots. He obviously has just been issued that equipment. 
From the way in which he wears it--nonchalantly--in the 
overflowing suburb, he obviously believes that he has found the 
right weapon against the Albanian demographic bomb. 
  However, Ismailj Redzepi, member of the Presidium of the 
Democratic Alliance of Kosovo, does not believe in the 
demographic forecast most frequently presented. "The Albanians 
are moving in other directions, and the demographic growth is 
settling down, but demography is a good thing for short-term 
political manipulation," he says. 
  "The thesis about a demographic intersection of Serbs and 
Albanians in Serbia in the near future is mentioned in every 
connection, but I would say that false conclusions are being 
drawn from false premises, because no one knows for certain how 
many Albanians there are in Serbia," is the opinion of Dr. 
Dragisa Velickovic, professor of the theory of economic 
development in Pristina. On the basis of the drastic difference 
between the 1961 Census and the later ones in 1971 and 1981, he 
doubts the validity of the latter. He considers it a mistake to 
project the growth of the Albanian population at present rates, 
because, he says, "the Albanian population is just ending the 
transition phase, and in 10 years at the latest that population 
will have a growth rate between 1 and 1.5 percent." Velickovic 
explains his forecast in terms of the Europeanization of the 
former communist oligarchy, which has become an entrepreneurial 
oligarchy, and the desire of young Albanians employed abroad to 
become entrepreneurs; previously, they invested their capital to 
build large houses for communal living, but now they invest in 
private business. Dr. Velickovic goes on to say that the space 
of Kosovo-Metohija is overpopulated, and more striking than the 
demographic figures is his datum that the streams which Kosovo 
possesses allow it to "maintain" two and a half million people 
at the most. 
  No one has as yet made public the "frustrations over water 
supply." Aside from the Albanian superiority in money and 
population, the Serbs are also disturbed by the military power 
of the West, which they fear might help the Albanians, and the 
Albanians are disturbed by the Serbian military power. Azem 
Vlasi, former politician, who is now a lawyer, says that the 
logic of force is the only logic of Slobodan Milosevic, and he 
is disturbed not so much by that logic as the fact that the 
"president who arrested him" is unable to govern without 
problems. In the Serbian political bloc, no one believes in war 
as a solution. 
  Dr. Simovic, who heads the okrug, finds the reason for this 
in the fact that the Serbs and Albanians have never waged war 
directly with one another and the fact that the latter would 
never dare to destroy their population and capital. This way of 
thinking is typical of the Serbs. "Last year, I issued them 130 
permits to open gasoline stations. These are all facilities 
worth between 250,000 and several million marks, and when 
someone opens one, he certainly is not preparing for war," says 
Milan Jocic, director of the Provincial Fund for Water Resources. 
  The Serbs do not think that they could be the ones to blame 
for war, nor do they believe that the Albanians would start it. 
The latter, meanwhile, think that after Croatia and Bosnia and 
in the international situation, which is not inclined toward 
Serbia in the least, it has had enough of war-making 
adventurism. However, the two sides have not found a way to 
communicate even that little bit to each other officially and 
publicly. There is no dialogue, as if this were a curse of the 
newly opened "academy for the deaf." In the meantime, two 
national councils, both of them closed, are continuing to live 
alongside one another, and they cannot agree even to collect the 
garbage. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7853 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_c_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Crisis in Customs Union With Slovakia Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Crisis in Customs Union With Slovakia Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0192A Bratislava MOSTY in Czech 1 Mar 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94CH0192A </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava MOSTY </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Jan Rychlik: "What Does Customs Union </F>
Actually Mean?"] 
  [Text] The broader reading public certainly does not 
require a special introduction to the well-known fairy tale that 
Jan Werich reworked in a more modern version under the title 
"Queen Scuder I." And so, merely to refresh memory, I recall the 
main point: A mountain woman was supposed to come visit the 
young king "neither on foot nor riding in a cart, neither naked 
nor dressed, and bring him a gift--which was not a gift." From 
the Czech viewpoint, this is somehow what even the election 
program for the currently governing HZDS [Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia] looks like, according to which a sovereign 
Slovakia with independent international standing was to be a 
component of Czechoslovakia in a common state. 
  It would seem that certain circles even visualize the 
functioning of the customs union in a similar manner. This 
includes not only the attempt by Ministers Ducky and Toth to 
limit the importation of Czech foodstuffs to Slovakia with the 
help of introducing special certificates to verify quality 
(although more than 99 percent of all products are produced in 
the Czech Republic as well as in Slovakia according to identical 
standards, and a Czech certification would thus have to 
suffice), but also the populist criticism by Petr Weiss, who 
accused the Meciar government, this time absolutely 
unjustifiably, of having signed the customs union agreement and 
having thus made it possible for the Czech Republic to export 
its unemployment to Slovakia, thus depriving the state of $90 
million (see PRACE, 17 February 1994). 
  Translated into intelligible language: Slovak economic 
circles would like to have such a customs union that would give 
them access to Czech markets but that would, at the same time, 
make it impossible for cheaper Czech agricultural production to 
gain access to Slovakia. As can be seen, this is a project that 
is similar to the notion that Slovakia can, simultaneously, make 
use of the advantages of a common state with the Czechs, as well 
as the advantages of independence. It is interesting that, 
although developments in 1992 clearly showed that this is 
impossible, some politicians continue to try to square this 
circle. 
  It is time to state some things openly. Customs union means 
the elimination of all of the quantitative obstacles to mutual 
trade. The Czech Republic enjoys better conditions for 
agriculture, and, therefore, its production is and will be 
cheaper than Slovakia's. Because it does not lie within human 
capabilities to transform the Tatra Mountains into a fertile 
Hana [Moravian plain], there is no choice but to come to terms 
with the given status and to see what the possibilities for 
solving the problem are. Because the unfavorable balance of 
mutual trade would soon exhaust the Slovak preserves of foreign 
exchange, given a clearing type of accounting (as is well known, 
the debtor must settle any excess in the marginal credit range 
in freely convertible currency), there are, essentially, only 
two possibilities: Either Slovakia disbands the customs union 
and introduces customs duties and import surcharges at its 
borders, a move by which it would protect its domestic market, 
or it will devalue its currency, which will make Czech products 
more expensive in Slovakia and Slovak products less expensive in 
the Czech Republic, so that Czech production will no longer be 
capable of competing on the Slovak market. In the first case, 
this means the introduction of reciprocal measures by the Czech 
Customs Administration because the Czech Republic has no reason, 
on the basis of some kind of philanthropic purposes, to permit 
Slovak goods to enter its market when it cannot export its 
products to Slovakia. The second possibility is, of course, a 
politically sensitive matter because it means devaluing the 
savings of the citizenry, a rise in prices, and inflation. In 
contrast to what it is possible to read occasionally in various 
periodicals, the Czech side would not benefit from devaluation, 
but this would obviously be the cleanest solution to bring about 
the recovery of Czech-Slovak trade. 
  In no event do the Czechs desire to counsel Slovakia on what 
to do. The decision lies fully on the Slovak side, although one 
thing is clear: The notion that the Czech Republic and the 
Slovak Republic will be exchanging, free of customs duties, only 
the production that the other republic is lacking is absolutely 
incompatible with the principles of free trade. It was a similar 
principle, which we did away with with such great pomp, upon 
which CEMA functioned under communism. The development of the 
European Economic Area and the successful termination of the 
negotiations of the Uruguay round of GATT clearly show that the 
road to Europe does not lead via protectionist measures. The 
would-be clever mountain woman is, therefore, proceeding very 
foolishly this time. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7854 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Olechowski Says Road to EU Difficult, Uncertain </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Olechowski Says Road to EU Difficult, Uncertain </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704090094 Warsaw PAP in Polish 0747 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0704090094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 7 Apr--Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski 
said in the Sejm today that Poland might get the status of a 
European Union [EU] member in about 2000. According to him, the 
road to the EU will be long, difficult, and uncertain. 
  The minister presented the reasons behind Poland's decision 
to strive for EU membership. He said that he will hand an 
application for membership to the Greek foreign minister in 
Athens tomorrow. 
  The minister said a sounding among 12 EU members indicates 
favorable reception of Poland's application. He added that over 
70 percent of Poles favor Poland's membership in the EU. 
  According to the Polish Government, Poland meets the EU 
conditions for membership application. These conditions are: 
the existence of stable democratic institutions, the observance 
of human rights, the rule of law and order, legislation being 
adapted to EU standards, and a market economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7855 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sejm Board Hears Report on EU Integration </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sejm Board Hears Report on EU Integration </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704095694 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 7 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0704095694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "U.K.:" "Report on Integration; Poland-European </F>
Union"] 
  [Text] Minister Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, the 
government's plenipotentiary for European integration and 
foreign assistance, presented the Sejm Commission for European 
Integration with a report on the implementation of a program of 
measures aimed at adapting the Polish economy and legal system 
to EU requirements. 
  The report, which was prepared on the basis of reports by 
individual ministries, deals with, among other things, the 
status of the adaptation and integration processes in the areas 
of the law and the economy, organizationally and institutionally. 
  "The program has not been and is not supposed to be 
something for its own sake but, instead, is the outline of a 
process whose scope and pace can be modified depending on 
changes occurring in both Poland and the EU," Minister 
Saryusz-Wolski said. 
  Among the adaptation measures, Poland's legal system has 
been 
dealt with as a priority, including measures dealing with the 
Customs Law, the Banking Law, the law on the protection of 
industrial and intellectual property, and the environmental 
protection law. This resulted in 38 scientific studies having 
been written by famous experts from all branches of law. One 
hundred and sixty draft laws were also reviewed from the 
standpoint of their conformity with European law. 
  In terms of long-term measures, experts are being trained, 
among other things, for cooperation with the European 
Communities, and work is being conducted on establishing 
institutional foundations for cooperation between Polish 
universities and prestigious schools of higher education in the 
West. 
  The Sejm deputies did not evaluate the working report 
because 
it will be debated at subsequent sessions by the commission. It 
was agreed that agriculture will be one of the first topics. As 
is well known, the biggest problem lies in adapting legal 
provision in force in Poland to EU requirements. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7856 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Czech Prime Minister on Ties With Neighbors </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Czech Prime Minister on Ties With Neighbors </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704093294 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 7 Apr 94 pp 1, 
23 </F>

<F P=103> WS0704093294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus by Barbara </F>
Sierszula; place and date not given: "Vaclav Klaus for 
RZECZPOSPOLITA; Relations With Poland Are Developing Normally"] 
  [Text] Before the Sunday (10 April) meeting between Czech 
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his Polish counterpart, Waldemar 
Pawlak, in the castle of Czocha near Lesna (in the vicinity of 
Jelenia Gora), the Czech prime minister answered a few questions 
for RZECZPOSPOLITA. 
  [Sierszula] Why will this meeting be of an informal nature? 
  [Klaus] I talked with Prime Minister Pawlak for only an 
hour, when President Clinton was visiting Prague. Now I remember 
that the informal meeting with former Prime Minister Hanna 
Suchocka was very successful, so I believe we should return to 
this tradition. 
  [Sierszula] As a result of your activities, almost no one 
uses the expression Visegrad Group any longer, and, instead, the 
states of our region are called CEFTA (Central European Free 
Trade Agreement). However, do you think CEFTA is really 
functioning? 
  [Klaus] CEFTA is operating to such a degree that its member 
states have been able to reach an agreement. What has been 
agreed on is functioning; however, one should think about 
whether we should go any further. Among other topics, this is 
what I would like to discuss with Prime Minister Pawlak. 
  [Sierszula] Are you satisfied with the present state of 
relations between the Czech Republic and its neighbors, such as 
Poland and Germany? 
  [Klaus] The relations are what they are. They result from 
the relations in the "micro" platform, from everyday contacts 
among various enterprises, companies, establishments, and people 
of culture. What is being done by the governments, prime 
ministers, presidents is only the tip of the iceberg, which is 
not the most important thing. Politicians should try to build 
up the contacts among states. Incidentally, I do not get the 
impression that these "microcontacts," which are said to be of 
paramount importance, between the Czech Republic and Poland, 
Germany, Austria, and Slovakia, are bad. 
  [Sierszula] What do you think is currently the greatest 
problem in Polish-Czech relations? 
  [Klaus] I do not think there are any fundamental, urgent 
problems that would call for an SOS meeting. I think our 
relations are developing normally. We are interested in 
building them up further. Sometimes they make our lives a 
little complicated, and the atmosphere is marred by various 
attempts to outrun each other in the race for NATO or the 
European Union. We should try to avoid this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7857 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Situation of Poles in Lithuania Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Situation of Poles in Lithuania Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0604140094 Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 6 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0604140094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Edward Krzemien: "Polish Troubles in Lithuania"] </F>
  [Text] In two weeks' time in Vilnius, the presidents 
of Poland and Lithuania will sign a Polish-Lithuanian treaty. 
Perhaps this will be the end of disputes between the two 
countries, which lasted more than two years, about the past. 
But it would be hard to expect Polish troubles in Lithuania to 
be over with the signing of the treaty. 
  Attacks on Jan Widacki, the Polish Republic's ambassador to 
Vilnius, may serve as an example here. Lithuanian nationalists 
have been accusing him of trying to polonize the Vilnius area, 
while leaders of the Polish minority have been accusing him of 
destroying Polish elements there. 
<H5>  Attacks on Ambassador </H5>
  "The Polish ambassador to Lithuania does not represent his 
country's interests well"--this is what Ryszard Maciejkianiec, 
chief of the Polish faction in the Lithuanian parliament and a 
member of the leadership of the Association of Poles in 
Lithuania [ZPL], said recently while speaking in Warsaw before 
the Sejm commission charged with maintaining contacts with Poles 
abroad. "His activity exacerbates conflicts among Poles in 
Lithuania, and also between Poles and Lithuanians." 
  On the other hand, Lithuanian nationalists are also sparing 
no criticism against Widacki. Seven Lithuanian right-wing 
parties issued a special statement six months ago in which they 
said that "Ambassador Widacki, through his activities and 
statements to the Lithuanian and Polish press, contributes to 
the Polish national minority constantly making unjustified 
claims." 
  Ambassador Widacki himself told GAZETA WYBORCZA that he 
"deserves" the criticism because he publicly refuses to support 
ZPL leaders whose goal is to enclose the Polish community in a 
ghetto. 
  "We have been cooperating with organizations that 
implement a positive program. We support the Polish School 
Mother Country [Polska Macierz Szkolna] and also Polish folklore 
and theatrical bands. We have brought in 225,000 Polish books, 
and we have made a donation to a regional hospital in 
Soleczniki, in the form of 3 billion zlotys worth of 
medications," Widacki says. 
<H5>  Three Groups of People of Polish Origin </H5>
  The embassy intervenes with the Lithuanian authorities in 
all 
cases of violation of rights of Poles, which are guaranteed by 
European standards and by a Polish-Lithuanian declaration of 13 
January 1992. Among others, the interventions concern the 
dissolved regional councils, a return of land to Poles, and the 
spelling of geographical names and Polish last names. Recently, 
there was an intervention in the case of the Lithuanian 
authorities ceasing to print Polish textbooks. A majority 
of our interventions were successful," Widacki says. 
  He divides Poles living in Lithuania into three groups. The 
first, called the incorporationist group, is based on 
the principle that the current Polish-Lithuanian border is just 
temporary and that sooner or later the regions will be 
incorporated into the Polish state. The group is very weak and 
has few members. It includes the oldest generation and also some 
extreme activists. 
  A second group, called the autonomy group, has 
as its goal the establishment in Lithuania of Polish 
administrative and political autonomy. It has the biggest 
number of members from among activists in the Polish minority. 
  The third group, one of citizens' integration, is 
based on the principle of maintaining identity and a cultural 
and language separation, but, at the same time, it wants to 
integrate with the Lithuanian society and to occupy posts in the 
structures of the Lithuanian state. The group is represented 
the least from among activists for people of Polish origin. 
Czeslaw Okinczyc, a deputy to the Lithuanian parliament, and 
also people associated with the ZNAD WILII biweekly and with a 
radio station of the same name, are members of the group. 
<H5>  Who Is Behind Whom </H5>
  Each of those groups looks for contacts with political 
groups 
in Poland. The "autonomists," who are the most numerous, first 
looked for support within the Christian-National Union, followed 
by the Movement for the Republic. Then they found an attentive 
ear among some politicians for the Polish Peasant Party and the 
Democratic Left Alliance [SLD], which is demonstrated by a 
January letter to Poland's supreme authorities with demands of 
"autonomy for Poles in Lithuania," which was signed by 82 
deputies from those clubs (let us recall that some of those from 
the SLD who had signed the letter withdrew their signatures 
before the end of January). 
  Ambassador Widacki explains that supporters of Polish 
autonomy in Lithuania are demanding that Poland force the 
Lithuanian authorities to implement constitutional amendments, 
among other things, and, at the same time, are demanding that 
their efforts to build autonomy from the rank-and-file level be 
supported financially. They want money for a Polish health 
center, a Polish hospital, a Polish university, and so forth. 
  According to Widacki, that is a dangerous position to take 
because it can only lead to exacerbating the conflict between 
Poles and Lithuanians. 
  "That is why we will persistently refuse to support 
building Polish autonomy from the rank-and-file level," 
Widacki states. 
<H5>  In Defense of Individuals </H5>
  I heard similar views in the Polish Foreign Ministry. 
"Poland wants to protect the rights of minorities--both 
those living in Poland and Poles living abroad--exclusively 
based on rights of individuals," says Stefan Meller, a 
director at the Foreign Ministry's European Department. "But we 
are opposed to any kind of joint rights--that is, to such rights 
that lead to recognizing an entire minority as a subject of 
international law and to granting it political autonomy." 
  "The Polish-Lithuanian treaty is supposed to serve the 
goal," 
Professor Meller says, "of having rights of individuals making 
up the Polish minority in Lithuania observed from every 
standpoint." 
  --According to Lithuanian sources, there are 268,000 Poles 
living in Lithuania. The ZPL, even though its membership 
decreases each year, is the biggest Polish organization. A year 
ago, it had 14,000 members, whereas, currently, the number of 
members is 6,000. Apart from that, the Polish School Mother 
Country is active in Lithuania and has about 1,500 teachers as 
its members. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7858 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Walesa-Pawlak-Kwasniewski Interactions Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Walesa-Pawlak-Kwasniewski Interactions Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0604121594 Warsaw POLITYKA in Polish 9 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> WS0604121594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLITYKA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Janina Paradowska: "A New Bermuda Triangle; </F>
President, Prime Minister, Chairman"] 
  [Text] Without a doubt, Aleksander Kwasniewski, 
fleeing from journalists by going down a ladder from a window, 
has become the political hit of the past few days. In the past, 
there was talk about Professor Geremek to the effect that, when 
he is on the stairs, you never know whether he is going up or 
down the stairs. This time, there was no such dilemma: 
Kwasniewski was obviously going down the ladder. Does his 
going down have a symbolic meaning? 
  If one takes a look at political events of the past few 
weeks, one comes to the conclusion that, apart from the 
confusion (which in fact should not be taking place because a 
coalition is in power that has such an enormous majority that 
definitely no other coalition will have this type of majority in 
the years to come), there are a lot of other things as well. A 
few pieces are emerging that compose quite a definite picture. 
And the picture is not that new, by the way. 
  It was clear from the beginning of the coalition consisting 
of the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] and the Polish Peasant 
Party [PSL] that it is based on a lack of mutual confidence by 
the partners, and that acting in a way that would avoid 
deepening this lack of confidence will be one of the most 
significant problems. I dare say that nothing positive has been 
accomplished in that regard, but, instead, a lot has been done 
to increase the lack of confidence. Everyone is terribly excited 
about the president's refusing to appoint Dariusz Rosati deputy 
prime minister and finance minister, whereas I am surprised that 
Mr. Rosati wanted to be a candidate at all, after Prime Minister 
Pawlak reordered his office (an hour before going to the 
Belweder) by dismissing Witold Modzelewski of the Finance 
Ministry and appointing Mr. Jan Kubik of the PSL in such a hurry 
that the person concerned was not even notified. I can see no 
difference of merit between the situation that forced Marek 
Borowski to make his dramatic resignation and what happened 
recently. Back then, a deputy minister was dismissed behind the 
minister's back, whereas this time the changes were even more 
wide-ranging. This fact contradicts, of course, a popular 
theory that the president and the prime minister had a deal in 
Rosati's case. If they did indeed have a deal, what would be 
the goal of the prime minister (who usually procrastinates in 
signing various nominations) signing whatever came across his 
desk? The only goal was that he was rather sure of the 
nomination, and he wanted to have his own man in the Finance 
Ministry, who would take care of the PSL's interests, not just 
in the sense of party interests but also--let us be fair--the 
interests of the countryside electorate. 
  Peasant activists were not thrilled at all by the fact that 
a 
large part of low-interest credits (established within the "1 
Million Per Hectare" program) found themselves in Warsaw banks, 
where farmers tend not to do business. They were also not very 
happy about the fact that the candidate for deputy prime 
minister for economic affairs has not even met the PSL 
Parliamentary Club, despite the fact that the club asked for 
such a meeting. Rosati is definitely an excellent candidate for 
both posts for which he was chosen, but the way his candidacy 
was dealt with tends to shed a rather miserable light on 
politicians of the party that promoted Rosati. 
  It is clear that a few lessons from the past were forgotten 
in all of this. Aleksander Kwasniewski, who studies the history 
of the Citizens Parliamentary Club so diligently, so as to 
prevent it from repeating itself with regard to his own Sejm 
deputies club, somehow ignored the past case of Jaroslaw 
Kaczynski, who was the "main player" while the Jan Olszewski 
government was being formed. The main player soon became the 
prime minister's petitioner. It is a strange thing that the 
prime minister's post continues to be underestimated in Poland 
for some reason, despite the fact that it is the prime minister 
who has the instruments to exercise real power. After the 
PSL-SLD coalition was formed, it was not before the crisis 
associated with Marek Borowski's resignation that it was 
determined who really is the prime minister. From that moment 
on, it was clear that it is Waldemar Pawlak who is the prime 
minister. So, what should have been done was to reconsider once 
again the principles of cooperation within the coalition, and to 
put government and coalition ranks in order. But not a lot was 
done in that regard. An agreement has not been reached on ways 
of handling personnel changes, witness the case of Zbigniew 
Siemiatkowski, whose road to a post in the Defense Ministry 
[MON] has been so long and winding that one is entitled to feel 
that the road must indeed span the globe. 
  More importantly, an agreement has not been reached on 
program-related issues, either. In all of his recent 
interviews, Aleksander Kwasniewski emphasized that the previous 
crisis resulted in the budget no longer being nobody's budget 
and becoming instead the budget of Prime Minister Pawlak's 
government. That is true. But we still do not know whether 
privatization is a completely private business of Minister 
Wieslaw Kaczmarek, especially given that, during debates on a 
draft of a privatization statute, quite clear differences of 
opinion emerged between Minister Podkanski (PSL) and Minister 
Pol of the Union of Labor on the one hand, and the Ownership 
Transformations Ministry's chief, who is from the SLD, on the 
other. It is not known whether the whole concept of changes in 
the so-called civil service, which was drafted by the Council of 
Minister's Office (and whose effect is making civil service 
political to the maximum extent possible), is Minister Strak's 
(PSL) business, or, alternatively, whether it is the coalition 
that is behind the concept and now supports it. If the latter 
is the case, the so-called coalition agreement concerning 
officials' professionalism and nonpolitical nature should go in 
the waste basket, and for good. These are some examples off the 
top of my head, which does not mean they are unimportant. Both 
problems pertain to the country's political system. 
  For many weeks, the coalition held sessions, they decided on 
who-knows-what, but nothing practical came out of it anyway, 
apart from headlines in the press announcing that Siemiatkowski 
will take his MON post the next day, while the prime minister 
will present the president with his candidate for deputy prime 
minister and finance minister the day after that. But, in fact, 
the prime minister (in his usual style) temporized with the 
signing of the nominations, and he procrastinated with 
presenting his own candidate. There was unofficial talk that an 
intentional humiliation of Aleksander Kwasniewski was taking 
place. It must be true that right now, the SLD insists on 
Rosati's candidacy (which misfired, it can now be said) in order 
to humiliate the prime minister, who does not look unhappy at 
all about the president's decision (Minister Strak, for 
instance, was kind enough to have made several public statements 
to the effect that a lack of finance minister brings no harm to 
the country's economy). But it is beyond any doubt that Prime 
Minister Pawlak is in a tough situation because he clearly does 
not want to see a war with President Walesa. By the way, that 
is no surprise--if you have a coalition partner who has more 
votes in the Sejm, you still need another ally even if you 
cannot trust him, either. It is always more convenient to have 
two solutions rather than to be against the wall all of the time. 
  Waldemar Pawlak experienced being against the wall before he 
was prime minister. But once he became the government's chief, 
he could see no reason for that to continue. Still, a question 
must be asked: Where is the endurance limit of the SLD ally, 
the kind of limit that, once crossed, will make the SLD say: 
"Enough," which can mean only one thing: the SLD leaving the 
coalition. At that point, Waldemar Pawlak, as chief of a 
minority government, even if it enjoys the Belweder's support, 
will become Aleksander Kwasniewski's petitioner because he will 
have to make efforts to gain Kwasniewski's support when it comes 
time to enact laws indispensable for the functioning of the 
country and its economy. It seems that that is about time the 
prime minister will ask himself that question in no uncertain 
terms. A further weakening of the coalition (which is extremely 
fragile to begin with) is not in the interest of the government, 
not to mention the country's interests. Incidentally, when it 
comes to the country, it seems that politicians have completely 
forgotten about it, while being preoccupied with their maneuvers 
in the upper echelons. Aleksander Kwasniewski should also ask 
himself a question like that. Getting the prime minister 
involved in a war with the president will eventually not turn 
out to the government's advantage. 
  Because of his rejection of Dariusz Rosati's candidacy, 
President Lech Walesa received an enormous amount of criticism; 
Walesa is blamed for a continuous destabilization of the 
situation. It is said that Walesa's measures are associated 
with the beginning of the presidential campaign, which the 
president just launched. The truth is that a great many 
politicians have already joined the campaign, while the 
president himself has been taking part in it for some time now. 
In my view, the point is not about the campaign but about the 
president having always taken advantage of disagreements among 
politicians in order to gain something for himself. Everyone 
can see what the president is like, and he cannot be changed. I 
would be surprised if the president, while seeing so many cracks 
and disagreements in the coalition, did not try to maneuver them 
somehow, although, when it comes to the Rosati case, Walesa's 
success is dubious, unless his intention was to have everyone, 
from Bugaj to Hall, unite against him; this is what indeed 
happened. But, if the intention was to get rid of another 
serious candidate for finance minister--Leslaw Paga--the 
president succeeded in that marvelously. 
  So I am not surprised with Lech Walesa's actions. What he 
will do about the budget will be a test of his real intentions. 
If he refuses to sign, which I doubt, I will regard the 
president as having acted against the reforms and having 
destabilized the economic situation for the first time. So far, 
he has signed a law on compensatory payments, even though he 
raised serious reservations. These reservations are reasonable 
from an economic standpoint. Using equally rational 
argumentation, he refused to sign a neo-popiwek 
[wage-controlling] law, which is a legislative little monster, 
having no chance of defending itself before the Constitutional 
Tribunal (possibility of introducing taxes through an ordinance 
by the Council of Ministers.) The president's refusal to sign 
the law may cause trade unions to be grateful to him, in 
addition to employees of big plants, and opposition members both 
in parliament and outside of it. So the neo-popiwek law was 
undoubtedly the coalition's gift to Lech Walesa. Therefore, 
there is no reason to constantly repeat the same scenario over 
and over again: The president says "No" in a situation, and he 
has a right to that, while the SLD immediately makes noise about 
limiting the president's constitutional powers. Spur of the 
moment tinkering with the Small Constitution is one of the worst 
possible ideas. Why does the Sejm simply not get down to work, 
prepare a draft of a constitution, and submit it to a 
referendum? If we keep announcing changes in the Constitution 
with every small conflict among politicians (this is not a 
conflict between the coalition and the president, but between 
the SLD and the president), we will lead Polish democracy 
astray, from where it will be hard to return. We had quite a 
start: Two Sejms whose terms ended ahead of schedule, and 
constant predictions--coming from different corners, by the 
way--that this particular Sejm will not survive the full term, 
either. 
  So, instead of the ever-nervous atmosphere, which, 
unfortunately, is being created by all of the parties to those 
disputes, and instead of spectacular escapes using a ladder and 
insisting on a candidate who, as can be seen, is not desired a 
great deal by either the prime minister or the president, I 
would expect some reserve scenarios and talks among political 
elites before the damage is done, not afterwards. Sejm Speaker 
Jozef Oleksy has suggested to the president that regular summit 
meetings be held. Lech Walesa should respond positively to that 
proposal. Otherwise, the president-prime minister-chairman of 
the biggest parliamentary club arrangement will indeed turn into 
a Bermuda Triangle, in which Polish politics will get stuck 
completely, while being incapable of solving the real problems 
and concentrating instead on various maneuvers and 
ambition-driven games. 
  What is the legacy of the recent crises so far? It is the 
lack of a director of economic policies and a future weakening 
of the finance minister's position. Whoever becomes the next 
finance minister will not have the position Marek Borowski used 
to enjoy in the government. What does a weak finance minister 
mean in our situation? It is better not to even think. Another 
legacy is the loss of popularity and social confidence by 
politicians of the governing camp. Jacek Kuron again leads in 
the popularity polls. 
  And so we have a situation that resembles something out of 
the strangest dream. The opposition practically does not exist, 
while concentrating mainly on debates on what it means to be an 
opposition, while the government's performance is declining. It 
is indeed quite a difficult thing to do--to so effectively 
disorganize a coalition like this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7859 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Walesa-Coalition Deal on Budget, Rosati Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Walesa-Coalition Deal on Budget, Rosati Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0604163294 Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 6 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> WS0604163294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Dominika Wielowieyska and Waldemar Kumor: </F>
"Rosati in Return for Budget; Peace at Top?"] 
  [Text] The coalition would no longer insist on 
Rosati's candidacy, and it would also amend the neo-popiwek 
[wage-controlling] law along the lines of what the presidents 
wants. The president would sign the budget and also approve, 
without any reservations, a new candidate for finance minister 
put forward by the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD]. It is 
possible that such decisions will be made as soon as tomorrow [7 
April] if a summit meeting between Walesa, Pawlak, and 
Kwasniewski takes place. 
  Prime Minister Pawlak is said to have promised the SLD that 
he will do everything in his power to persuade the president to 
hold such a meeting at the end of the week. 
  We learned unofficially that the prime minister told Sejm 
Speaker Jozef Oleksy (SLD) yesterday that a meeting at the 
Belweder "has very good chances of materializing." 
  Right before Easter, the prime minister telephoned Dariusz 
Rosati, the SLD candidate for finance minister, and asked him 
not to give up, despite the president's rejection of his 
candidacy. Professor Rosati confirmed yesterday, while talking 
with GAZETA WYBORCZA, that the coalition members continue to ask 
him not to withdrawal his candidacy until the dispute is finally 
resolved. But he is aware that his chances are slim. 
  "The president has already rejected the candidacy once, 
and I do not think he will change his mind," Lech 
Falandysz, minister of state in the President's Office, told us 
yesterday. 
  The coalition wants to overcome the deadlock by suggesting a 
deal: Perhaps it could give Rosati up, but it is waiting for 
assurances from the president that he will approve the next 
candidate submitted by the SLD. The coalition is also hoping 
that the president will sign the Budget Law, despite his earlier 
threats to veto the measure. 
  In return, the Polish Peasant Party and the SLD could show 
remorse and admit that the neo-popiwek law, which was vetoed by 
the president, requires amendments. It is true that both 
parties intend to overrule the presidential veto, but the only 
goal of that would be to move for an amendment to the law, using 
urgent proceedings, and, in the course of the amendments, the 
presidential reservations would be taken into account. 
  The issue is primarily about amending the legal provision 
pertaining to the government's introduction of wage controls in 
all companies, should "the country's financial stability be 
endangered." The coalition is not sitting idly by. We found out 
at the Finance Ministry that proceedings to amend the law have 
reached an advanced stage. 
  The solution could satisfy both parties because the 
continuity of wage controls would be maintained. The Sejm would 
overrule the president's veto, and the law would then become 
effective retroactive to 1 April, while the parliament would 
amend the law within a month and a half. 
  Will Lech Walesa decide on a cease-fire? One does not know. 
It is also hard to predict whether the coalition's leaders will 
not begin arguing among themselves at the last moment once again. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7860 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Olechowski Outlines Proposed MSZ Changes </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Olechowski Outlines Proposed MSZ Changes </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704095594 Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 7 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0704095594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "em," "krzem:" "Shouts About Subcommission; </F>
Political and Apolitical Foreign Ministry"] 
  [Text] Coalition deputy ministers whom the Foreign 
Ministry [MSZ] chief wants to allow into the ministry will not 
be part of the foreign service corps. As part of a reform he 
outlined to Sejm deputies yesterday, [Foreign Minister] Andrzej 
Olechowski intends to separate the ministry's political 
leadership from the corps. 
  The role of deputy ministers, who, along with the MSZ chief, 
will constitute its political top, is supposed to be about 
participation in the shaping of the minister's policies, about 
representing MON [Ministry of National Defense] abroad, and also 
vis-a-vis domestic political forces. Any measures by the deputy 
ministers undertaken inside the MSZ must be coordinated with the 
minister and a secretary general. 
<H5>  Strong Secretary </H5>
  The secretary general would be in charge of the civil 
service 
(in the MSZ, it is to be called the "foreign service corps.") 
  The secretary would be someone apolitical, whose nomination 
would be agreed upon by the prime minister and the president, so 
as to prevent frequent changes at the post. 
  The secretary general would be the boss of director 
generals, 
who would be in charge of individual departments. Both 
levels--that is, of the secretary general and of director 
generals--are part of a group of supreme government officials 
appointed personally by the prime minister. 
  The outlined arrangement is supposed to alleviate some 
burden from the minister in terms of the day-to-day 
administration of the ministry, and it is also supposed to 
create opportunities for the minister to participate to a 
greater extent in proceedings by the entire government and to 
conduct his own policies. 
<H5>  Corps of Officials </H5>
  A new statute on the MSZ is supposed to define clear 
principles on how to join the foreign service corps, on 
promotions, and on the exchange of people between the center and 
its foreign posts. The minister is supposed to introduce a new 
set of internal rules that will define with precision the links 
between six official grades. 
  Vacancies in posts abroad would be announced six months in 
advance, and everyone could apply to be appointed after his 
direct supervisor agreed. Nominations to work abroad would be 
subject to opinions by a personnel committee (consisting of 
department directors). 
  Details of the reforms within the MSZ are not being revealed 
for now because they could change after a debate within the 
government. 
<H5>  Dispute Over Subcommission </H5>
  As we found out unofficially from a participant in a session 
by the Sejm Foreign Affairs Commission yesterday, Sejm deputies 
who are members of the commission enthusiastically received the 
draft of reforms within the MSZ. So they were even more 
surprised when Andrzej Micewski demanded an extension of the 
mandate of a subcommission for personnel issues within the MSZ. 
Olechowski has disliked the subcommission's doings from the 
beginning. 
  Professor Bronislaw Geremek (chief of the Foreign Affairs 
Commission) refused to submit Micewski's motion to a vote 
because the motion was not on the commission's agenda. A 
heated dispute erupted over that issue between Geremek and the 
subcommission's members, which later was also joined by Minister 
Olechowski, who spoke very strongly against any further activity 
by the subcommission. 
  Let us recall that the subcomission was established in 
January at the initiative of Tadeusz Samborski of the Polish 
Peasant Party [PSL]. It included as its members some Sejm 
deputies for the ruling coalition and also one Sejm deputy for 
the Union of Labor [UP]. The Democratic Union [UD] and the 
Confederation for an Independent Poland [KPN] refused to 
participate in the commission, while the Non-Party Bloc in 
Support of Reforms has withdrawn from it. 
  Olechowski denied the statement by Sejm deputies that the 
subcommission's cooperation with him is good: "I do not 
have a feeling of conducting a dialogue with the Sejm deputies. 
I expected the subcommission to tell me what specific human 
harm has been done." 
  The subcommission's members were trying to argue that they 
no 
longer have any intention of interfering with personnel 
policies, but just to settle a few dozen "cases concerning real 
people" involving former MSZ employees. In the end, Prof. 
Geremek ordered that a vote be conducted. Eleven Sejm deputies 
(Democratic Left Alliance, PSL, and one Sejm deputy for UP) were 
in favor of extending the subcommission's mandate, whereas 12 
Sejm deputies were against (UD, KPN, and UP, while one Sejm 
deputy for UP abstained). 
  After the debate, the coalition members remained in the 
room, 
shouting that the votes were not counted properly. They 
announced that they would put the results of the vote in 
question. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7861 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economy Improves; `Permanent Growth' Emerging </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Economy Improves; `Permanent Growth' Emerging </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704104094 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 7 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> WS0704104094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "Z.M.:" "Permanent Growth; Economic Situation </F>
in March 1994"] 
  [Text] The economic situation in Poland improved in 
March. The economic situation's indicator increased by 2 percent 
compared with what it was in February of this year. Those are 
the conclusions drawn from the most recent research poll by the 
Main Commercial School's Institute of Economic Development. 
  The production output indicator increased substantially over 
the month of March. Enterprises are predicting that the trend 
will continue over the next three to four months. 
  An increase in the in-flow of new domestic orders, which has 
been reported by enterprises, is also a positive phenomenon. 
All signs are that we will have a similar situation over the 
course of the next three to four months. 
  After its January increase and a stabilization in February, 
the indicator of price increases on ready-made products 
experienced a drop. Enterprises are predicting a slowdown of 
the rate of increases of prices on their products also over the 
next three to four months. 
  Last month, a decrease of reserves of ready-made products 
was 
reported, even though the reserves' levels were rising on a 
regular basis beginning in December 1993. 
  The indicator of production of merchandise for exports rose 
for the second month in a row; the same applies to the portfolio 
of new export-bound orders. This kind of rate should hold over 
the next few months. 
  The rate of growth of unemployment decreased in March, and 
the financial situation of enterprises improved slightly. 
  The increase in production levels, the increase of domestic 
and export orders, the decline in the levels of reserves of 
ready-made products, and an investment revival--all these are 
signs of permanent economic growth occurring in Poland. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7862 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Daily Views Future of Wage Control Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Daily Views Future of Wage Control Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704095894 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 7 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> WS0704095894 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by K.J.: "If the Sejm Accepts the President's Veto, </F>
What Ace Does the Government Have Up Its Sleeve?"] 
  [Text] The Finance Ministry has announced that, if the 
Sejm accepts the president's veto to the new popiwek [tax on 
excessive wage increases] law, the government will submit a new 
bill controlling salaries and wages. This time it would be 
similar to the popiwek between 1990 and 1991--without any tax 
allowances. It is possible that this bill would allow only one 
method of establishing wages, in line with the index determined 
by the government. 
  In the event that the president's veto is not rejected by 
the 
Sejm, the Finance Ministry is already preparing a bill that 
would stop the automatic valorization of retirement and 
disability pensions as well as unemployment benefits. 
Therefore, the possibility should not be ruled out that, in 
1994, a strictly fixed amount of money would be earmarked for 
the increases in retirement and disability pensions, just as has 
been done for the past three years with the salaries of the 
budget sphere. 
  Asked what the government will do if the Sejm does not pass 
the new popiwek law, Finance Deputy Minister Jan Kubik 
responded: "Nothing." However, immediately after that, he 
"admitted" the ministry's plans. 
  The ministry has received information that last Thursday and 
Friday more money was taken out of banks for salary increases in 
enterprises. This especially goes for the Silesian banks, 
Director Zbigniew Boniuszko, of the Finance Ministry, said 
yesterday. He fears that, if there is no law regulating this 
problem, wages and salaries may increase in April by 18-20 
percent. 
  The government was going to submit another proposal to the 
deputies: Instead of adopting the new popiwek law once again, 
they might try to amend it. Thus, the Sejm would have to 
override the president's veto, pass this law, and, at the same 
time, amend it. 
  What would this amendment consist of? 
  The government would abandon the famous Article 21--that is, 
the right to extend the control of salaries and wages to private 
companies. So far the government has justified this with the 
necessity of "combating special threats to the financial balance 
of the state." All the revenues derived from the new popiwek 
would go to the state budget; at the beginning the government 
wanted half of those revenues to be forwarded to the Agency for 
Industrial Development (amendment of Article 31). 
  After yesterday's visit to the Finance Ministry, Prime 
Minister Pawlak approved the amendment bill prepared by the 
ministry. 
  However, from the standpoint of the law, it is not possible 
to amend this law. A law that has not been announced in the 
Legal Gazette cannot be amended. 
  It is possible, then, that the government will do the same 
but in a different manner: If the Sejm does not override the 
presidential veto, the government will submit another bill after 
several days. The only difference between this bill and the 
previous one would be that it would not allow for wage controls 
in private companies and would classify the popiwek revenues as 
the revenues of the state budget. The problem is that the new 
law would have to be forwarded to the senate and then wait to be 
signed by the president. Most certainly, then, it could not 
come into effect on 1 April of this year. 
  "As a result of the government's statements that it is 
preparing a new law, perhaps similar to the one we had in 1990, 
enterprises will start paying additional money in panic," claims 
Maciej Manicki, deputy chairman of the All-Polish Trade Unions 
Agreement and chairman of the Sejm Extraordinary Committee for 
the Pact on State Enterprise. The committee decided yesterday 
that it would propose that the Sejm reject the new popiwek law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7863 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Transformation of Food Industry Bank Set </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Transformation of Food Industry Bank Set </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20550A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20550A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] The Polish media have recently described 
the transformation of the Food Industry Bank (BGZ), which 
primarily serves the agricultural sector (which employs 
approximately 38 percent of the population) and is jointly owned 
by the State Treasury and approximately 1,200 cooperative 
(co-op) banks. Like other banks, the BGZ, which is one of 
Poland's largest financial institutions, is affected by the 
country's current financial crisis and requires a substantial 
overhaul. The U.S. auditing firm of Arthur Andersen estimated 
that the BGZ needs 16.2 trillion zlotys [Z] for capitalization, 
but, at the end of 1993, the Finance Ministry allocated to the 
BGZ only Z4.27 trillion out of the Z21 trillion of bonds 
available for the transformation of banks. The remaining Z12 
trillion the BGZ needs will be granted in the form of government 
bonds after it converts to a joint-stock company. Current BGZ 
losses "are being covered from the state budget, but the 
reccurrence of losses is due to the continued granting of 
preferential loans" and to unprofitable investments such as 
sugar mills and fruit and vegetable plants. The NIK (Supreme 
Chamber of Audit) reports that at least Z21 trillion was lost 
because of unrecoverable loans. (GAZETA BANKOWA 12 Feb 94) The 
losses due to these bad loans make the BGZ "unable to achieve 
its potential for making reserve provisions from internal 
funds." Making provisions for reserves in the required amounts 
may result in the bank's "generation of losses on the balance 
sheet, which cannot be covered by the bank's internal capital." 
In such case, additional "capital support from the State 
Treasury would be necessary." A condition for recapitalization 
of the BGZ is its conversion to a joint-stock company (rendering 
it BGZ SA). Once the BGZ SA is formed, the bank will be 
capitalized by restructuring bonds. (RZECZPOSPOLITA 26-27 Feb 94) 
  At a 9 March conference devoted to the BGZ conversion, in 
which 49 BGZ branch directors participated, Prime Minister 
Waldemar Pawlak assured those present that the work on 
converting the BGZ into a cooperative structure is continuing. 
Pawlak added, however, that "unfortunately, the Finance Ministry 
backed out of formerly agreed-upon decisions and put a stop to 
the entire process"--referring to the conflict between former 
Finance Minister Marek Borowski and him over the dismissal of 
Deputy Finance Minister Stefan Kawalec. Despite such 
difficulties, Pawlak is convinced that the conversion process 
will be completed this year "and will employ such tested methods 
as those used by the French Credit Agricole." 
  Three variants for restructuring the Food Industry Bank--as 
well as other cooperative banks--into a corporation bank in June 
of this year were presented by BGZ Deputy Director Ryszard 
Turpin for discussion. 
  The first model calls for a three-tier structure and assumes 
that a National (Domestic) Co-op Bank will be created, and about 
nine to 12 regional banks with legal entity status will be 
formed. Turpin stated "in such a structure, the BGZ could become 
a national bank coordinating the activities of the entire co-op 
banking sector." This conversion model has the support of the 
National Bank of Poland (NBP), the Finance Ministry, and the 
Union of Polish Banks (ZBP). 
  The second model makes the BGZ the clearing and financial 
center specifically and only for co-op banks. The BGZ would 
retain a two-tier structure as a central bank and would serve 
its branches, which would be the regional banks functioning 
without the status of legal entities. In Turpin's opinion, this 
model "lacks strong support because it is not sufficiently 
refined and does not take into account the already existing 
regional banks, which include co-op banks such as BUG SA, GPB-Z 
SA, GBW SA." 
  The third model provides for the BGZ conversion into a 
specialized state agricultural bank able to issue long-term 
loans. Alongside this proposed state bank, a national holding 
bank would be formed, maintaining a three-tier structure of a 
national holding bank, regional banks, and local-level 
cooperative banks. 
  Turpin emphasized the importance of a prompt Sejm debate on 
the drafts of the cooperative banking system "to foster the 
development of co-op banking." He also said that such a draft, 
with a two- or three-tier structure, has already been prepared 
and should be submitted to the Sejm as a government or a Sejm 
deputy initiative." In Turpin's opinion, the first model has the 
best chance of passing in the Sejm. "If passed, the competences 
of both national and regional banks should be clearly defined, 
and all cooperative banks should be obligated to merge with 
regional branches." (RZECZPOSPOLITA 10 Mar 94) 
  After the Sejm accepted the first model, BGZ Director 
Kazimierz Olesiak, nominated by Pawlak in February, expressed 
hope that the Sejm would employ the "accelerated legislative 
process" in recommending the bank's transformation strategy to 
complete the BGZ's conversion to a joint-stock company. Olesiak 
maintained that "only then will the government allocate over Z10 
trillion in restructuring bonds," without which the BGZ and 
1,200 other co-op banks "will not be able to serve about 30,000 
organizations and people" in the agrarian economy. In Olesiak's 
opinion, implementation of this model could "save about 250 
co-op banks from bankruptcy" and could make the BGZ the 
country's second-largest bank, after the Main Commerce Bank 
("Panorama" newscast, TV Polonia Network 25 Mar 94). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7864 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Maritime Minister Introduces Flag of Convenience </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Maritime Minister Introduces Flag of Convenience </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604225394 Warsaw PAP in Polish 2054 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0604225394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Szczecin, 6 Apr--Boguslaw Liberadzki, the minister 
of transport and maritime economy, who took part on 6 April in a 
meeting of the Szczecin Maritime Lobby, has announced the 
introduction in our country of a free register of ships sailing 
under various flags. 
  In practice, this means the birth of a Polish flag of 
convenience, similar to that of Panama or Liberia, under which 
shipowners from various countries will be able to register their 
vessels. There are many who are interested in "changing the 
flag" of their ships. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7865 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jeszenszky Comments on Holocaust Memorial Speech </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jeszenszky Comments on Holocaust Memorial Speech </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604165094 Budapest PESTI HIRLAP in Hungarian 6 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604165094 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest PESTI HIRLAP </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky by </F>
unidentified correspondent; place and date not given: "Geza 
Jeszenszky on the Interrupted Speech -- One Should Condemn Both 
Fallow Ideas"] 
  [Text] Geza Jeszenszky interrupted his speech at the 
international conference on the Holocaust in Hungary because 
some of the participants began clapping their hands and stamping 
their feet to express their dislike for his lecture. According 
to our information, the initiator of the provocative action that 
interrupted Geza Jeszenszky's speech was a member of one of the 
research groups of the Eotvos Loramt Science University. We 
asked Jeszenszky's opinion about the incident. 
  [Jeszenszky] When I said, also referring to Jozsef Antall, 
that Nazism and Communism are equally responsible for the death 
of millions of innocent people and that these two "fallow ideas" 
must be condemned together, for a moment I thought that the 
clapping and the noise were signs of agreement; only later did I 
realize that the opposite was true, namely that the people 
making the noise wanted to stop me from finishing my speech. 
Evaluating the "patience" of the back seats, I did not finish 
my speech. 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] Mr Jeszenszky! According to our information, 
it was not planned that you would deliver a speech at the 
conference. 
  [Jeszenszky] That is true. The official greeting speeches, 
and especially Chief Rabbi Jozsef Schweitzer's words inspired me 
to deliver a greeting speech. Jozsef Schweitzer expressed his 
hope that the conference would serve the truth and the need for 
spiritual peace. I found this justified also because, in my 
opinion, it is very important for the new generation to learn 
the history and causes of the black year of 1944, because new 
genocides are taking place today, and the silent forms of ethnic 
cleansing have been known in the Carpathian Basin for 75 years. 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] What was the main idea of your speech? 
  [Jeszenszky] I drew the attention to the fact that the 
tragedy of the Hungarian Jews had widespread and broad causes, 
just like the causes of World War I, namely that there were 
quite a lot of people responsible, but some people are more 
responsible than others. I also said that the Hungarian 
Government, one that is usually called a government of 
historians and in which unfortunately there is one historian 
less today, continues to be led by the spirit and evaluation of 
1944 expressed by Istvan Bibo in his study on the Jewish 
question written in 1948. 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] In your opinion, what led to the Holocaust in 
Hungary? 
  [Jeszenszky] Among the causes of events that took place in 
1944, one should definitely list World War I and the subsequent 
unjust settlement and the wave of terror in 1919. One should 
also consider the responsibility of the policy of the 
neighboring countries and of the great powers. One should not 
mix the Jewish victims with the army losses, but I find it 
necessary to also remember the similar size of other victims, in 
addition to the losses of the Hungarian nation through the death 
of Jewish citizens. One should not forget that it was Nazism 
that made it possible for Bolshevism to spread in Hungary and 
that liberation from Nazi occupation and the Arrow Cross rule 
was also the beginning of a new terrible dictatorship of several 
decades. One should strongly condemn the "Jewish laws" in 
Hungary and the anti-Semitic incitement of those years, but 
there would have been no deportations and genocide without 
German occupation, and Hungary would have received a good mark 
for its humanity. There were guilty people in Hungary who 
received due punishment, and other guilty people escaped 
punishment, probably by joining the Communist Party, but the 
Hungarian nation is not a guilty nation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7866 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_h_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Workers Party Chairman Explains Foreign Policy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Workers Party Chairman Explains Foreign Policy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0504142694 Budapest Kossuth Radio Network in Hungarian 
1050 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0504142694 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest Kossuth Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gyula Thuermer, chairman of the Hungarian </F>
Workers Party, by unidentified announcer; place and date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Announcer] Gyula Thuermer, chairman of the 
Workers Party, is in front of the microphone to explained his 
party's foreign political ideas. One of the main elements of 
Hungarian foreign policy is to catch up with the West and to 
join the various Western European organizations. Do you 
consider it conceivable that we will be a full member of the EU 
before the end of this century? 
  [Thuermer] The opinion of the Workers Party is that not only 
the means of the foreign policy followed in the past four years 
but also the objectives of that are wrong. This includes the 
forced march into the European Union too. I cannot imagine, 
neither politically nor economically, that Hungary would become 
member of the European Union before the end of the turn of the 
century. 
  [Announcer] What is the situation with NATO? Is our 
membership necessary from a security point of view? 
  [Thuermer] While our opinion regarding EU membership is 
somewhat ambiguous, for we think that we should not be in such a 
hurry, but wait until conditions will be more favorable for us, 
our views regarding NATO membership is totally unequivocal. We 
think that Hungary has no place in NATO whatsoever. 
  [Announcer] Do you accept the Partnership for Peace? 
  [Thuermer] The Partnership for Peace is a deceiving matter. 
It is totally without advantages. [passage omitted] We pledge 
various obligations which only question Hungary's independence 
even more. 
  [Announcer] As you reject the idea of joining the western 
organizations, what sort of alternative do you offer? 
  [Thuermer] Our opinion is unequivocal: Hungary should be a 
neutral country. We are in a situation today when large 
international processes have not finished yet. [passage omitted] 
If we cooperate with NATO, all possibility of neutrality will be 
lost. 
  [Announcer] We have not talked about our eastern neighbours 
yet. I am thinking of Russia and Ukraine. Would the Workers 
Party change the relations vis-a-vis these countries? 
  [Thuermer] [passage omitted] We think that Hungary as a 
Central European country needs balanced and good relations with 
the great eastern powers, Russia and Ukraine and, at the same 
time, of course, with the west. The most important thing is to 
be on good terms with the neighbors. 
  [Announcer] How does the foreign policy of the Workers Party 
deal with the rest of the neighbouring countries? 
  [Thuermer] I would offer a treaty to all our neighbors. 
Three things should be laid down in this treaty. The sides 
should mutually renounce any change of the borders. This is the 
first thing. [passage omitted]. Second, we should spell out 
that we mutually guarantee the rights of the national 
minorities, taking into consideration the European practice and 
each other's means. The third issue is that we should express 
our intent that we will cooperate in every field. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Announcer] Can the southern Slav crisis be solved and how? 
  [Thuermer] The southern Slav crisis could have been settled 
a 
long time ago if others had not interfered in it. We have 
always said that the settlement should be left to the denizens. 
[passage omitted] The Hungarian Government should say that we 
are not to take part in any peacekeeping action which concerns 
the neighbors. It should also be said -- let it be a war 
situation or not -- that the AWACS planes need to be sent home. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7867 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_m_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Gligorov: No Negotiations Until Embargo Lifted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Gligorov: No Negotiations Until Embargo Lifted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BR0604144594 Paris LE MONDE in French 6 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> BR0604144594 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris LE MONDE </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yves Heller on interview with FYROM President </F>
Kiro Gligorov on 4 April in Skopje: "`Everything Is Negotiable 
Provided Greece Lifts the Blockade,' President Kiro Gligorov 
Told Us"] 
  [Text] Skopje -- The Republic of Macedonia [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] is prepared to 
negotiate "immediately" on the dispute with Greece, including on 
its name and on its flag, which are both disputed by Greece, 
only if Andreas Papandreou's government lifts the embargo it 
imposed on its northern neighbor more than six weeks ago. This 
is the position which Macedonian President Kiro Gligorov 
expressed in an interview to LE MONDE on Monday 4 April in which 
he reported Greek "troop movements" on the common border. 
  "The negotiations (with Greece) can resume immediately, but 
the embargo must first be lifted because it is very difficult to 
have discussions in such imbalanced circumstances," Mr. Gligorov 
stressed, emphasizing the fact that "no country would negotiate 
under such constraints." And the Macedonian president confirmed 
that his country is "prepared to negotiate on all issues" 
remaining between Skopje and Athens. These are, first, the very 
name of The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), a 
temporary name accepted by the United Nations exactly one year 
ago because Greece refuses to allow this country, which has a 
little more than 2 million inhabitants, to bear a name -- 
Macedonia -- which Athens thinks belongs exclusively to Greek 
heritage. 
<H5>  Loss of Identity </H5>
  Among the other disputes between the two states is the 
Macedonian flag, with the Greeks demanding a change to the 
emblem it carries (on a red background) -- a so-called Vergina 
sun, named after a city in Greek Macedonia in which such an 
emblem was found in the tomb of King Philip II. Athens is also 
demanding that Skopje change some articles of its Constitution, 
seeing them as evidence of "irredentism." 
  But although everything is open to negotiation, not 
everything is necessarily acceptable in the eyes of President 
Gligorov, a 77-year-old lawyer and economist with great 
political experience and skill who has a long federal career 
behind him (in particular he was a member of the Yugoslav 
presidency and was speaker of the Federal Assembly from 1974 to 
1978). 
  Hitherto, and since the collapse of Yugoslavia in 1991, he 
has been the only leader of the six federated republics to keep 
his fellow citizens out of the war, despite a highly explosive 
environment. For him "it is possible to discuss everything; 
nothing can be excluded (from discussion), but it is clear that 
a people cannot be asked to change its identity. Changing its 
name represents a loss of identity." 
<H5>  Troop Movements </H5>
  In return, "any negotiation, any agreement implies a 
compromise by both sides." As for the flag, "if there is 
agreement, even this question can be settled." At all events, 
"there cannot be negotiation as long as the embargo continues." 
To make Macedonia bend, to ensure that it abandons its name and 
symbols to avoid asphyxiation, Greece is imposing a blockade on 
Macedonia in violation of all European Union [EU] rules. This 
policy means that Athens is completely isolated within the EU, 
its 11 partners protesting this measure, but without securing 
its lifting. The EU Commission has expressed the intention of 
referring the matter to the European Court of Justice in 
Luxembourg to force the Greek authorities to abandon their 
position. 
  This embargo "is causing great damage to the people and 
economy of Macedonia" and it is "in the interests of the EU for 
it to be lifted, because it does not just affect Macedonia, it 
violates the Maastricht Treaty. Europe must find a way out of 
this situation," Mr. Gligorov stressed. 
  He has so far received no signal indicating an easing of the 
Greek positions, which instead are "hardening." "Some Greek 
troop movements" have been noted on the border, according to the 
Macedonian president, who does not believe that "Greece will 
attack Macedonia now" and does not "think that a NATO and EU 
member country could behave like that." 
  Referring to the lessons which should be learned from the 
war 
in Bosnia, Kiro Gligorov reaffirmed that independent Macedonia 
"is a democratic country, a rule-of-law state, oriented toward a 
market economy, which wants economically open borders with all 
its neighbors" and that "such a Macedonia is a precondition for 
stability in the Balkans." "Our existence is in the interest of 
our neighbors, who must abandon some ambitions resulting from 
History, because those ambitions have always led to war." 
  No neighbor of Macedonia -- an enclave between Greece, 
Bulgaria, Serbia, and Albania, and which has a very large 
Albanian minority -- is apparently exempt from "ambitions" in 
one form or another. Among them, Albania is clearly not the 
last to engage in attentive and insistent scrutiny of Macedonian 
affairs. 
  In particular, the Skopje press has pointed out the active 
participation of Tirana's ambassador in meetings of the 
leadership of the main Albanian movement in Macedonia, the Party 
of Democratic Prosperity, which split after fierce internal 
struggles. "There is a difference between each country's 
legitimate right to take care of its minority, and interference 
in another country's internal affairs. This legitimate right 
means following the implementation of international norms with 
regard to your minorities; but interference in the life of 
political parties in unacceptable," President Gligorov said with 
regard to Albania and its practices, about which the Macedonian 
Government has expressed its annoyance. 
  Macedonia is at present outside the conflict which has 
brought bloodshed to most of the former Yugoslavia. The 
satisfaction which Kiro Gligorov derives from this is, however, 
undermined by the fact that there is a "risk (for his country) 
as long as the war continues alongside it and as long as the 
crisis with Greece continues." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7868 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK Demands Tax-Free Port on Adriatic Coast </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK Demands Tax-Free Port on Adriatic Coast </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604153094 Belgrade POLITIKA in Serbo-Croatian 5 Apr 94 p 
10 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604153094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade POLITIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Branislav Radivojsa report on interview with Slobodan </F>
Jarcevic, foreign minister of the Serbian Krajina; place and 
date not given: "Krajina Will Demand a Free Port on the Coast"] 
  [Text] The signing of the cease-fire agreement between the 
republic of Serbian Krajina and the Republic of Croatia 
envisages the two armies each withdrawing 1 km to their 
respective sides. UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] will be 
deployed between them. The two armies will withdraw their heavy 
weapons 10 km (mortars) and 20 km (heavy artillery). 
  According to the Zagreb agreement, UNPROFOR will carry out 
checks to see whether the two side are observing the agreement. 
The blue helmets will, for the first time, carry out checks not 
only on the Krajina territory, but also on the Croatian 
territory, up to 20 km from the line of separation. 
  In his interview for POLITIKA, Slobodan Jarcevic, foreign 
minister of the republic of Serbian Krajina and a member of the 
Krajina negotiating team in Zagreb, also stressed this new fact. 
  We asked Minister Jarcevic what status Krajina's delegation 
had at the negotiations. 
<H5>  Two Equal Sides </H5>
  [Jarcevic] We and the Croats acted as two equal sides. We 
agreed not to mention the terms Republic of Croatia and the 
republic of Serbian Krajina in the negotiations and documents. 
The documents refer to the two delegations only as "two sides," 
without using any other designates. For instance, the documents 
state that "the two sides agreed" that the "Serbian army 
withdraw," that the "Croatian army withdraw...." 
  During the preliminary talks with Mr. Churkin we agreed that 
we would not touch political issues. Our aim was to arrive at a 
cease-fire agreement and to end hostilities, and not to make an 
agreement on borders and demarcation lines that would deal with 
the status of the territories occupied by the Croatian side. 
  Both we and the Croats also supported the proposal that, 
immediately after the implementation of this agreement, we will 
begin negotiations about roads, the economy, oil pipelines, 
power lines, trade, and so forth. The condition for these talks 
will again be that we do not deal with political problems. Only 
once life, the economy, and everything else begins to function, 
could we discuss political issues. 
  [Radivojsa] What will the Serbian side demand in the 
negotiations regarding roads and economic cooperation? 
  [Jarcevic] Our aim is the scrapping of Security Council 
Resolution 820. Point 12 of this resolution forbids 
import-export activities by the republic of Serbian Krajina. 
Moreover, we are interested in the opening of the roads only if 
we are allowed to trade with the world. Otherwise, if we open 
roads, which is what Croatia wants, our trucks could be 
confiscated in Hungary. Therefore, we would not benefit from 
this kind of agreement. 
<H5>  400,000 Serbs Fled </H5>
  [Jarcevic continues] The Security Council would therefore 
have to guarantee us freedom on the market. Only then will we 
sign the agreement. 
  [Radivojsa] Does this also refer to the opening of the 
Zagreb- Knin-Split rail line, and the opening of the Krajina 
section of the Belgrade-Zagreb highway? 
  [Jarcevic] Of course, but we are opposed to the 
consolidation of the roads, economy, and even tourism in Croatia 
while we are closed off and subjected to the sanctions. We 
demand freedom to export to Belgrade, to Slovenia, and to 
Hungary via the shortest route, through Western Slavonia. 
  We will also seek a tax-free port on the coast, because a 
large part of our trade gravitates around the ports on the 
Adriatic coast. We primarily have one of the Zadar ports in 
mind. This port would handle our exports and imports without 
inspection by the Croatian customs authorities. 
  [Radivojsa] What could Slobodan Jarcevic say at present 
about the third stage of negotiations, about possible political 
issues? He says that the talks in that stage will be the most 
difficult, because they will deal with the issue of refugees, 
the territories that Croatia occupied in its aggressions of 1992 
and 1993. The Serb ethnic territories in Western Slavonia, 
where Serbs constituted a majority until 1991, will also be on 
the agenda. Then, we will also discuss war crimes and ethnic 
cleansing, which, as Jarcevic says, assumed much larger 
proportions in the Republic of Croatia. The Republic of Croatia 
has expelled some 400,000 Serbs from its territory. 
  What could we then expect from the negotiators in the third 
stage? 
  [Jarcevic] Regarding Krajina's future, I can say that the 
sanctions introduced against the Serbian people are a paradise 
in comparison with what they could experience in a Croatian or a 
Muslim state. The world should therefore not be surprised that 
we are putting up with the sanctions. This is why we should not 
be asked whether we will accept a federal or a confederal model, 
or an autonomous status in the Republic of Croatia. We do not 
want any of that. 
  [Radivojsa] This was a categorical answer by Slobodan 
Jarcevic. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7869 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Akashi, Izetbegovic Statements on Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Akashi, Izetbegovic Statements on Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604201694 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604201694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Before he met Radovan Karadzic in Pale, Yasushi 
Akashi met Alija Izetbegovic, leader of the Bosnian Muslims, in 
Sarajevo. Through Eurovision exchange, we received brief 
statements by Akashi and the leader of the Bosnian Muslims after 
their meeting in Sarajevo in the morning. 
  [Begin recording] [Akashi in English with superimposed 
translation in Serbo-Croatian] The attack stopped as of 1800 
yesterday. However, we have to work first on a greater UNPROFOR 
[UN Protection Forces] presence. A larger number of armored 
vehicles should be sent and General Rose will go there very soon 
-- tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. At the same time, we are 
determined to work on a general, global cease-fire, not only the 
one between Muslim and Croatian sides, but also including the 
Serbian side, so as to establish basis for a real, lasting, and 
global peace. 
  [Izetbegovic] As regards a general cease-fire, we are of the 
opinion that one should place the surrender of heavy weaponry in 
the center of the question. In our opinion, there will be no 
peace without that. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7870 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_i_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Representatives of Bosnia, Herceg-Bosna Meet </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Representatives of Bosnia, Herceg-Bosna Meet </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604185494 Zagreb HTV Television in Serbo-Croatian 1730 
GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604185494 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb HTV Television </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Government representatives of Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
the Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna met for the first time in 
Mostar today. Jadranko Prlic, prime minister of Herceg-Bosna, 
and Edi Bukvic, deputy prime minister of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and 
others spoke mostly about the transformation of the present 
governments and administrations into the government and other 
federal bodies. The concrete result of the talks was the 
setting up of joint expert groups which will be in charge of 
several fields and development projects. An expert group was 
also founded which will coordinate the present financial and 
customs systems of the two governments. 
  Also discussed were the reconstruction of the Sarajevo-Ploce 
railroad, posts and telecommunications, and infrastructure in 
the Mostar area. The participants also discussed the media, 
especially the responsibility of the media on both sides in the 
consolidation of peace and the restoration of trust between 
Croat and Muslim people. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7871 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik: `Integration Links' Army Priority </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik: `Integration Links' Army Priority </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604125194 Bratislava REPUBLIKA (OBRANA Supplement) in 
Slovak 31 Mar 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604125194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava REPUBLIKA (OBRANA Supplement) </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik by "(me)"; </F>
place and date not given: "We Have To Be Patriots"] 
  [Text] In mid-March, the government assumed power in our 
Republic, rocked by the uncivilized behavior of our politicians, 
and has six months to go. This is enough for certain things and 
too little for others. A few minutes after the new prime 
minister appointed Pavol Kanis deputy minister of the Slovak 
Republic, we had the opportunity to ask Moravcik several 
questions. It is up to our readers to decide whether they were 
the correct ones. 
  [Correspondent] Sir, what do you think can be done in the 
defense sector before the elections? 
  [Moravcik] I believe that we have to use the six months to 
proceed in the main direction of the development of the Army. I 
may be influenced by the fact that I was foreign minister. I am 
mainly stressing integration links. The Army should become more 
active in that direction--that is, it should continue with the 
integration trends that have started because our security is 
based at present on the principle of collective security. 
Collective security requires integration. This is what I 
consider the main direction, on which many other things are 
dependent, as regards the structure of the Army, its training, 
etc. 
  [Correspondent] Many of our Army's problems are caused by a 
lack of funds. Do you believe we will be able to defend the 
Army's budget when other sectors raise their demands? 
  [Moravcik] This year, I have no doubt about it. However, 
there are pressures in this direction. We have to be 
patriots--that is, we have to keep the Army on at least such a 
level as permitted by the budget for this year. Next year, we 
will see. If we can take a tougher step in the economic sphere 
to prevent the declining trend in national production, we will 
have more opportunities for the Army. I firmly believe that we 
will manage it. 
  [Correspondent] As regards the Army, we have gotten used to 
the idea that political decisions take precedence over military 
ones. Do you believe this era has already ended? 
  [Moravcik] I would not draw a sharp line between military 
and political decisions. Some decisions are purely military and 
technical. Politics has no place there. It would be absurd. 
On the other hand, other important decisions regarding the Army 
are highly political. I do not see a problem here. 
  [Correspondent] How do you view the prospects of the Army in 
the next years to come? 
  [Moravcik] We have to modernize the Army further. I believe 
that this trend has already begun and that the Army has become 
self-confident, which is very important. If the Army becomes 
even more confident in contacts with other armies of Western 
Europe--and I believe it will--everything will be all right. We 
have to proceed in that direction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7872 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_y_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Conflicts, Recesses in Federal Assembly Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Conflicts, Recesses in Federal Assembly Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0228B Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 pp 22-23 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0228B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "And Now a Recess"] </F>
  [Text] This kind of parliament, if it is in the 
interest of the ruling party, can remain until the next 
elections--without doing anything. And Lilic could say that 
Yugoslavia needs a parliament that it will be proud of, if it 
goes down along with the dinar. 
  The federal parliament--after it tried last week to 
extricate 
itself from four months of a blockade--became entangled even 
deeper in the quicksand of complete uncertainty. Just as the 
Council of Citizens ended its recess and began a session on 2 
March, Radoman Bozovic declared another recess on the evening of 
the very next day. 
  When Bozovic declares a recess, it has never turned out 
well, 
at least not so far. The experience of this chamber of 
parliament and its current membership confirms that any other 
miracles are possible after a recess. 
  On the night of 31 May-1 June 1993, for instance, bloody 
demonstrations broke out in front of parliament. The fierce 
clash between police and demonstrators in front of the Federal 
Assembly was preceded by an incident in the Assembly building. 
Bozovic, as always when he is at a dead end or someone tells him 
"That is necessary," in one classic knockout arbitrated--with a 
recess. Even after the Assembly was disbanded on 20 October, 
when Slobodan Milosevic said that the people needed a parliament 
that it would be proud of, the session of the Council of 
Citizens ended again with a recess. 
  Bozovic apparently has all the rights to that patent. The 
people's deputies have not yet come to ask whether he is doing 
it all himself or whether someone is helping him. It is said, 
admittedly, that his dossier, after the ministerial scandal, in 
which Bozovic played the role of the third man, is still on 
Slobodan Milosevic's desk. Allegedly, whenever the president of 
Serbia needs that role he reminds Bozovic that 700,000 German 
marks have not been found yet and that an investigation could 
begin. Milosevic, according to that scenario, puts pressure on 
Bozovic and the latter subsequently puts pressure on whomever he 
needs to. It seems that he does not even have to be particularly 
persuaded to do so. 
  In contrast to a comic strip, the situation with 
continuations in the Federal Assembly is incomparably more 
complicated: They are always announced, but they are never 
seriously meant. After all, some special customs prevail in 
parliament, along the lines of "It may be, but it does not have 
to mean anything." Admittedly, Bozovic more or less promised a 
continuation "as soon as possible." It was clear that that 
promise was completely consistent with the promise by his 
Socialist colleague Milomir Minic, who tried to use the quarrel 
between the Serbian and Montenegrin Radicals to appeal to the 
people, who are viewing this performance comfortably and 
directly. "The people are good at taking the measure of 
political options which, according to our (the Socialists') 
understanding, are a transitory phenomenon on the Serbian 
political scene." The people are asking the Socialists "to be 
involved in the key issues," and those, according to Minic, are 
peace, economic renewal, the functioning of a law-governed 
state, and the unification of political forces in the country. 
  Except for the "two eyes in the head"--the deputies of the 
Socialist Party of Serbia and the Democratic Party of Socialists 
of Montenegro, who are fraternally pressing each other in an 
apparently increasingly firmer embrace and more and more 
exaggeratedly offering proof of their mutual love--all the 
others in the federal parliament are deeply affected by quarrels 
and schisms. Kilibarda's four Populists, with all their labor, 
are still unsuccessfully trying to recall the interests of the 
people and the state. 
  The "Socialist fortune hunters," as Seselj honored his 
former 
allies last Tuesday, and the Radical "street thugs and 
primitives," as they were already characterized on Wednesday by 
the Socialist Party of Serbia in an official statement for the 
public, have taken off the gloves and a fight with bare fists 
could even start now. The ring has been moved from the Serbian 
parliament, where it was in the fall, while the Radicals tried 
unsuccessfully to overthrow Sainovic's government, to the 
Federal Assembly. 
  The conflict cannot be disguised any longer: the conflict is 
here. Like every bad alliance or bad marriage, the link between 
the Socialists and the Radicals apparently also has to collapse 
with curses, hatred, and a deafening uproar. Since such scenes 
imply an audience, both the Radicals and the Socialists think 
that it is good to have the performance take place in public: 
the people will be able to choose the better ones. 
  It seems that SOMEONE has upset the born Montenegrin, of 
Serbian origin, and the warlord who is still proud of his 
confiscated title today, who were constantly caught until last 
summer in the act of illicit love. Nothing is left of their 
mutual respect. The final scene of the session that was 
interrupted last Wednesday (before Bozovic used a recess to 
prevent something more than a quarrel) shows that at the heart 
of the parliament there are two angry and merciless enemies, 
whose quarrels, or something worse than them, are yet to come. 
Almost driven mad by Seselj's insistence that he stay at the 
rostrum, Bozovic, perhaps with the intention of keeping the 
"people" from hearing everything that he would say, pressed the 
key to turn off the speaker, but poured into in his microphone a 
whole heap of accusations at his expense. 
  "Your insults are over.... I hope that you are civilized 
enough for a deputy's seat.... You are uncivilized.... You have 
misused the podium enough. I will demand that they remove 
you...." Bozovic got angry, so that finally Seselj retorted with 
a single sentence, in a similar style, that there would never be 
an end to Bozovic's insolence. 
  All of this, however, is only details, or at least the 
outward manifestation of the serious drama through which this 
parliamentary membership is passing. It is becoming more and 
more obvious that this Federal Assembly is not lucky with the 
people's deputies. Just when one thinks that finally it will 
start to do its job, to pass at least some of the laws which we 
cannot have done without for a long time now or to deprive the 
third Yugoslavia of the application of regulations that were in 
effect in its past, the deadlock appears inevitable. It is not 
possible to move out of the deadlock to which parliament is 
constantly returned by the quarrels and incidents. 
  After the split between the Socialists and Radicals, it 
seemed that the opposition would take fate into its hands in 
parliament. With the collapse of that alliance, the ruling 
parties of Serbia and Montenegro lost a majority in the lower 
chamber. The illusion, however, was only a parliamentary 
episode, and the opposition deputies, for the most part, were 
not capable enough to take advantage of that split. In the 
meantime, while parliament's work was blocked, the "political 
police," publicly accused of causing conflict within the 
opposition parties, did not sit with their hands folded. Whether 
someone outside was undermining the political parties or whether 
they, like all other organisms, were "multiplying" from 
themselves, is less important than the already noted fact that 
divisions within them, usually, indicate new elections. 
  In regard to what is happening in the Federal Assembly, 
perhaps one of those two historic sentences of Slobodan 
Milosevic is not unimportant (the first is the one from Kosovo, 
"No one should beat you"), uttered precisely in parliament, as a 
message to the Rakovica workers: "And now, everyone to his job." 
Any good reader of the message realized that the job applied 
considerably more broadly and deeply than the auditorium in 
which it was mentioned. 
  Perhaps the "job" had to do with the battle for renewed 
prestige in parliament? Since the lost majority with which they 
were faced last October, the Serbian and Montegrin 
Socialists--as unsurpassable technicians of power--gained (it 
does not matter whether it was on their own or by assignment) 
the desired balance of power, in their favor, to such an extent 
that they virtually no longer needed the opposition. Of the 20 
DEPOS (Democratic Movement of Serbia) deputies in the Council of 
Citizens, 11 (whom the SPO [Serbian Renewal Movement] were 
expelled from the party but who nevertheless succeeded in 
keeping their places on the benches) are "renegades," seven 
declared themselves to be SPO deputies, and Milorad Savicevic 
and Pavle Nikolic declared themselves to be "non-party figures." 
The leader of the SPO, who is demanding a separate deputies' 
office for his wing of the party, made his seat in the Council 
of Republics conditional upon a new discussion of depriving the 
11 rebels of their seats. 
  The attitude among the Democrats is even apparent in the 
Assembly restaurant. The new leader, Dr. Zoran Djindjic, 
represents that party in the Council of Republics, and the old 
one, Dr. Dragoljub Micunovic, is still considered the leader of 
the deputies' group in the Council of Citizens. Dr. Miroljub 
Labus and Miodrag Perisic sit at the table with Djindjic, and 
Dr. Ivan Vujacic and Desimir Tosic with Micunovic. Djordje 
Zecevic was also absent from this session, while Dr. Dragan 
Domazet also went abroad--i.e., the two wings of the Democrats. 
  The Radicals, proud of their party discipline, although they 
expelled from their ranks three deputies from the Montenegrin 
SRS [Serbian Radical Party], did not succeed in having granted 
the desire to deprive them of their seats. Allowing the 
Montenegrin Radicals to complaint about Seselj, Bozovic, "in the 
name of defending the status of deputies, rules of procedure, 
and laws," "verified the will of the Council," and returned the 
previously denied seats to the Committee on Mandate-Immunity 
Issues for further consideration. Then the chairman of that 
committee, Radical Jovan Glamocanin, suddenly submitted his 
resignation, and the vice president of the Council of Citizens, 
Maja Gojkovic, saying that she had not agreed with Bozovic for a 
long time, also ostentatiously left the deputies' bench. 
  The Federal Assembly has been faced with this practice for 
the first time: Deputies refuse to participate in committees and 
commissions, but remain in parliament. In the corridors of the 
Assembly, the question of who will be vicpresident of the 
Council of Citizens has been answered by the joke that it will 
be Radmilo Bogdanovic, who was re-elected vice president of the 
upper chamber that day. Recommended by the Socialists on both 
sides (the signatures of Radoje Kontic and Milos Radulovic are 
prominent among the Montenegrin signatures), Bogdanovic was only 
denied the votes of the Montenegrin Radicals and two Democratic 
Party deputies. 
  The Council of Republics, on which representatives of the 
opposition counted so much, has been strengthened in a way that 
few people could have expected. In addition to Bogdanovic, it 
now also has two Zorans--Andjelkovic and Solokovic. With a rump 
composition (16 instead of 20), the Serbian Assembly was able to 
choose its fiercest fighters. No one paid attention to Novak 
Kilibarda's criticism that no chamber was constituted with a 
rump composition anywhere in the world, and that this one should 
not be constituted when it was reduced by 10 percent of the 
deputies. Thus, this Council, as in the past, can adopt whatever 
it cares to routinely and without debate: The majority is always 
powerful. After all, even before the blockade this chamber was 
able to choose federal judges, and Dragoslav Jovanovic as 
governor of the National Bank of Yugoslavia, or, as now, to 
adopt the federal budget and later, when it did not get through 
the other chamber, to get over it and go on. 
  With that kind of Council of Republics and that kind of 
Council of Citizens, the federal parliament--if it is in the 
interest of the ruling parties and the current regime--can wait 
for the next regular elections without doing anything at all. Of 
course, if the leader of the Radicals does not intend to turn 
his clash with the federal prime minister about "secret dinners" 
and "kisses with Dafina" into a demand for the replacement of 
Kontic's cabinet. It is difficult to say whether Seselj would 
obtain support from the ranks of the fragile and internally 
undermined opposition, since only seven deputies raised their 
hands for his proposal for a vote on violation of the rules of 
procedure. 
  What could the head of state do in that case? Could Zoran 
Lilic, on his own or "on assignment," one evening, in the 
leading news story on state television, be the first one to 
pound his fist on the table and then say that Yugoslavs needed a 
parliament that they could be proud of? He could--why not--if he 
used the contrived recovery of the dinar and the economy. If the 
new governor really holds out and does not allow printing money 
for the needs of the budget, and prohibits borrowing for the 
budget if there is not enough foreign exchange to cover it (and 
there is no coverage for March), and, all in all, succeeds in 
surviving until the middle of the year, when many people expect 
an end for him like Panic's and Cosic's, a celebration has to be 
arranged for the people. So far they have not had any better 
entertainment from replacements and elections. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7873 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_c_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Cutbacks, New Line Items in Defense Budget </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Cutbacks, New Line Items in Defense Budget </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20577A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20577A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] The Czech parliament has approved an 
(inflation adjusted) 27-billion-koruna [Kc] defense budget for 
1994 that reduces previous overall expenditures and reorders 
defense priorities. Despite the general cutbacks, reports Pavel 
Jegl in the Prague daily ZEMEDELSKE NOVINY, this year's budget 
contains new line items for the creation of a rapid deployment 
force (Kc800 million), the restructuring of logistic systems 
(Kc500 million), and the modernization of the communications 
network (Kc300 million). Jegl writes that the Defense Ministry, 
emphasizing the reduced expenditures in the new budget, has 
labeled it a "survival budget." 
  Miroslav Kalousek, the deputy defense minister, has been 
charged with developing a new system of planning, programming, 
and budgeting that is compatible with the systems of NATO member 
countries, notes Jegl. The new system is intended to facilitate 
the detection of wasteful expenditures and thus reduce costs. 
It should also make it easier to examine the expense structure, 
analyze revenue and expenditures, and make rapid budgetary 
adjustments. Kalousek told Jegl that the Czech military is in 
the process of redefining the nature of the threats facing the 
Czech Republic and is designing a force structure to meet such 
threats. He estimates that this redefinition of the defense 
system should be completed by the middle of this year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7874 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_p_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Military Daily Views Road to NATO, EU </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Military Daily Views Road to NATO, EU </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0604134594 Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA in Polish 5 Apr 94 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0604134594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw POLSKA ZBROJNA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Forowicz: "On 7 April, Poland Will Submit </F>
Motion Requesting Admission to European Union--to the West, Not 
Against the East"] 
  [Text] The forecasts are optimistic. Poland may join the 
Western structures of economic cooperation and security earlier 
than was predicted by most analysts. 
  No specific dates have been set yet. However, we can see 
phenomena that are not any less convincing than precise 
schedules. Integration is clearly faster now. The government 
has confirmed its desire to further increase this rate. It 
unanimously empowered Prime Minister Pawlak to submit a motion 
requesting full membership in the European Union [EU], one of 
the most important political establishments of today's world. 
<H5>  A Historical Moment </H5>
  Also, according to parliament members, if the external 
conditions are favorable, this initiative may enable Poland to 
achieve a true European character, democracy, and well-being. 
  They emphasize that such a firm intention to develop the old 
and establish new links to the West results from the social 
assent as well as from the agreement among politicians on this 
issue. 
  Sometimes it seems that it is all happening in conditions 
that are similar to the general agreement and support 
demonstrated by Poles in such historical moments as the 
regaining of independence after World War I, the bloodless 
overthrow of communism in 1989, and the voluntary acceptance of 
the burden of the economic reform in 1990. 
  The fact that our goals were clearly defined and then 
presented was important. We have not always been able to act 
like this. We should, then, once again recall the sharp words 
of criticism spoken in November and December by Lech Walesa 
about Western politicians. At that time, the NATO leaders were 
still hesitant in their evaluations; they were not sure whether 
the issue of admitting Poland to the organization could even be 
discussed. After a few months, it became clear that the 
criticism of the delay of the West, pointing to its consistency, 
is beginning to yield the expected results. 
<H5>  Unanimity </H5>
  The most important and probably the most valued factor is 
the 
unanimity of the Polish political forces. At a recent meeting 
in parliament with Robin Beard, the NATO deputy general 
secretary for defense, Deputy Jerzy Wiatr, one of the leaders of 
the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD], said that "even those 
politicians who look only in the direction of Russia finally 
admit that the Polish pro-Western option is right." 
  He explained that the breakthrough moment was the Moscow 
coup. Poland learned a very important lesson from the 
developments in Russia: The source that radiates democracy and 
the philosophy of dynamic economic progress is still in the 
West. Tomasz Nalecz, of the Labor Union, added to these words 
that, in the issue of our membership in NATO, we are witnessing 
some kind of unique phenomenon in the Polish parliamentary 
system. 
  If we take a look at the plenary sessions of the Sejm 
discussing our membership in NATO, we would not see any 
differences between the various parties, even though they are 
quick to underscore their different opinions and ardently 
present controversial issues. 

<H5>    A Hand in a Friendly Gesture </H5>
  The strategic goal of Poland is the attainment of full 
membership in NATO, the EU, and the West EU, says General 
Stanislaw Wozniak, director of the Department of Military 
Foreign Affairs of the Ministry of National Defense. He also 
stresses that our realism in the selection of Western 
organizations in which we would like to have our security 
structures does not mean that we want to turn our back on our 
eastern neighbors. 
  This is proved by a number of military agreements, signed 
first with our neighbors and then with others--in all, 14 
states, mostly eastern and southern states. Only recently have 
we reached such agreements with the United States and Canada, 
and we are planning to conclude them with Sweden and Norway. 
  Foreign analysts know perfectly well that, in Polish defense 
concepts, there is no room for an invasive expansion or attempts 
to subordinate other states. The location of the Polish Army 
units is no secret, and it proves that we have no aggressive 
intentions or that we are grouping our forces in order to attack 
any external object. 
<H5>  Slavic and Modern </H5>
  Similar views about our good relations with Russia and other 
neighbors, especially Slavic neighbors on the other side of the 
Niemen, Bug, and San Rivers, are expressed by Andrzej 
Olechowski, author of the recently announced main points of the 
eastern policy. He formulates several programs, based on 
partnership and outlining joint action for peace, economic 
cooperation, or exchange of experiences useful in the efficient 
implementation of democratic reforms. 
  Minister Olechowski would even be ready to propose "curbing 
the pro-NATO trends if the price were," let us say, 
"deterioration of the position of the prodemocracy forces in 
Russia." 
<H5>  Solid Roots </H5>
  The opinion that the road to NATO should lead via the EU is 
becoming increasingly popular in the concepts of Polish 
diplomacy. This opinion is backed by the Sejm Extraordinary 
Committee for the European Agreement with Jan Borkowski of the 
Polish Peasant Party, Piotr Nowina-Konopka of the Democratic 
Union, and Professor Marek Mazurkiewicz of the SLD. The 
committee was the first to definitely support the intention of 
the head of the Polish diplomatic service; he wanted to obtain 
consent from the government to submit a motion requesting full 
membership in the EU for Poland. 
  This committee also issued a positive opinion on the solid 
ground that had been prepared for Poland for the so-called 
second and third pillar of the Maastricht Treaty. Even though 
the first pillar--economic integration--may still seem rather 
weak, we can certainly cooperate in the areas of foreign policy, 
security, the justice system, and internal order. 
  All of our initiatives set off these solid foundations of 
integration and stress the time factor. The Treaty on the EU 
came into effect on 1 November 1993. On 1 February of this 
year, Poland obtained the status of a state associated with the 
EU. The time span is not very big. 
  Now the government is showing that we are doing our best not 
to allow the distance to increase, or even that we want to 
believe that it will be reduced earlier than expected. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7875 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Berov Chairs Cabinet Session on Foreign Debt </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Berov Chairs Cabinet Session on Foreign Debt </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704094994 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 0900 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704094994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Kalina Stancheva on a meeting of Council of </F>
Ministers in Sofia on 7 April] 
  [Text] After his month-long illness, Prime Minister Lyuben 
Berov appeared today at his workplace. The ministers marked 
this fact by drinking a glass of cognac to his health, and the 
prime minister thanked them for their efforts during his absence. 
  In a meeting behind closed doors, the cabinet heard a report 
by Finance Minister Stoyan Aleksandrov, chairman of the 
Government Foreign Debt Commission, regarding the upcoming 
negotiations with the Paris Club, which a delegation will leave 
to attend on Tuesday [12 April]. The cabinet approved the 
position to be put forward by the Bulgarian delegation. No 
comment was made on the issue of personnel changes in the 
commission's membership following the resignations of two of its 
members. According to information obtained from the Council of 
Ministers, the changes will be made after Antonov and Kunchev 
have appeared before the cabinet to explain the motives for 
their resignations. 
  Because of speculative increases in certain prices, the 
government decided to add another 12 items to the existing list 
of 11 kinds of goods and services monitored by the government. 
  The government decided to follow the course of setting fixed 
prices for the sale of tobacco products on the domestic market. 
Keeping in mind the foreign exchange rate and the Customs Duties 
Act that has recently come into force, the maximum new price of 
(?45) leva for a pack of cigarettes will apply to imported 
Rothmans, Marlboro, and Kent cigarettes, while the Bulgarian 
brands Viktori and Welcome will cost 24 leva a pack, and 
cigarettes in normal packaging for mass consumption will cost 
between 7 and 12 leva. 
  Following the introduction of the 18-percent VAT rate, 
domestic telephone calls will now cost private subscribers 90 
stotinki per unit, and business subscribers -- 1.18 leva. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7876 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhelev Meets Former Debt Commission Members </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhelev Meets Former Debt Commission Members </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604204494 Sofia Bulgarska Televiziya Network in Bulgarian 
1700 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604204494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Bulgarska Televiziya Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] We have just heard from the Presidency Press Center 
that President of the Republic Zhelyu Zhelev has met with 
Ventseslav Antonov and Chavdar Kunchev [chairman of Bulgarian 
Foreign Trade Bank]. They were the principal participants in 
formulating the strategy and philosophy for conducting the 
negotiations on settling the Bulgarian foreign debt. 
  The president expressed his serious concern over the fact 
that they had left the Foreign Debt Commission. During the 
conversation, it became clear that the both of their decisions 
to resign were prompted by fundamental differences with the 
remaining members of the Commission. In response to Dr. 
Zhelev's request, both of them will meet with Prime Minister 
Berov. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7877 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Aleksandrov Denies Reports on Army Cuts </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Aleksandrov Denies Reports on Army Cuts </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604204094 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1600 
GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604204094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Defense Minister Valentin Aleksandrov gave a news 
briefing today on the results of the meeting of the Supreme 
Military Council. He announced that the figures given in the 
mass media on cuts in the army's strength are incorrect and 
imprecise. 
  Aleksandrov also signed an order transferring 87 officers 
from the Defense Ministry and the economic sector to the 
reserve. The officers in question are over 57 years old and 
have completed 20 years of service. The minister explicitly 
stressed that no cuts will take place in the Bulgarian Army, but 
only retirements. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7878 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Turkish Parliamentary Delegation Arrives </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Turkish Parliamentary Delegation Arrives </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Dispatch of Troops to B-H Discussed </H4>

<F P=102> AU0404184994 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1600 
GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0404184994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Mariya Tsenkova reports on the visit of the Turkish 
parliamentary delegation led by Husamettin Cindoruk to Bulgaria: 
  [Tsenkova] The working part of the visit began. In the 
afternoon Mr. Cindoruk visited the National Assembly and talked 
with National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov. 
  [Begin Cindoruk recording, in Turkish fading into Bulgarian 
translation read by Tsenkova] Except for sending Turkish Blue 
Helmets to Bosnia-Herzegovina, we did not have any other issues 
on which our opinions were not similar, Cindoruk said. He also 
added that it was not so much a difference of opinions on that 
issue but rather a different interpretation of the UN decision. 
  However, according to Mr. Yordanov, the participation of 
Turkish blue helmets in the Yugoslav conflict will revive the 
historical memories of the population in the region. A modern 
policy cannot be based on memories. According to Aleksandur 
Yordanov, the Bulgarian position is correct, balancing, and 
moderate. It requires from all countries to stay away from the 
conflict, even if they feel equally engaged in the situation in 
former Yugoslavia. 
  The positions of the two countries on developing Black Sea 
economic cooperation also were discussed. 
  At the moment the Turkish parliamentary delegation is 
meeting 
the minister of foreign affairs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7879 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Turkish Parliamentary Delegation Arrives </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Turkish Parliamentary Delegation Arrives </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Cindoruk Meets With Senior Officials </H4>

<F P=102> TA0504181894 Ankara ANATOLIA in English 1615 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> TA0504181894 </F>
<F P=104>  Ankara ANATOLIA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  (Text] Sofia, April 5 (A.A) -- Parliament speaker 
Husamettin Cindoruk who is currently in Bulgaria held official 
contacts with senior Bulgarian officials on Tuesday. Bulgaria 
called for cooperation on struggling with international drug 
traffic and on terrorism. 
  Bulgarian acting prime minister and labor and social 
minister 
Evgeni Matinchev said Turkish-Bulgarian political relations are 
improving day by day. 
  Cindoruk said Turkey and Bulgaria should improve relations 
and cooperation in every field being a good neighbor adding that 
Turkey could help Bulgaria on the construction of highways in 
Bulgaria. 
  Matinchev called on Turkish initiators to invest in Bulgaria 
and wanted them to purchase touristic facilities in Bulgaria. 
  Cindoruk during the meeting conveyed President Suleyman 
Demirel's invitation for Bulgarian President Zhelyu Zhelev to 
come to Turkey. Cindoruk and a delegation accompanying him will 
return to Turkey on Wednesday. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7880 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Belgium's Claes Visits, Signs Declaration </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Belgium's Claes Visits, Signs Declaration </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404121094 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 0900 
GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0404121094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The official part of the visit by Willy Claes, 
Belgium's deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs, 
who arrived in Bulgaria on 3 April, began today. 
  After a meeting and talks at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
with Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov, a joint political 
declaration was signed. The two sides stressed the decisive 
role that the CSCE process could play in strengthening European 
security stability and emphasized the importance of the Helsinki 
conference final document, the Paris Charter on New Europe, the 
Helsinki document of 1992, and other official documents, the 
declaration reads. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7881 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067_b_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Claes Received by Zhelev </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Claes Received by Zhelev </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404202494 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1500 
GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0404202494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The situation in the Balkans and the Yugocrisis 
were among the topics that were discussed between President 
Zhelyu Zhelev and Willy Claes, Belgium's deputy prime minister 
and minister of foreign affairs. 
  Bulgaria's position as a stabilizing factor in the Balkans 
is 
highly valued by the Belgian Government, the guest pointed out. 
Kamen Velichkov, adviser to the president on foreign policy 
issues, has more information about the meeting: 
  [Begin Velichkov recording] Issues related to Bulgaria's 
integration in the European community had a central place in the 
talk. Dr. Zhelev expressed our country's gratitude for 
Belgium's position and the personal efforts of Mr. Claes in 
resolving some of the issues that emerged after the provisional 
trade agreement and related issues came into force at the end of 
1993. Hope was expressed that Belgium will support our 
country's efforts to obtain an enhanced status in the West 
European Union, and to be integrated within NATO. 
  On all those issues a common opinion was expressed that 
Bulgaria has good prospects regarding gradually joining the 
European structures. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7882 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDS Rally in Sofia Demands Early Elections </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDS Rally in Sofia Demands Early Elections </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504185894 Sofia BTA in English 1819 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504185894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- A rally held in Sofia by 
the anti-communist Union of the Democratic Forces (SDS) today 
called on the cabinet to resign and demanded early elections. 
  Addressing the rally, SDS leader Filip Dimitrov said the 
union will use all parliamentary means to make the cabinet step 
down. He called upon the people to flood into the central 
square and remain there until the cabinet resigns in case the 
parliamentary means prove ineffective. The demonstrators 
chanted their approval. 
  "The Communists (the successor to the disbanded Bulgarian 
Communist Party is the Bulgarian Socialist Party) are ruling 
this country, pulling the strings of straw man Berov (the prime 
Minister)," said Ivan Kostov, MP of the SDS and former finance 
minister. "The choice is elections provoked by the SDS. Only 
the force that can bring about elections can be sure of winning 
them in this chaos," said Kostov. 
  SDS floor leader Stefan Savov said the SDS needed to poll 
not 
35 percent but 51 percent of the vote to form a strong 
government. The SDS scored a 34.6 percent victory at the 1991 
polls, which was not enough to form a stable cabinet. 
  The speakers charged the ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights 
and Freedoms and the New Union for Democracy with allying 
themselves with the Communists by backing the present 
government. President Zhelev was also accused of helping form 
the cabinet and supporting it so far. 
  For the first time at the rally, new songs written 
especially 
for the SDS election campaign were performed. The speakers 
called on people not to despair and go to the polls. 
  The rally chanted the name of exiled Bulgarian King Simeon 
and sang the old Bulgarian anthem (from the monarchy days) 
banned by the communist regime. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7883 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   SDS, BSP Consider Election Campaigns </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    SDS, BSP Consider Election Campaigns </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504135894 Sofia BTA in English 1423 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504135894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- Bulgaria's major political 
forces, the anti-communist Union of the Democratic Forces (SDS) 
and former Communists' Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), are 
considering their election campaigns before elections are even 
scheduled. For more than a year the SDS have been calling on 
the cabinet of nonpartisan Professor Lyuben Berov to resign and 
insisting on early elections. Three days ago President Zhelyu 
Zhelev withdrew his support for the cabinet. The cabinet's 
resignation is a variant being considered by the ethnic Turks' 
Movement for Rights and Freedoms (DPS) on whose mandate the 
incumbent cabinet was formed in late December 1992. At a 
closed-door sitting late last week, the Socialists, for their 
part, decided to give a last chance to Prof. Berov's cabinet and 
granted them a month and a half to take under control the 
critical situation of the past couple of weeks. In the 
meantime, Prime Minister Berov, now recovering from a cardiac 
operation, publicized his plans about structural and personnel 
changes in the government. 
  The government has obviously come to an impasse, SDS leader 
Filip Dimitrov told journalists after a sitting of the union's 
supreme leadership. According to him, the government is trying 
very hard to convince people that the situation is improving. 
While the dollar seems to be under control, the prices do not. 
The statements of cabinet members sound most strange; they 
display a fake optimism and gross indifference to the man in the 
street, Filip Dimitrov went on to say. He reiterated the 
union's firm belief that the incumbent cabinet should step down. 
The SDS leader would not give further details as to the 
specific action the union is planning to take, adding only that 
it will resort to extraparliamentary means as soon as the 
parliamentary ones prove inefficient. 
  The SDS supreme leadership today also discussed its election 
campaign. This issue was high on the agenda of the BSP 
Executive Council. Socialists' leader Zhan Videnov told 
journalists that disbanding the parliament, which the effective 
constitution provides for in case a caretaker cabinet is 
appointed, is absurd when the country has embarked on the road 
of transition. Amendment of this provision in the constitution 
will require a majority of three quarters of the parliamentary 
votes. 
  Filip Dimitrov also said that the SDS leadership has not put 
for discussion the BSP proposal for amendment to the 
constitution to enable Parliament to sit even after the 
formation of a caretaker cabinet. According to the SDS leader, 
the fact that the Socialists are trying to launch the prolonged 
and complex parliamentary procedure for amending of the 
constitution comes to show that they are the ones who fear early 
election, not the SDS. The ex-Communists fear elections like 
hell, Filip Dimitrov also said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7884 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Papers Report Controversy Over Army Dismissals </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Papers Report Controversy Over Army Dismissals </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504091694 Sofia BTA in English 0833 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504091694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From BTA's 5 April "Press Review"] </F>
  [Excerpt] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- "Army Threatens To 
Revolt Against Purge", DUMA writes on its front page. Defence 
Minister Valentin Aleksandrov is expected to dismiss some 3,000 
officers and 1,000 sergeants. According to DUMA, that might 
provoke unrest and even a revolt in the army. According to 
TRUD, 3,400 officers and twice as many sergeants will be sacked. 
"I have dismissed 200 and I will dismiss more," Defence 
Minister Aleksandrov reportedly said at yesterday's meeting of 
the National Security Council with the Presidency, writes DUMA. 
The minister explained that cuts were inevitable because of the 
inadequate budget. Participants in yesterday's [4 April] 
meeting suggested that an official declaration be issued for the 
press to prevent dismal rumours from spreading in the Army, but 
the head of the president's office, Mr. Ivaylo Trifonov, chose 
to make a routine and colourless statement, DUMA comments. The 
daily points out that the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP, the 
former Communists) opposed any "shock measures" before the 
coming into force of the Defence Act. 24 CHASA also writes that 
BSP leader Zhan Videnov was against the dismissals. A signed 
commentary in TRUD analyzes the current situation in Bulgaria 
and concludes that a Pinochet-type dictator might fit quite well 
in this country. STANDART NEWS reports that the council 
discussed the financial and currency crisis. "Politicians and 
the president fell out over the foreign debt," it comments. It 
also maintains that Deputy Prime Minister Evgeni Matinchev and 
BSP floor leader Nora Ananieva angrily left the session long 
before it was over. "The foreign debt issue is not to be 
settled at the Presidency; there is a government for that, and 
we are no presidential state," said Ms. Ananieva. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7885 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Council Approves Draft Decree on Price Control </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Council Approves Draft Decree on Price Control </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504153694 Sofia BTA in English 1513 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504153694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ekaterina Kazasova] </F>
  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- The National Council for 
Tripartite Cooperation (of the government, labour organizations 
and employers) today adopted a draft decree pertaining to the 
control on the prices of prime necessities. The social partners 
approved a proposal of Finance Minister Stoyan Aleksandrov 
envisaging to add another 12 items in the list of 
government-monitored goods. The goods to be enlisted are all 
foods, including sunflower oil, cow's butter, yellow cheese, 
eggs, sugar, sausages, baby foods and legumens. The draft 
amendment was adopted in connection with the April 1 entry into 
effect of the value-added tax (VAT). 
  The persistent upward trend of the US dollar and the entry 
into force of the VAT pushed the prices markedly up. "We 
believe the current price rise to be the last one this year," 
Deputy Prime Minister and acting Prime Minister Evgeni Matinchev 
told journalists. He also said that this was part of the 
cabinet's strategy for the budget's utilization and introduction 
of VAT. Today, however, he denied that there was any price shock 
whatsoever, citing figures of the Committee on Prices, according 
to which the price growth was only negligible. The prices of 
goods monitored by the cabinet went up by less than 6 percent 
over the last two weeks of March, according to data of the 
National Statistical Institute. Anyway, the consumer is free to 
choose what to believe: the figures or what he sees with his 
own eyes when shopping. 
  The social partners turned down a proposal made by the 
Confederation of the Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria to 
declare a moratorium on the rise of the maximum prices set by 
the government on electricity, heating, fuels, postal services 
and telecommunications. Freezing prices could only make some 
goods vanish from the market, according to Mr. Mincho Koralski, 
representative of the Union for Private Economic Enterprise at 
the Tripartite Council. Enterprises will either stop making 
them or will make them for export only, he said. 
  Widening the range of government-monitored goods to include 
goods whose prices had been deregulated is accepted as a 
temporary measure by the social partners. According to them, it 
will help curb inflation and will be effective only until prices 
and the market stabilize. All council members backed the 
decision, though some expressed reservations. 
  Deputy Prime Minister Evgeni Matinchev believes the measures 
approved by the Tripartite Council would allow to tighten price 
control by the local authorities. So far it has been exercised 
chiefly by the Finance Ministry and the Pricing Committee. The 
latter, however, has not enough people on its staff to exercise 
effective control. The draft decree envisages that the 
municipalities' rights will be expanded, allowing them to use 
fines paid by violators to hire more full-time and part-time 
employees and exercise stricter price control. 
  Today's decision of the Tripartite Council is years late, 
said Mincho Koralski. In his view, the decree will not solve 
all problems. Its potential is very limited and it will have a 
minimal effect, Mr. Koralski said. That is why the social 
partners insist that the government ask parliament to put on its 
priority list the Price Bill approved by the Tripartite Council 
and the government a year ago. The social partners also call on 
the government to come up with a pricing policy concept for 
1994. The government is expected to adopt the decree at its 
next meeting. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7886 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Daskalov, Belgium's Claes Discuss Relations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Daskalov, Belgium's Claes Discuss Relations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404202294 Sofia BTA in English 1423 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404202294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 4 (BTA) -- After their two-hour talks 
today Belgium's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Willy Claes and Bulgaria's Foreign Minister Stanislav 
Daskalov signed a joint political declaration. Mr. Daskalov was 
invited to visit Brussels. 
  The declaration points out the two countries' willingness to 
develop relations of friendliness, understanding and 
cooperation, based on mutual confidence and respect. The 
declaration outlines the trends of Bulgarian-Belgian relations 
in all spheres of mutual interest: political, economic, 
cultural, consular etc., and states the two countries' 
willingness to cooperate in a number of international issues, 
Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov told reporters. Mr. Claes 
pointed out their unanimity on the development of mutual 
relations, which will be further promoted by a series of regular 
political consultations. Here are main spheres of cooperation 
listed in the declaration: economy, social issues, industry, 
finance, environment protection and technology. The two 
countries intend to encourage investments and direct contacts 
between firms, to intensify their cooperation in agriculture, 
industry and power engineering and to work on joint projects in 
third countries. 
  The two countries express their readiness to support the 
authority of the United Nations, and acknowledge the role of the 
CSCE for maintaining stability and security in Europe, the 
usefulness of position coordinating through consultations within 
the Western European Union and the important role of the Council 
of Europe. They share the conviction that security and 
stability should be based on the observance of international law 
and the principle of defence sufficiency. Bulgaria and Belgium 
declare that their "own security is directly related to that of 
NATO member states, the North Atlantic Cooperation Council and 
the Partnership for Peace programme." 
  Belgium is willing to support Bulgaria's participation in 
the 
integration process in Europe. In accordance with the EU 
resolutions of Copenhagen (June 1993) the two countries' 
cooperation will be aimed at Bulgaria's admission to the 
European Union. 
  Bulgaria and Belgium have similar views on the significance 
of the illegal immigration problem and are convinced that every 
state should allow its citizens to return. They should agree on 
the practical application of this principle. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7887 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Claes' `Satisfaction' With Talks Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Claes' `Satisfaction' With Talks Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404202694 Sofia BTA in English 1756 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404202694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 4 (BTA) -- The state and prospects of 
Bulgarian-Belgian relations, matters concerning European 
cooperation and security and the conflict in former Yugoslavia 
were on the agenda of today's meetings here of Mr. Willy Claes, 
with President Zhelyu Zhelev, National Assembly Chairman 
Aleksandur Yordanov, acting prime minister Evgeni Matinchev and 
Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov. At a news conference this 
evening, Mr. Claes expressed satisfaction with the talks. 
  Following his session with Foreign Minister Daskalov, Mr. 
Claes told reporters that the two sides hold similar views on 
the prospects of Bulgarian-Belgian contacts. He called 
attention to the exchanged visits by the two countries' chiefs 
of General Staff. Members of the Royal Institute for Defence 
Studies will shortly visit Bulgaria. Mr. Claes sees this as an 
indication of possible agreements in the field of defence. 
  A number of Belgian companies, especially in food 
processing, 
agriculture and tourism, might show interest in investing in 
Bulgaria, the chief Belgian diplomat believes. He recommended 
that the Bulgarian Government launch structural changes and 
promised his Bulgarian counterpart that the Belgian Government 
would provide the necessary financing guarantees to catalyze 
investment. Encouragement of Belgian investment here was 
discussed by Mr. Claes with President Zhelev. The two found 
that there is a fine legal framework for an increase of Belgian 
investment in Bulgaria and a pick-up of commercial relations. 
In a couple of months, the Belgian Minister of Agriculture will 
visit Bulgaria. A bilateral accord may be signed during that 
visit. 
  Mr. Claes told Acting Prime Minister Matinchev that by 
mid-May the ratification process of Bulgaria's Europe agreements 
will receive a fresh impetus. In April, the G-24 will consider 
Bulgaria's embargo-related losses. Mr. Claes expressed his 
conviction that the Bulgarian foreign debt problem will be 
settled soon and undertook personally to assist the negotiations 
with the London and Paris Clubs. 
  The debt problem was also on the agenda of Mr. Claes's 
session with National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov, who 
found that the only dispute between Bulgaria and Belgium was the 
Bulgarian debt to Belgian commercial banks. Mr. Yordanov set 
forth the Bulgarian position on the Yugocrisis. "On this matter, 
we have no differences whatsoever with the Belgians," he told 
reporters. The Bulgarian head of parliament appreciated 
Belgium's assistance to the entry into force of the Bulgarian-EC 
Interim Trade Agreement and expressed the hope that Belgium will 
help speed up Bulgaria's association with the European Union. 
"We count on the Belgian Parliament for an early ratification 
of the agreement," Mr. Yordanov said. 
  Bulgaria's integration into the European Community was the 
centrepiece of the talks between Mr. Claes and President Zhelyu 
Zhelev. The president's foreign policy adviser said that Dr. 
Zhelev expressed the hope that Belgium will support Bulgaria in 
its efforts to acquire an enhanced status in the Western 
European Union and its integration into NATO. Dr. Zhelev and 
Mr. Claes also discussed the situation in the Balkans and the 
Yugocrisis. The guest lauded Bulgaria's position which upholds 
the balance and is in a position to prevent extremes in the 
behaviour of various forces in the Balkans, the Presidential 
adviser emphasized. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7888 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Party Official Alleges Greek Persecution </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Party Official Alleges Greek Persecution </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504182994 Sofia BTA in English 1739 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504182994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Today" -- BTA lead] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- [passage omitted] The 
rights of Bulgarians in Aegean Macedonia and Thrace in Greece 
are still being violated, Stoyan Boyadzhiev, chairman of the 
extraparliamentary Internal Macedonian Revolutionary 
Organization-Union of Macedonian Societies, told a press 
conference. To support his claim, he circulated a Bulgarian 
translation of a Greek document, entitled "Instructions for the 
Assimilation of Macedonian Bulgarians." It was issued by the 
Greek State Security Service with the Ministry of Public Order 
and signed by Maj. Gen. Dimitrios Kapelaris, according to 
Boyadzhiev. The document recommends security services to ban 
the speaking of local dialects. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7889 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   WEU Assembly Leader Cites `Enhanced Status' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    WEU Assembly Leader Cites `Enhanced Status' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504154394 Sofia BTA in English 1454 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504154394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- Bulgaria will probably be 
granted the so-called "enhanced status" of a Western European 
Union (WEU) associate member at a meeting of the ministers of 
the WEU-member states, said Sir Dudley Smith, president of the 
WEU Assembly, at the Parliamentary Foreign Policy Committee 
today. Membership in the WEU for Bulgaria is comparable to 
membership in NATO, Sir Dudley Smith told MP's. The WEU is to a 
great extent a catalyst in NATO and UN activities, said Mr. 
Cameron, also member of the WEU delegation headed by Mr. Smith 
visiting this country since yesterday. The visit provides a 
chance for Bulgaria to defend its democratic image, Mr. Nikolay 
Slatinski, chairman of the Parliamentary National Security 
Committee, told BTA after a meeting of the WEU delegation with 
this committee. Bulgaria should convince the European states 
that it is neither economically not politically inferior to the 
states of the Visegrad group, Mr. Slatinski added. 
  At present Bulgaria holds the status of a permanent observer 
in the WEU. We should not aim at the highest possible as 
regards Bulgaria's future status in the WEU; in this respect I 
am moderately optimistic, Ivan Gaytandzhiev MP told journalists. 
As an associate member Bulgaria will be able (possibly through 
a representation in Brussels) to take part in preliminary 
investigations and in the making and implementation of decision 
to be adopted by the full WEU members, Mr. Robins of the WEU 
delegation explained. It has also been provided for maintaining 
constant contacts between the defence ministries and other 
institutions of the countries of various statuses in the WEU. 
Central Europe should become an integral part of the WEU and 
the Union may therefore have to change its name, Sir Dudley 
Smith said at the meeting. As regards Russia, at present that 
country has too many unsolved problems to be accepted in the 
WEU, the president of the WEU Assembly added. 
  Sir Dudley Smith described the decision of the UN Security 
Council to send Greek and Turkish blue helmets to Bosnia as 
inappropriate. Greece's stand on the Macedonian state is too 
extreme; Bulgaria is a leading force in the eastern part of the 
Balkans, Sir Dudley Smith told MP's of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee. Events similar to the ones in Bosnia may take place 
in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- 
FYROM] as well and it is necessary to avert them. The WEU is 
fully aware of the role of a frontline state which Bulgaria has 
assumed in enforcing the Yugo-embargo, he added. The president 
of the WEU Assembly told MP's that it is important for the 
Bulgaria side to make out a good case of the issue of its 
embargo-related losses at the session of the WEU Assembly in 
June 1994. 
  The potentials of the Bulgarian military industrial complex 
are interesting and deserve to be studied in greater detail, Mr. 
Cameron told MP's today in response to a question. The WEU 
Assembly has recommended the ministers of its member-states to 
allow the associated countries to take part in the work of the 
WEU Satellite Telecommunications Centre in Spain, Mr. Cameron 
recalled. There are ample opportunities for future cooperation 
between Bulgaria and the WEU in arms production through the 
so-called Western European Armaments Group, the WEU delegation 
believes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7890 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhelev Receives FYROM Party Leader </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhelev Receives FYROM Party Leader </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504161394 Sofia BTA in English 1545 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504161394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- President Zhelyu Zhelev 
today met Mr. Ljupco Georgievski, Chairman of the Internal 
Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party for 
Macedonian National Unity (IMRO-DPMNU), the president's foreign 
policy adviser Kamen Velichkov said. "I cannot say there were 
any differences between the two sides," Mr. Velichkov said. The 
leader of Macedonia's [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
-- FYROM] major opposition parliamentary party arrived Sunday on 
an informal visit to Bulgaria at the invitation of the 
extraparliamentary Fatherland Union. 
  The Bulgarian side reminded that this country was the first 
one to recognize the sovereignty of Macedonia in January 1992 
and laid a stress on the necessity for Macedonia to get in 
closer contacts with the European structures, the president's 
adviser said. He reiterated this country's stand against the 
embargo Greece has enforced against Macedonia and said Bulgaria 
believes it does not contribute to the stability in the Balkans. 
  Dr. Zhelev expressed his desire that the two countries 
develop unselfish relations based on an equal footing. Bulgaria 
will, however, profit from the cooperation, Mr. Velichkov said. 
  The meeting between Dr. Zhelev and Mr. Georgievski was held 
without the help of an interpreter, Mr. Velichkov also said. 
  The Macedonian guest today met National Assembly Chairman 
Aleksandur Yordanov to discuss the performance of the two 
countries' parliaments. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7891 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Georgievski Reflects on Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Georgievski Reflects on Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704071894 Sofia BTA in English 1448 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704071894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- "We have to believe that 
the Berlin Walls between the Balkan states will soon fall. If 
we want that to happen between the Republic of Macedonia [The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] and the Republic 
of Bulgaria, our statesmen should make more efforts to effect 
it," Mr. Ljupco Georgievski, leader of the most influential 
opposition party in the Republic of Macedonia (the Internal 
Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party of 
Macedonian Unity) [IMRO-DPMU] told a news conference here 
today. He arrived on a visit here Sunday at the invitation of 
the non-parliamentary Fatherland Union and met with President 
Zhelyu Zhelev, National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov, 
the floor leaders and other MP's of the two major parliamentary 
forces (the Bulgarian Socialist Party and the Union of 
Democratic Forces), leaders of non- parliamentary political 
formations and representatives of the clergy. 
  "All political parties without exception declared clearly 
Bulgaria's support for the concept of an independent Republic of 
Macedonia. Bulgaria will uphold this position at all 
international forums," Mr. Georgievski pointed out. Bulgaria 
was the first country in the world to recognize officially the 
Republic of Macedonia in January 1992. Mr. Georgievski believes 
that the construction of a railway between Sofia and Skopje and 
the easing of border formalities on checkpoints along the 
Bulgarian-Macedonian border would allow a free flow of people, 
ideas and communications. "Macedonia should sign military 
agreements with all countries willing to cooperate with it," he 
said, answering a question about military cooperation between 
Bulgaria and Macedonia. 
  The leader of the IMRO-DPMU believes that Serbian influence 
in the Republic of Macedonia is still enormous but a downward 
trend can be observed. "UNPROFOR soldiers from the United 
States should stay as long as a Serbian-Greek alliance exists 
against the Republic of Macedonia," he said. Mr. Georgievski 
opposes the sending of peace- keeping forces from Eastern 
Orthodox or Muslim states to Macedonia. Macedonia has not taken 
a clear stand on the participation of Turkish troops in the 
peace-keeping forces in Bosnia. 
  The IMRO-DPMU hopes to win 51 percent in the forthcoming 
general elections this fall and be able to form a government, 
Mr. Georgievski pointed out, and reminded that in the previous 
parliamentary elections in December 1990 his party won 31 
percent of the votes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7892 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Turkish Representatives Meet Zhelev, Matinchev </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Turkish Representatives Meet Zhelev, Matinchev </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504182494 Sofia BTA in English 1709 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504182494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 5 (BTA) -- The Turkish parliamentary 
delegation led by Grand National Assembly Speaker Husamettin 
Cindoruk, which is visiting this country, this afternoon had a 
20-minute meeting with President Zhelev. The Turkish MP's 
yesterday arrived on an official visit at the invitation of the 
Bulgarian Parliament. The question about the participation of 
Turkish blue helmets in the UN peacekeeping forces in Bosnia was 
not raised, President's foreign policy adviser Kamen Velichkov 
said. The fact that this Turkish parliamentary delegation 
comprises members of four political parties indicates that 
good-neighbourliness was set the major principle of Turkey's 
policy by a political consensus, Mr. Cindoruk reportedly told 
President Zhelev. The two sides identified mutual interests in 
attracting foreign investments in the region and particularly 
for the construction of the regional infrastructure, Mr. 
Velichkov also said. "The Black Sea Economic Cooperation was 
mentioned along this line of reasoning," the president's adviser 
said, answering a journalist's question. 
  Earlier in the afternoon the Turkish delegation met Deputy 
Prime Minister Evgeni Matinchev, now sitting in for Prime 
Minister Berov during the latter's sick leave. The talks 
focused on the achievements of the military cooperation, control 
of drug trafficking and organized crime, and mutual interests in 
the construction of the east-west and north-south trunk roads. 
"I availed myself of the occasion to stress the losses this 
country is sustaining as a result of the Yugo-embargo and to 
call on Turkey to help solve this problem in its capacity as a 
member of international institutions," Mr. Matinchev said. The 
acting prime minister also raised the question of Turkey's 2 
million U.S. dollar liability to Bulgaria for the water supplied 
last year. Mr. Matinchev said that the Turkish parliamentary 
speaker apologized and explained the settlement was belated by 
the bureaucratic machine in Turkey. He also pledged to address 
the Turkish prime minister for a speedy solution of this problem. 
  This morning the Turkish guests held long meetings with the 
Parliamentary National Security and Foreign Policy Committees. 
Speaking to journalists after the meeting, the leaders of the 
two committees said that the Bulgarian MP's raised the question 
of the deployment of Turkish blue helmets in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
Both committees reiterated this country's stand in favour of 
the Balkan countries' non-involvement in the conflict in former 
Yugoslavia. Mr. Cindoruk said in response that he respects 
Bulgaria's stance. "As to the Yugo-crisis, the two countries are 
acting within the framework of the UN decisions, each one of 
them taking its own stand," Mr. Cindoruk said. He once again 
explained that it is not Turkish troops but Turkish blue helmets 
that have been invited to join the UN peacekeeping forces in the 
Yugo-conflict. Parliamentary National Security Committee 
Chairman Nikolay Slatinski said that there were no serious 
debates as to the Turkish blue helmets. "But what we can say is 
that Turkey first asked to participate and only then was it 
invited by the UN Security Council," Mr. Slatinski went on to 
say. The National Security Committee and the Turkish guests 
discussed some other issues, including the Rezovska River, 
running along the Turkish-Bulgarian border, fishing in 
territorial waters in the Black Sea and Bulgarian plots in 
Turkey. MP's of this parliamentary committee voiced their 
opinion that it was high time the rights of Bulgarian Muslims 
were taken out of the Islamic Conference's agenda. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7893 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yordanov Cited on Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Yordanov Cited on Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404200294 Sofia BTA in English 1811 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404200294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 4 (BTA) -- A Turkish parliamentary 
delegation, led by the President of the Turkish Grand National 
Assembly Husamettin Cindoruk, arrived on a three-day official 
visit here today. The delegation includes MP's of the Social 
Democratic Populist Party, the Welfare Party, the True Path 
Party and the Motherland Party. "This is the first visit of a 
head of the Turkish Parliament in the last 20 years and it is an 
indication of good neighbourly relations," Aleksandur Yordanov, 
chairman of the Bulgarian National Assembly, said welcoming the 
Turkish guests. 
  Late in the afternoon, the Turkish MP's conferred with Mr. 
Yordanov. "We share similar views on all issues with the 
exception of the commitment of Turkish troops to the UN 
peace-keeping forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina," Mr. Cindoruk 
said after the meeting. According to him, it is not a case of 
differences of opinion but rather of the interpretations of the 
United Nations' decision. "We respect the Bulgarian position 
(on non-involvement of the Balkan countries in the 
Yugoconflict)," the president of the Turkish Parliament said. 
"The blue helmets going to Bosnia are not Turkish troops but 
troops of the United Nations," Mr. Cindoruk argues. According 
to the chairman of the Bulgarian Parliament Aleksandur Yordanov, 
instead of resolving the problem, the presence of Turkish blue 
helmets in Bosnia and Herzegovina would cause further escalation 
of the tensions based on historical experience in this region. 
  "Both Bulgaria and Turkey see the promotion of their 
commercial and economic relations mainly within Black Sea 
Economic Cooperation, together with other countries in the 
region like Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Greece," Mr. Yordanov 
said after the meeting. He explained Bulgaria's stand on 
Turkey's active efforts to accelerate the formation of a 
parliamentary assembly of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation. 
"Bulgaria believes such a parliamentary body could only be 
instituted on the basis of a well-developed economic 
cooperation," Mr. Yordanov said. According to him, there are 
some other forums for parliamentary contacts, like the Council 
of Europe and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in 
Europe. Mr. Cindoruk sees no obstacles to the development of 
Bulgarian-Turkish economic relations. 
  Aleksandur Yordanov raised with his Turkish counterpart the 
problem about Bulgarian immovable property in Istanbul: The 
Bulgarian Church, hospital and school. 
  Mr. Cindoruk conferred today with Foreign Minister Stanislav 
Daskalov. They agreed that bilateral relations are making 
positive progress and discussed the possibilities for their 
further promotion in various fields, the Foreign Ministry press 
centre said. Mr. Cindoruk and Mr. Daskalov were unanimous about 
the need to strengthen Balkan stability by peaceful means. 
Black Sea Economic Cooperation was also discussed during the 
meeting. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7894 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cooperation Protocol Signed With Georgia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Cooperation Protocol Signed With Georgia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404202994 Sofia BTA in English 1501 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404202994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Bulgaria-Georgia: Development of Cooperation" -- BTA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Sofia, April 4 (BTA) -- Georgia's President Eduard 
Shevardnadze has addressed a message to Bulgaria's President 
Zhelyu Zhelev in which he expresses hope that relations between 
Bulgaria and Georgia will develop and strengthen further. The 
message was presented to Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov by 
Georgia's First Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail Ukleba who is 
leading a Georgian delegation which arrived here yesterday. 
  The two diplomats discussed the current state of Bulgarian- 
Georgian relations and the prospects for their development, said 
the spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, Mr. Radko Vlaykov. The 
two countries are willing to maintain more active relations and 
to hold regular political consultations. Documents have already 
been developed to regulate trade and economic contacts as well 
as cooperation in science and culture. Black Sea economic 
cooperation was discussed at the meeting. Later today Mr. 
Ukleba and Bulgaria's Deputy Foreign Minister Dimitur Ikonomov 
signed a protocol on cooperation between the two countries' 
foreign ministries. Mr. Ukleba was received by the deputy 
chairman of parliament, Mr. Yordan Shkolagerski. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7895 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karabashev, Georgian Official Cited </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karabashev, Georgian Official Cited </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604120394 Sofia BTA in English 0953 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604120394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Bulgaria, Georgia Promote Trade, Economic Cooperation" -- </F>
BTA headline] 
  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- The Bulgarian Deputy Prime 
Minister and Minister of Trade Valentin Karabashev today 
received the First Deputy Foreign Minister of Georgia Mikhail 
Ukleba, said the Government's Press Office. 
  They discussed the legal framework of bilateral trade and 
economic cooperation, stressing that the bilateral trade and 
economic cooperation draft accord has been initialed. The 
accord envisages the signature of agreements on air, sea and 
land transport cooperation, on the avoidance of double taxation 
and on reciprocal investment protection and promotion. 
  A Bulgarian government delegation is scheduled to visit 
Tbilisi this June, said the Press Office. 
  The Georgian delegation completed their four-day visit here 
today. 
  In the course of the visit, the sides discussed matters of 
bilateral cooperation and the Black Sea Economic Zone. They 
signed a protocol on cooperation between the two Foreign 
Ministries. The Georgian diplomat delivered a message to 
Bulgarian President Zhelyu Zhelev by Georgian President Eduard 
Shevardnadze, expressing a wish to strengthen bilateral 
relations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7896 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Havel Recovering From Virus `as Expected' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Havel Recovering From Virus `as Expected' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504135694 Prague CTK in English 1354 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504135694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Litomysl, East Bohemia, April 5 (CTK) -- President 
Vaclav Havel is staying at his private residence outside Prague 
to recover from a virus infection complicated by pneumonia. 
  Presidential spokesman Ladislav Spacek said the president 
was 
trying to get better in time for the meeting of Central European 
presidents taking place here April 15-16. 
  Spacek said the president was recovering as expected and had 
canceled all his plans in order to ensure he recovered 
completely. His participation in the presidential summit, 
however, depends on several medical tests which are still being 
run. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7897 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Coalition Talks on Senatorial Elections Fail </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Coalition Talks on Senatorial Elections Fail </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504192694 Prague CTK in English 1832 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504192694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 5 (CTK) -- Government coalition party 
experts today failed to reach any compromise on senatorial 
elections and will probably not meet again, Radim Spacek from 
the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) told journalists. 
  He added it was now up to the coalition party leaderships to 
"define the ground" for further negotiations. 
  Senatorial elections will probably be held along with 
communal elections in the autumn. The 81-seat Senate, in which 
one-third of the deputies will be elected every two years, is 
defined in the Czech Constitution but has not been created yet. 
  The coalition parties are split over the method of electing 
the senators. The strongest party, the Civic Democratic Party 
(ODS) of Premier Vaclav Klaus insists on 81 one-mandate 
constituencies, a proposal criticized by the other coalition 
parties -- the Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's 
Party (KDU-CSL), the ODA, and the Christian Democratic Party 
(KDS) -- which say the ODS wants to ensure for itself dominance 
of the Senate. 
  They propose the creation of 27 three-mandate 
constituencies. 
  The opposition parties are opposed to the Senate's very 
existence. 
  Spacek said that ODS representatives "will discuss any 
variant of senatorial elections as long as talks are about 81 
constituencies." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7898 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus Explains Settlement Plan for Russian Debt </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus Explains Settlement Plan for Russian Debt </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604071294 Prague CTK in English 1912 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604071294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 5 (CTK) -- Agreement on the final 
date of signing a document on repaying the Russian debt means 
that several- year talks on the issue are drawing to a close, 
Premier Vaclav Klaus said after return from a two-day trip to 
Russia today. 
  The date is May 30. A "check date," May 15, was agreed upon 
in the talks with Russian Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin, Klaus 
said, adding that in case of problems the two premiers would 
speak over the phone on May 16 in order to remove the obstacles. 
  The agreement does not mean that the Russian debt, worth 
some 
$3.4 billion, will be paid back "starting tomorrow or the day 
after tomorrow," Klaus noted. "The agreement means a written 
acknowledgement of the debt and establishment of clear relations 
and clear schedule of the payments," he added. 
  The debt will be partly repaid on the basis of the 
principles 
of the "Paris Club of creditors," the rest by deliveries of 
goods and through Czech participation in Russian privatization. 
  Klaus admitted that the Czech Republic had been striving for 
collecting the debt by other means than through the Paris club 
which comprises economically advanced countries. 
  "We had hoped for a long time that we would be able to find 
other ways of payment, not being viewed as the rich West to 
which payments are made belatedly. I have to admit these dreams 
were unrealistic," Klaus said. 
  Klaus said he had not discussed security issues with 
President Boris Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7899 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Papers Reflect on Klaus' Visit to Moscow </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Papers Reflect on Klaus' Visit to Moscow </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604122994 Prague CTK in English 0908 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604122994 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 6 (CTK) -- Without hesitation, 
Russian Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin said yesterday that "Russia 
has Czech experience to draw on," the Czech daily LIDOVE NOVINY 
writes today. He is probably the first Russian politician ever 
to have said anything like that, the paper adds. 
  In short, Czech Premier Vaclav Klaus has scored a big 
success 
in Russia, the paper writes, adding that besides a largely 
routine agreement on the support and protection of investments 
and a 1994 bilateral trade agreement, Klaus's mission to Russia 
is notable for achieving a visible turnabout in the Russian 
approach to bilateral relations. 
  If until now Russia has been accepting Czech payments for 
oil 
and other raw materials while allowing Czech imports go unpaid 
for, this policy has now probably come to an end. The two 
countries' finance ministries have until the end of May to draw 
up a document which would set out terms for the Russian debt 
repayment. 
  The Czech Republic has at long last been deemed to be a 
country with which it pays to have good long-term relations 
instead of shortsightedly abusing Czech dependence on oil from 
Russia, the paper writes. 
  In recent years, Russia has acquired a bad image in general, 
but especially as regards the economy. The Russian economy is 
incredibly inefficient and the limping reform is not expected to 
improve noticeably in the years to come. 
  In view of the lack of recovery factors it comes as no 
surprise that quality of goods does not improve. And yet in 
some respects Russia has remained an economic superpower, the 
paper writes. 
  Russian trade balance registered a $19.5 billion surplus in 
1993 with the balance of payments running even. The country, 
therefore, has not run further into debt, the paper says. 
  Russia's overall foreign debt has attained the $80 billion 
mark but even so, its value per head remains lower than, to give 
an example, the one for the Czech Republic, not to mention other 
former Warsaw Pact countries except Romania. 
  Russia, then, does not belong to countries hopelessly in 
debt 
which should or must be allowed some write-offs. Such an 
approach would be mistaken both in logic and the assessment of 
reality, the paper says. 
  The lasting quality of what has been achieved, however, is 
to 
be doubted as it depends on Russia remaining stable. In any 
case, the Czech negotiating position will improve markedly once 
the Ingolstadt oil pipeline has been built, doing away with the 
dependence on its pipeline from Russia. 
  That said, the Czech Government's fundamental policy should 
aim to recapture the Russian market. The partial capitalization 
of Russian debt, meaning that Russian firms are sold to Czech 
investors, would be a meaningful contribution to that end. The 
question is, however, the paper asks, whether Czech companies 
are capable yet of such an expansion. 
  LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE, writing on the same theme, says that 
during his two days in Moscow, Klaus presented himself as being 
on an equal footing with his counterparts and as someone who 
does not even shrink from telling unpalatable facts. 
  Klaus's thoroughly pragmatic or even utilitarian approach 
found expression in shifting the emphasis from the past, 
exemplified by the Russian debt and the vassal-like attitude of 
the former COMECON countries to the Soviet Union, to the future, 
ideally conceived as one of standard trade relations between two 
countries with equal rights. 
  In contrast to the former "mutually unprofitable 
cooperation" 
Klaus proposed "business as usual," the paper says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7900 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   ODA Policy Summarized Before Conference </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    ODA Policy Summarized Before Conference </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604194894 Prague CTK in English 1257 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604194894 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Prague, April 6 (CTK) -- The seventh national 
conference of the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), to be held in 
Brno on April 9 and 10, will deal with local government reform, 
the preparation of community and senatorial elections, the 
financing of local budgets and security policy. 
  It will be attended by guests from France, Hungary, Germany, 
Austria, Russia, Slovakia and Great Britain. 
  The ODA is pressing for thirteen local administrative units 
-- a relatively low number. At January's meeting of the party's 
Central Assembly, chairman Jan Kalvoda rejected information that 
the ODA was considering supporting the abolition of the district 
level of local administration. "We consider the districts at 
present to be the only functioning element of the state 
administration, and their abolition would shake the whole 
structure," Kalvoda said. At a meeting of the "coalition four" 
on March 28, Kalvoda was asked to put forward material on local 
government reform and the decentralization of central government 
by the end of the week. 
  As regards senatorial elections, the ODA, together with its 
coalition partners, the Christian Democratic Party (KDS) and the 
Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party 
(KDU-CSL), supports a system of 27 three-mandate constituencies, 
whereas the Civic Democratic Party (ODS, the fourth coalition 
party) wants 81 one-mandate constituencies. Under a compromise 
solution proposed by deputies, this year people would vote for 
three senators in each of the "large constituencies," of which 
there would be 27. Each of these constituencies would be made 
up of three smaller areas, and thus the number of voting areas 
desired by the ODS would be achieved. 
  In the issue of church property restitution, the ODA has 
stressed from the start that February 1948 (the date of the 
communist takeover) is the cut-off point and a barrier which 
restitution should not cross. It believes that the law on 
mitigating property wrongs suffered by the churches needs to be 
tied to the actual needs of the sects. It favors restitution of 
religious property in the form of a law which lists individual 
properties to be returned. Kalvoda says the party is a clear 
supporter of the principle of the separation of church and 
state, and believes that this question should be solved as soon 
as possible. 
  However, the ODA believes that the cut-off date of February 
25th, 1948 is no good as regards the restitution of property to 
Jewish communities. [passage omitted] 
  The ODA now has about 2,000 members (in December 1990 it had 
100 members), the relatively low number being due to its 
selective policy in accepting new members. The party is a 
member of the European Democratic Union. 
  The ODA is a government coalition party. In the 19-member 
government it has three posts -- Jan Kalvoda is deputy prime 
minister, Vladimir Dlouhy minister of trade and industry, and 
Jiri Skalicky privatization minister. 
  Polls conducted by the Institute for Public Opinion Research 
show that the ODA is the second strongest political party 
following Klaus's ODS [Civic Democratic Party]. It has occupied 
the place since February 1993 when nine percent of the 
population supported it. In August 1993 this was 13 percent 
(together with the opposition Czech Social Democratic Party of 
Milos Zeman), in January 1994 ten percent and in February 11 
percent of the electorate. 
  Surveys show that Dlouhy has for a long time been the most 
popular Czech politician, with 62 percent of the population 
trusting him in February 1993, 76 percent in September and 82 
percent in December 1993 and March 1994. Kalvoda ranks among 
ten most popular Czech politicians. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7901 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Unhealthy Habits Blamed for Shorter Lives </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Unhealthy Habits Blamed for Shorter Lives </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0205A Prague PRAGUE POST in English 22 Mar 94 pp 1, 3 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0205A </F>
<F P=104>  Prague PRAGUE POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ross Crockford: "Eat, Drink and Be Merry, for </F>
Tomorrow We Die"] 
  [Text] Thinking of spending another night in the pub, 
relaxing over goulash, beer and a cigarette? You may not find 
this news relaxing: According to a new Ministry of Health 
report, the pub-going life is the main reason the average Czech 
dies earlier than just about anyone else in Europe. 
  According to the report, released Feb. 28, the fatty diet, 
smoking, excessive drinking, stress and physical lethargy common 
to most Czechs also cause up to 60 percent of the illnesses and 
syndromes that kill them prematurely. 
  Environmental hazards and inefficient medical care were each 
deemed to be 20 percent responsible for the Czechs' short life 
expectancies. 
  Czech men, on average, live to an age of 68.5 years, and 
Czech women to 76.1 years. In neighboring Austria, by 
comparison, the average life expectancy is 74 years for men and 
81 for women. In the United States it is 72.3 years for men and 
79 for women. 
  Standing outside a central Prague cafeteria where he had 
just 
finished off a lunch of boiled pork and mashed potatoes, Milan 
Novak said he is aware of the statistics, but that they wouldn't 
necessarily make him change his habits. "Everything is to blame 
here: the air, the water, the poor hospitals and the food," said 
the 30-year-old businessman. "But lunch is a break from work, so 
I'm not going to worry about my health when I'm eating." 
  According to Rudolf Poledne, head of a laboratory conducting 
arteriosclerosis research at Prague's Institute for Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, the biggest problem is the widespread 
attitude of people like Novak that one's health is largely 
beyond one's control. 
  "It's easy to blame the environment or the stress caused by 
your work," said Poledne. "We were taught for years by the 
totalitarian system that everything can be planned and directed, 
so people didn't feel responsible for anything, including their 
own health." 
  Instead, Poledne said, many have simply become accustomed to 
fatal indulgences. Czechs guzzle more beer than anyone else in 
the world--more than 150 liters (39.75 gallons) per person every 
year. The average Czech also smokes around 1,900 cigarettes 
yearly, down slightly from an all-time high of over 2,100 four 
years ago. 
  One of the organizations attempting to curb this lethal 
overconsumption is the National Center for Health Promotion. 
Zdenek Kucera, the director of the center, said he is developing 
several programs to educate people about such unhealthy 
consumption. One campaign, called "Quit to Win," rewards those 
who stop smoking with chances at $5,000 and a trip to the Canary 
Islands. 
  Kucera acknowledged that while it seems contradictory for 
the 
Czech government to encourage the development of the alcohol and 
tobacco industries and fund his center at the same time, 
"similar situations exist in every country. There is a very 
strong wish to organize educational campaigns, but they are very 
careful not to violate the overall policy of the cabinet, which 
is to be as economically liberal as possible." 
  It is unlikely that the government will do much more to 
encourage people to change their ways. Jan Sorf, director of 
physical education for the Ministry of Education, Youth and 
Sport, said that no one had the funding to maintain, let alone 
build, public athletic facilities. These initiatives, he said, 
have to come from volunteer organizations such as the YMCA, or 
entrepreneurs who have discovered that money can be made from 
fitness centers and squash courts. 
  So far, economics has proven more successful than government 
planning in changing unhealthy habits. Researchers have noted 
that the amount of cholesterol coursing through the arteries of 
the average Czech has dropped 5 percent since 1988. This is 
thanks not to education, but to the skyrocketing prices of meat 
and cheese--a consequence they jokingly refer to as "the Klaus 
effect," after Czech Prime Minister and economic reformer Vaclav 
Klaus. 
  It may only be a matter of time until Czechs adopt the 
Western pursuit of immortality. But at least one believes there 
also should be room for people to indulge their life-threatening 
appetites. Back at the cafeteria, Mirslav Bunat, a retired 
engineer, reported that he had just enjoyed a "fantastic" parek 
(hot dog). "I think about how unhealthy it is sometimes," he 
said, "but I still love Czech food. I live in Switzerland now, 
and you can't get this kind of food there, so when I come back 
here I eat it all the time." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7902 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jeszenszky Jeered at Holocaust Conference </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jeszenszky Jeered at Holocaust Conference </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504182594 Budapest MTI in English 1546 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504182594 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 5 April (MTI) -- Audience protests 
disrupted a Hungarian Government minister's speech to a World 
War II Jewish Holocaust conference today. Foreign Minister Geza 
Jeszenszky's speech, greeting an international conference on the 
Hungarian Holocaust at the Budapest University of Arts and 
Sciences, was drowned out by stamping and slow handclapping from 
audience members showing derision at the minister's ideas on 
1940's history. 
  Jeszenszky said one should never forget that Hungary gave 
refuge to the Jews until 1944 and that the German invasion 
marked not only the start of deportations but also atrocities 
against non-Jewish Hungarian citizens. As a Hungarian citizen, 
historian, politician, and presidium member of the ruling 
Hungarian Democratic Forum, the minister said those not 
sympathizing with the victims of 1944 have no place in the 
Hungarian nation. 
  He asked listeners to mourn not just the 600,000 Jewish 
victims, but also nearly 500,000 Hungarians who died in World 
War II. 
  The minister reminded politicians and scholars at the 
conference of the link between the Hungarian Holocaust and the 
Peace Treaty concluding World War I, a treaty very damaging for 
Hungary. 
  Jeszenszky then drew a parallel between Communism and 
Nazism, 
saying that both are barbarous ideas which should be condemned 
together. But he could not continue because of jeering and 
stamping from some of the audience. 
  Before Jeszenszky's remarks, Director of the New York 
Rosenthal Institute Randolph L. Braham had delivered a lecture. 
  "Keeping silent about this genocide makes us complicit in 
it," said Braham. "This political attitude aimed at falsifying 
history -- one seen in Western Europe after the war and in the 
post- communist countries today -- is particularly dangerous," 
he added. 
  Braham thought right-wing movements reviving in the region 
with anti-Semitism central to their political ideology had just 
this goal. He hoped these "political charlatans" could be 
squeezed out of public life by resolving underlying economic 
problems. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7903 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Ministry Issues Statement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Ministry Issues Statement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504182694 Budapest MTI in English 1622 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504182694 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 5 April (MTI) -- As reported earlier, 
audience protests disrupted Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza 
Jeszenszky's speech to a World War II Jewish Holocaust 
conference today. Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky's speech, to 
a conference on the Hungarian Holocaust at the Budapest 
University of Arts and Sciences, was drowned out by stamping and 
slow handclapping from audience members when he drew a parallel 
between Communism and Nazism. 
  A statement sent to MTI by the Hungarian Foreign Ministry 
today says Jeszenszky originally did not plan to contribute to 
the conference. However, he changed his mind when inspired by 
formal greetings, first of all by those of Chief Rabbi Jozsef 
Schweitzer, who expressed the hope that the conference would 
help people become familiar with justice and promote spiritual 
reconciliation. 
  Moved to contribute, Jeszenszky said he was pleased to 
realize that he could identify himself with the overwhelming 
majority of views expounded in the opening speeches. 
  Jeszenszky said it was Nazism that made it possible for 
Bolshevism to gain ground in Hungary. It cannot be forgotten 
that the liberation of Hungary in 1945 marked the beginning of 
another, decades-long dictatorship, he said. The minister 
quoted late prime minister Jozsef Antall as saying that both 
Nazism and Communism are barbarous ideas which should be 
condemned together. 
  At that point, some people in a corner of the hall started 
handclapping -- to prevent the minister from ending his speech 
rather than express their approval of his ideas, the statement 
says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7904 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   PRC Justice Minister Visits, Comments </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PRC Justice Minister Visits, Comments </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504193094 Budapest MTI in English 1811 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504193094 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, April 5 (MTI) -- "We were pleased that 
the change in Hungary's regime has caused no break in 
Chinese-Hungarian relations, which are developing well, with 
respect for one another's views," Hungarian Deputy Speaker of 
Parliament Matyas Szuros told Chinese Justice Minister Xiao Yang 
in Budapest today. 
  Szuros said that Hungary highly appreciated the economic and 
social results China achieved since it launched sweeping reforms. 
  In its foreign policy based on a consensus of political 
parties, Hungary continues to endorse the "One China" principle, 
Szuros said. 
  Xiao Yang stressed that China would under all circumstances 
respect the Hungarian people's decision on choosing its social 
system. 
  Building a market economy, China attributes great importance 
to close cooperation with Hungary, he added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7905 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Deputy Protests Treatment of Dissidents </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Deputy Protests Treatment of Dissidents </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504192994 Budapest MTI in English 1500 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504192994 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, April 5 (MTI) -- "They should go home!", 
opposition MP Zoltan Trombitas of the Federation of Young 
Democrats (Fidesz) shouted after Deputy Speaker of Parliament 
Vince Voros had greeted the Chinese justice minister [Xiao Yang] 
and his delegation in the box of honour at Hungarian Parliament 
today. 
  Late, after the scheduled departure of the Chinese 
delegation, Trombitas received a public warning from Voros in 
front of the plenary session. 
  Fidesz sources say Trombitas was protesting against Chinese 
treatment of dissidents, now being arrested in China, while some 
leaders of the 1989 student protests are still in prison there. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7906 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Goods Transport Protocol Signed With Ukraine </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Goods Transport Protocol Signed With Ukraine </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504162094 Budapest MTI in English 1412 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504162094 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 5 April (MTI) -- This year's goods 
transport protocol was signed in Budapest today by Hungarian 
Minister of International Economic Relations Bela Kadar and his 
Ukrainian counterpart Oleh Slyepichev. 
  The ministers told the press that two-way trade was 
developing dynamically, despite a fall in production and export 
in both countries. Last year the trade turnover totalled $300 
million, of which Hungarian export amounted to $159 million, and 
import to $141 million. Ukraine is the 14th biggest trade 
partner of Hungary. 
  Kadar and Slyepichev said the organizational framework for 
bilateral links had been established. To date, about 300 
Hungarian- Ukrainian joint ventures have been set up. In a move 
to promote their operation, the two countries are likely to sign 
an investment protection agreement soon. 
  The two ministers voiced their wish to strengthen 
cooperation 
between Hungary, Ukraine, and Slovakia, and said the three 
states will seek help from the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development to finance projects in the region. 
  The Ukrainian minister thanked Hungary for a $1 million loan 
for the reconstruction of the Beregszasz hospital. The loan is 
to be repaid through goods deliveries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7907 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prime Minister Outlines Government Goals </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Prime Minister Outlines Government Goals </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704085494 Prague CTK in English 1853 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704085494 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 6 (CTK) -- It is the unambiguous 
goal of the new Slovak Government to speed up the process of 
economic transformation in a way society can bear, Prime 
Minister Jozef Moravcik told the Bratislava diplomatic corps 
today. 
  Moravcik said the government would take concrete steps to 
develop the private sector, support small and medium businesses, 
increase the competitiveness of Slovak products, and create job 
opportunities. 
  He also promised that privatization would be speeded up in a 
fair way. "We welcome more active participation by foreign 
investors in the privatization process in the Slovak Republic," 
he said. 
  The government also intended to create the necessary 
conditions for the broadest possible integration of the Slovak 
economy into European and world economic structures. 
  Even though his government will only last until the 
elections 
six months from now, it would introduce innovations into the 
economy that should outlive the government's term of office, 
Moravcik said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7908 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   KDH Condemns SNS on Zhirinovskiy Congress </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    KDH Condemns SNS on Zhirinovskiy Congress </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504083594 Prague CTK in English 2018 GMT 4 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504083594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 4 (CTK) -- The fact a leading 
member of the Slovak National Party (SNS) took part in the 
weekend pan-Slavic congress shows the party's political line is 
not just the personal deviation of the new chairman but of the 
whole party, Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) chairman Jan 
Carnogursky told CTK today. 
  Carnogursky was referring to the involvement of SNS deputy 
chairman Juraj Molnar in the Moscow-held congress on Sunday 
which was organized by radical Russian nationalist Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy. 
  Vladimir Miskovsky, deputy for the National Democratic 
Party-New Alternative (NDSDA) which arose from the division of 
the SNS, said honorary chairman of the SNS Jozef Prokes should 
be asked his views on Molnar's attendance at the congress, 
Prokes being shadow foreign minister. "He is in the same party 
as Mr Molnar and certainly knows best of all what Slovakia's 
state interests are," he said. 
  Chairman of the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement 
(MKDH) in the Slovak parliament Bela Bugar declared he was 
insulted merely by the fact Slovakia was represented at the 
congress. "Zhirinovskiy and his statements are known almost to 
little children now as well," he told CTK. "Unfortunately it 
must be said the rest of the world behaves towards this man 
somewhat laxly. It reminds me of 1938 and later times," he said. 
  Even though the SNS had not authorized Molnar to speak at 
the 
congress, as SNS chairman Jan Slota claimed today, Molnar still 
had had the authority to go, Bugar said. "I don't think that in 
this way we will contribute to rapprochement among nations. The 
SNS has revealed to us another of its profiles," he said. 
  The pan-Slavic congress was the fifth congress of 
Zhirinovskiy's Liberal Democratic Party (LDPR). Participants 
agreed on the creation of a Union of Slav Nations and elected 
Zhirinovskiy himself as president of the "Slav parliament". 
  At the congress Molnar said independent Slovakia had 
realized 
that "if Slav are not united we shall not exist". "It's in our 
interest to know what role in Central Europe Slovakia will play 
if the LDPR wins in Russia," he told CTK. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7909 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Weiss, Slota Comment on Issue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Weiss, Slota Comment on Issue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0504135994 Prague CTK in English 1403 GMT 5 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0504135994 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 5 (CTK) -- The participation of 
Juraj Molnar, a delegate by the Slovak National Party (SNS) in 
Sunday's World Slavonic Congress, held on the initiative of 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, is evidence of a crisis in the party, 
chairman of the Democratic Left Party (SDL) Peter Weiss told 
journalists today. This crisis results in pushing for extremist 
and populist trends, Weiss added. 
  "If a political party loses a program, it usually 
compensates 
it by turning to myths. One of them could be Slav solidarity 
and cooperation of Slav countries," Weiss said. 
  Chairman of the ethnic Hungarian Christian Democrats Bela 
Bugar pointed to the apparent shift in the SNS strategy. The 
party's last electoral manifesto was unique [in] calling for the 
destruction of a common state of two Slav nations; now it is 
calling for the unification of the Slavs, Bugar argued. 
  Slovak Radio broadcast a statement by SNS chairman Jan Slota 
today. Molnar travelled to Moscow as an observer and was not 
assigned to present a message, Slota said. 
  Slota considers negative statements by leaders of other 
parties inadequate and stupid. At the congress Molnar said 
"five sentences" on the need of Slav solidarity, concluding that 
no Slavs would exist without Great Russia. Slota said he fully 
identified himself with this view. 
  The SNS "has nothing in common" with the alleged invitation 
to Zhirinovskiy to Slovakia for April 16-19, Slota stated, 
adding that "if we are really such a democratic country as we 
are calling ourselves... I see no reason for wondering about 
Zhirinovskiy's visit". 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7910 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Slovak National Property Fund Leader Appointed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Slovak National Property Fund Leader Appointed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704085094 Prague CTK in English 1642 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704085094 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 6 (CTK) -- The Slovak parliament 
today approved the appointment of Rudolf Janac as the new 
president of the National Property Fund (FNM). Viliam Vaskovic 
has been named FNM vice president. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7911 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meciar Expected To Return Once More </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meciar Expected To Return Once More </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0204A Prague PRAGUE POST in English 22 Mar 94 p 3 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0204A </F>
<F P=104>  Prague PRAGUE POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kevin Drew: "Meciar Has Been on the Mat Before"] </F>
  [Text] Bratislava -- An elderly couple wagged their fingers 
and scolded a pair of teenage boys standing in front of the 
Slovak parliament last Friday. 
  An hour earlier, parliament had passed a motion of no 
confidence against Vladimir Meciar's government, but a crowd of 
nearly 100 still lingered outside talking politics. 
  "You don't know what you're talking about," the old man said 
to the boys, who had been making jokes about the ousted prime 
minister. 
  "Meciar is for Slovakia, he stands up for us." 
  Such is the power Meciar still holds over many Slovaks. With 
his charisma, uncanny political instincts and penchant for 
prevailing against the odds, it would be difficult to bet that 
he has been sidelined permanently. 
  After all, Meciar was ousted from the prime minister's job 
before. He burst into the public spotlight during the 1989 
revolution and in 1990 was elected premier of the Slovak 
republic. In April 1991, the presidium of the Slovak parliament 
removed him from office after an emotionally pitched power 
struggle. 
  But 14 months later, he was back, winning a solid election 
victory with the newly formed Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 
(HZDS). That victory, coupled with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav 
Klaus' rise, sealed the dissolution of Czechoslovakia. 
  Observers then said Meciar's absence from government had 
worked to his advantage because he couldn't be blamed for the 
myriad of new problems that plagued Slovakia before the election. 
  He might have the same opportunity now. The new government 
will have to preside over fiscal and political chaos--which may 
soon be exacerbated by a 20- or 30-percent devaluation of the 
Slovak currency. An earlier move devalued the currency 15 
percent. 
  What's more, his party, the HZDS, remains the largest one in 
parliament. Meciar, who will take a deputy's seat, has already 
promised "emphatic" opposition to the new government. 
  Throughout 1993, polls consistently showed that only 25 
percent of Slovaks supported him. 
  But the opposition has always fared worse. 
  Throughout his various political tribulations, Meciar has 
retained his ability to communicate with the average 
Slovak--particularly pensioners in Bratislava and people in the 
countryside. Now that he finds himself down once again, 
observers are reluctant to count him out. 
  "Slovaks believe Meciar really understands their problems," 
said journalist Tibor Repta. "This is still new to us, to have a 
leader able to convince us that they care about Slovakia." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7912 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister Cosea Discusses Pace of Reform </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Minister Cosea Discusses Pace of Reform </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704065494 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1406 GMT 6 Apr 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704065494 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest, ROMPRES, 6/04/1994 -- "Romania has the 
capacity to employ its own potential," said Romanian minister of 
state, head of the Council of Economic Coordination, Strategy 
and Reform, in an interview granted to the governmental daily 
VOCEA ROMANIEI. 
  "The market economy is not a goal, an objective," says 
Cosea, 
but it must be considered as "a way to organize production and 
consumption based on relations of equivalent exchanges." 
Minister Cosea opined that Romania should consider the projects 
for the future according to the objectives it wish to reach. 
The development, as a goal, "depends on a country's capacity of 
employing the potential it has and, in this respect, few 
countries have this capacity that Romania has." 
  Minister Cosea said also that the reform in Romania was "an 
action of updating and civilizing which entails time and 
efforts. Still, the reform must be, in the end, visible and 
perceptible at the level of the individual" and not reduced to 
some statistical figures with regard to the pace of the 
privatization. "If it does not bring a change in the life of the 
individual, in his life in the society, the reform has no 
motivation." Reviewing the past four years of reform, Mircea 
Cosea concluded that the single change in the life of the 
individual was only a "permanent stress caused by the vanishing 
of the old values." 
  The reform, Cosea opined, should lead to the healing of the 
Romanian individual from two maladies he suffered from very much 
in the communist regime, namely, "the apathy, lack of 
determination," and "a certain underestimation of the country 
and of the people he belongs to in favor of foreign values, 
usually Western ones." Mircea Cosea said that at the time being 
Romania needed "a well structured system of values" and "a 
revigoration of the real, genuine patriotism which means one's 
faith that he belong to a valuable and strong nation." These can 
be achieved, Cosea considers, through the economic factor. When 
the Romanians would be able to live a better life, they will 
abandon the tendency of over-estimating the values of other 
peoples only because of their higher living standard, believes 
Cosea. 
  Referring to the privatization issues of primary concern in 
1994, Mircea Cosea warned that "privatization is not a reform 
element in itself but a single step which must be taken in the 
economic and social field." Minister Cosea said also that 
because of the way privatization has been made from 1990 till 
now, it is no longer perceived by the public as a reform element 
but as "a collective trauma." In this respect, Cosea mentioned 
certain abuses, elements of corruption, in the first years of 
the privatization process. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7913 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Salvadoran Foreign Minister Visits </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Salvadoran Foreign Minister Visits </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404195194 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1337 GMT 4 Apr 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404195194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 4/4/1994 -- "We have spent 48 
hours in Romania and we have noted that you have all the 
necessary elements for success. You have a big potential but a 
greater support is needed from the part of the Romanians living 
abroad, especially in the United States, said the minister of 
foreign affairs of El Salvador, Miguel Angel Salaverria, after a 
round of talks with the head of the Romanian diplomacy, Teodor 
Melescanu, on Monday, April 4. 
  One of the main theme approached during the talks referred 
to 
the concrete cooperation in the economic field between the two 
countries, said the Romanian minister of foreign affairs, Teodor 
Melescanu. 
  The Romanian party underscored its economic potential in 
several fields of interest for El Salvador, especially the 
textiles, electric energy, petro-chemistry, and expressed its 
readiness to participate, once the issue of the financial 
sources is solved, said Melescanu. 
  In the context, the two parties analysed the idea of opening 
a Romanian economic mission in El Salvador. 
  The two parties debated issues concerning the regional 
relations in Eastern Europe as well as in Central America. 
  A second round of talks between the two foreign ministers is 
scheduled for Monday afternoon when an accord is going to be 
signed thus canceling the requirement of visas on diplomatic and 
service passports. The two ministers will sign also a 
memorandum concerning a consultations mechanism to be 
established between the two foreign ministries. 
  The minister of foreign affairs of El Salvador, Miguel Angel 
Salaverria, was received on Monday by Romanian President Ion 
Iliescu. 
  The Salvadorean guest conveyed to the Romanian head of state 
"a warm message" from the part of Salvadorean President Alfredo 
Cristiani, expressing the desire for strengthened cooperation 
between El Salvador and Romania. 
  The Salvadorean dignitary, who is making a several days long 
private visit in Romania, was pleasantly impressed by the 
contacts he had had here. The democratic future of Romania is 
secure, said the Salvadorean minister. 
  The Salvadorean minister referred also to the future of the 
diplomatic relations between the two countries -- a Salvadorean 
ambassador for Romania is planned to be based in Rome -- as well 
as to the possibilities for joint actions in the economic field 
to which Romania could participate with technology while El 
Salvador with work force and capital. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7914 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Romania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Trade Agreements Signed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Trade Agreements Signed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0404195594 Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1711 GMT 4 Apr 94 
-- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0404195594 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMPRES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 4/4/1994 -- Possibilities are at 
hand to expand the commercial exchanges and economic cooperation 
between Romania and El Salvador, is the conclusion of the 4 
April meeting between Romanian Trade Minister Cristian Ionescu 
and Miguel A. Salaverria, minister of foreign affairs of El 
Salvador. 
  The talks pointed to the necessity to diversify the Romanian 
export offer to the Salvadorean market, to include more 
products, such as farm machinery, equipment, installations. The 
possibility was also emphasized to increase the presence in the 
Romanian market of traditional El Salvador products, like 
coffee, tropical fruit juices and concentrates, tropical wood. 
  The two parties agreed that a Romanian economic mission 
should go to El Salvador at the end of April to seek out domains 
of interest for cooperation between the two countries. 
  In 1993 the Romanian-Salvadorean trade was worth some $1.2 
million. 
  Romanian exports to El Salvador consisted of chemical 
fertilizers and tractors. 
  Romanian Senate President Oliviu Gherman also had a meeting 
with the Salvadorean foreign minister Miguel Angel Salaverria 
and stressed the compatibility between the two countries' 
economies, saying that the visit by the Salvadorean chief 
diplomat could allow for the singling out of zones where mutual 
support in the process of democratization could be facilitated. 
  The Senate president expressed the Romanian Parliament's 
readiness for the development of interparliamentary relations 
between the two countries, possibly by setting up groups of 
friendship. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7915 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu067__a94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-067-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Yugoslavia, Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Serb Forces on Kosovo-Albania Border </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Serb Forces on Kosovo-Albania Border </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704104294 Tirana ATA in English 0823 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704104294 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pristina, April 6 (ATA) -- Serbian Army have 
deployed troops nearby the Mulliq village in Gjakova Commune 
along the Kosova-Albania border line, the Gjakova information 
centre reports. 
  Since last Sunday a military convoy with cannons was 
deployed 
near the Frasheri village in Mitrovice Commune. They are 
conducting military exercises and provoking the inhabitants, 
states Kosova information centre. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7916 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Albania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meets With Human Rights Group </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meets With Human Rights Group </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604172694 Tirana ATA in English 1023 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604172694 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Albania's Acceptance in the Council of Europe Favours the </F>
Observation of the Human Rights" -- ATA headline] 
  [Text] Tirana, April 6 (ATA) -- In the meeting of April 5 
with the delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Council of 
Europe [CE], the Albanian Helsinki Committee [KShH] said that 
Albania's acceptance in the Council of Europe would favour the 
observation of the human rights and would be fruitful for the 
development of democracy. The chairman of this committee, Josif 
Vrioni, made a panorama of the work made for the rehabilitation 
of the formerly politically prisoners, establishment of the rule 
of law and the press freedom, underlining the great difficulties 
that existed in the post dictatorship period. 
  Mr. Kujtim Cashku, one of the representatives of this 
committee, said that Albania has started the observation of the 
human rights from the scratch, when there were no ministry of 
justice and specialised institutions for this purpose, there 
were no laws on the protection of the private ownership and 
other such things. 
  Asked by one of the members of the delegation of the Council 
of Europe whether there are cases of human rights violations in 
Albania, Mr. Vrioni said that the situation of human rights 
observation is not perfect, but it is generally good, stressing 
that Albania fulfills all conditions to become a full member of 
the Council of Europe. 
  With regard to the existence of an influence from the 
political forces on the decisions by lawyers, Mr. Vrioni said 
that to speak about such a thing one needs to have facts and not 
suspicions. 
  Questioned whether the Albanian Helsinki Committee insists 
in 
Albania's becoming a member of the Council of Europe, all its 
members gave an absolute unanimous positive reply. 
  Mr. Cashku handed to the European delegation a report about 
the questions of the human rights observation in Albania. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7917 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Berov To Announce Cabinet Plans `Next Week' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Berov To Announce Cabinet Plans `Next Week' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704172094 Sofia BTA in English 1553 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704172094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 7 (BTA) -- Following consultations 
with the parliamentary groups, Prime Minister Lyuben Berov next 
week will announce his plans about cabinet changes, reads a 
government press release this afternoon. Prof. Berov this 
morning chaired a regular government sitting resuming his duties 
after a 26-day sick leave and a major heart operation. While he 
declined to make any comments before journalists, photographers 
were allowed to take pictures. 
  The prospective cabinet changes will be aimed at fulfilling 
priority cabinet tasks to carry out privatization, combat 
corruption, conclude agreements with the international financial 
institutions, expand this country's international ties, protect 
Bulgarian business and revise its social policy in favour of a 
wide strata of the population. The ministries, too, are 
expected to specify and publicize the steps they will take by 
year-end to carry out these tasks, the release also said. 
  The better part of the release responds to criticism against 
the Cabinet by President Zhelyu Zhelev. On Saturday, April 2, 
Dr. Zhelev sharply criticized the Cabinet for bringing reforms 
to a standstill, declaring the withdrawal of his support for 
them. "The incumbent cabinet suits the Bulgarian Socialist 
Party (BSP, the former Communists), as it gives them a chance to 
do what they've always wanted to do, govern without shouldering 
the political responsibility for it," the president then said. 
Meeting with the leader of one of Bulgaria's major labour 
organizations, the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in 
Bulgaria, President Zhelev reiterated he no longer supported the 
cabinet and predicted early elections would be held this autumn. 
  Though asked by the press to respond to last Saturday's (92 
April] criticism, Berov would not do it, "to avert a further 
straining of relations between the cabinet and president, which 
some would see as a war between the two institutions". The 
government Press Office release describes the arguments in the 
presidential attack as emotional, farfetched and one-sided. The 
release describes as baseless the presidential charge that being 
responsible for the dollar and price rise in the last month, the 
government has endangered civil peace and social stability. 
"This was an insufficiently considered move", says the release. 
It accuses President Zhelev of sometimes trying to turn into a 
supporter of some political force or other. "It is inadmissible 
for the president to declare confidence or no confidence in any 
government. This is a function of the parliament. Presidential 
attempts to change the parliamentary lineup are unconstitutional 
and recall some old-fashioned non-republican ways in Bulgarian 
history", says the release. The prime minister is far from 
thinking that his government is ideal and has fulfilled all its 
promises, the release also says. Yet only a nonpartisan 
government of national responsibility can rule this country in 
the present complicated and extremely controversial lineup, with 
no parliamentary force commanding a clear majority. 
  The release refutes the president's criticism for the forex 
[foreign exchange] crisis, arguing that the cabinet cannot be 
held responsible for forex policy, as this is a responsibility 
of the central Bulgarian National Bank subordinate to 
parliament. It says the president gave twice smaller figures on 
the land reform. "It should be clear that legislature also has 
a commitment to the land reform to fulfill, and that legislation 
assigns a significant role to judiciary at this stage", says the 
release. In connection with criticism of the low progress of 
privatization, the release recalls that the government-sponsored 
amendments to the Privatization Act have been stalled in 
parliament for over seven months. According to the release, it 
is an exaggeration to speak of a disastrous price rise on the 
home market. "We are witnessing the emergence of a market 
economy and rising private enterprise that the government should 
support, by passing the necessary laws, in the interest of the 
nation and not against it. Any other type of thinking is 
retrograde and seeks to play on the real hardships of ordinary 
Bulgarians", says the release. In conclusion, the release 
expresses a hope that "the president's overstatement on Saturday 
is not so much a conviction as a suggestion by advisers on and 
off his payroll". 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7918 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Assembly Vote on VAT Act Amendments Detailed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Assembly Vote on VAT Act Amendments Detailed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704092394 Sofia BTA in English 1831 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704092394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- Today parliament 
defeated both bills on amendments to the Value-Added Tax [VAT] 
Act which came into effect on April 1. The mass media demanded 
that newspapers, advertisements in them and Bulgarian books be 
exempted from VAT. One of the bills was moved by Yuriy Borisov 
and Ivo Atanasov, MP's of the BSP [Bulgarian Socialist Party]. 
Under it Bulgarian scientific and fiction books and newspapers 
with the exception of porn publications would be exempted from 
the 18 percent VAT for a period of three years. The other bill 
was moved by MP of the SDS [Union of Democratic Forces] Lyubomir 
Pavlov; under it advertisements in the mass media would also be 
exempt from this tax. 
  The Borisov-Atanasov bill was defeated 111-65; the Pavlov 
bill was killed 140-27. According to Miss Velislava Dureva, MP 
of the BSP, the secret ballot was prompted by media threats that 
MP's who vote against the amendments would from now on be 
totally ignored by the press. 
  Before the plenary sitting Mr. Petur Balabanov, MP of the 
BSP, told reporters that the parliamentary BSP (holding 99 of 
the 240 seats) had decided to back the Borisov-Atanasov bill. 
The New Union for Democracy (16 seats) had similar intentions, 
voiced by its co-chairman Stefan Bozhilov two weeks ago. As to 
the parliamentary SDS (87 seats), its attitude was officially 
declared at a plenary sitting by Mr. Ivan Kostov. It backed the 
proposal of the Budget and Finance Committee but it was not 
moved in the form of a bill and could not be put to the vote. 
The Budget Committee suggested that newspapers do not register 
for VAT purposes until the end of this year and be further 
charged 10 percent turnover tax. The parliamentary DPS [Rights 
and Freedoms Movement] was not unanimous, said Mr. Hasan Ali 
before the plenary sitting. They finally decided that everyone 
should follow the dictates of his own conscience. The 
independents also failed to take a clear stand. Its members 
would vote differently, said Mr. Ruslan Semerdzhiev. 
  The two bills were not put to the vote at the end of last 
week for lack of quorum. [passage omitted] 
  If passed by Parliament, the exemption of newspapers, 
magazines and Bulgarian literature from VAT would cost the 
national budget no more than 50-70 million leva a year, said the 
chairman of the Parliamentary Economic Committee, Mr. Asen 
Michkovski. Although parliament's regulations provide for both 
open and secret ballot, the choice of the latter for a bill, and 
at first reading at that, sets a precedent in our parliamentary 
practice, he pointed out. 
  After that parliament went on to pass parts of the Judiciary 
Organization Act at second reading and debated amendments to the 
Incomes Tax Act at second reading. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7919 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Press Attacks Rejection Decision </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Press Attacks Rejection Decision </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704095294 Sofia BTA in English 0814 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704095294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From BTA press review] </F>
  [Text] Sofia, April 7 (BTA) -- "Parliament Dooms Free 
Speech to Bust" (DEMOKRATSIYA); "MP's Axe Free Speech" (DUMA); 
"MP's Butcher Newspapers" (24 CHASA); "Secret Ballot Slaps 
Speech in the Face" (STANDART NEWS): These and similar 
headlines cap front-page comments in all dailies on yesterday's 
vote by which parliament defeated two bills amending the 
value-added tax [VAT], effective as of April 1, 1994. The bill 
would have granted relief from the 18 percent flat VAT rate to 
the Bulgarian press and fiction and popular science literature 
except pornographic publications. At the end of March, the 
newspapers ceased to publish for four days in protest of what 
they dubbed "the killer tax." 
  "This is the first time that Parliament has taken a 
secret-ballot vote on a bill," writes DUMA. The daily 
reproduces yesterday's statement of its editor-in-chief, Mr. 
Stefan Prodev MP of the ex-Communist Bulgarian Socialist Party 
(BSP), at parliament's sitting, in which he called on his fellow 
parliamentarians to spare Bulgarian newspapers and books. "Only 
a few newspapers will survive; most, caught in the death grip of 
the tax, will perish. What is the use of a diversity of news 
and opinions which the diverse press provides to those who 
seriously think themselves to be God's chosen lot? They can 
anyway wallow in their own sauce which they will secrete 
profusely in their own parties' organs. Which, of course, will 
be toeing the party line," runs a comment in STANDART NEWS. 
  KONTINENT is even more acerbic, describing the 240 MP's as 
"politicians manque who in four years contrived to make the 
Bulgarian people look back with nostalgia to totalitarianism." 
"Now they have set out to tax newspapers out of business, those 
same newspapers which seem to be the only ones that dare to put 
up their dirty linen in plain view of the nation or rather of 
what is left of it," reads a signed comment in KONTINENT. 
According to OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK, the only argument advanced by 
the opponents of tax relief to the Bulgarian press and books 
"was that the tax administration would find it difficult to 
collect the tax at a differential rate." "In the imminent 
election campaign, however, this decision may prove to be one of 
parliament's worst self-defeats," comments the financial and 
business daily PARI. 24 CHASA writes that "new bills to repeal 
the killer tax will start to be tabled even today." The paper 
quotes the sponsors of the defeated bills, Mr. Lyubomir Pavlov 
MP of the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) and Mr. Yuri Borisov 
MP of the BSP, as saying that "this time separate amendments 
will be moved concerning the newspapers, Bulgarian books, the 
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and press advertisements." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7920 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Minister Promises `No Layoffs' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Minister Promises `No Layoffs' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704083294 Sofia BTA in English 1852 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704083294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- There are no layoffs in the 
Defence Ministry, and there will not be, either; in the army 
there are only officers going into retirement," Defence Minister 
Valentin Aleksandrov told reporters today. 
  Today he issued an order under which 87 colonels aged over 
50 
are pensioned off. Mr. Aleksandrov said that the process will 
be completed by this summer and some 2,886 will go on pension. 
Only army doctors can stay until they are 60. At the same some 
1,500 sergeants and sergeant-majors will be dismissed for 
lacking secondary education, the minister explained. Outside 
the army and the military plants the ministry has 5,000 more 
civilian employees on its payroll. According to the minister, 
they are too many and some of them will have to be dismissed. 
The minister has reduced his team from 33 to 11 members. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7921 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Turkish Assembly Leader Holds News Conference </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Turkish Assembly Leader Holds News Conference </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704082894 Sofia BTA in English 1824 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704082894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- "I believe we will make up 
for lost time by activating our meetings," Mr. Husamettin 
Cindoruk, president of the Turkish Grand National Assembly, told 
a news conference today. He led a parliamentary delegation on a 
three-day official visit here, the first by a head of the 
Turkish Parliament to Bulgaria in 20 years. During his stay, 
Mr. Cindoruk conferred with National Assembly Chairman 
Aleksandur Yordanov, President Zhelyu Zhelev (with whom he 
discussed Dr Zhelev's visit to Turkey this coming June), Deputy 
Prime Minister Evgeni Matinchev, Foreign Minister Stanislav 
Daskalov, and MP's of the National Security and Foreign Policy 
Committees. 
  According to Mr. Cindoruk, the activation of parliamentary 
contacts already creates prerequisites for a successful 
promotion of bilateral economic relations as well, following the 
example of political and military contacts. Mr. Cindoruk will 
recommend the Turkish Government to concentrate on boosting 
Turkish-Bulgarian trade, creating an East-West corridor after 
the restoration of peace in the Balkans and cooperating with 
Bulgaria in transport and tourism, in third countries included. 
  "We count entirely on your parliament for a solution of the 
problems of the Bulgarian citizens who identify themselves as 
ethnic Turks because they are equally represented in it," the 
chief Turkish legislator told the news conference. He said that 
Bulgaria is making great strides on the road of democracy. He 
believes that the two countries' concerted efforts could help 
remove the question about the rights of Bulgarian Muslims from 
the agenda of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. "The 
matter was put on the agenda before 1989, before the start of 
democratic changes in Bulgaria," Mr. Cindoruk pointed out. 
  He explained again that the commitment of Turkish blue 
helmets to Bosnia-Herzegovina was not decided by Turkey but by 
the UN Security Council and recalled that his country has always 
accepted such invitations, sending peacekeepers to Korea, 
Somalia and other countries. "At the same time, we are 
understanding of Bulgaria's sensitivity to this matter. If 
under the influence of these objections the United Nations 
changes its decision, we will accept this, too," Mr. Cindoruk 
stressed. 
  National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov assessed his 
Turkish counterpart's visit as exceedingly successful. In his 
view, this visit showed that a number of questions and ideas, 
which are useful to both countries at these hard times for the 
Balkans, can be raised and acted on at the parliamentary level. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7922 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   WEU Secretary General Arrives, Meets Daskalov </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    WEU Secretary General Arrives, Meets Daskalov </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704082694 Sofia BTA in English 1659 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704082694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- The secretary general of 
the Western European Union [WEU], Mr. Willem van Eekelen, 
arrived on a five-day official visit here today. This is his 
second visit to Bulgaria (the first one was in the autumn of 
1991). He will meet with Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov, 
National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov, Defence Minister 
Valentin Aleksandrov, representatives of the Parliamentary 
National Security Committee and Foreign Policy Committee and 
President Zhelyu Zhelev. He will also deliver a lecture at the 
Bulgarian Atlantic Club. 
  "I was invited by the Bulgarian Government to have 
consultations on the relationship between Bulgaria and the 
Western European Union," Mr. Van Eekelen said upon his arrival 
at Sofia Airport. "At the May meeting, the 9th of May, when the 
Bulgarian foreign and defence ministers will also be attending, 
we hope to upgrade the form of consultations to allow your 
country more participation in our activities and I would like to 
hear the Bulgarian views on that new situation and new status," 
he said. When asked about Bulgaria's chances, he made the 
following comment: "We already have close cooperation with your 
country on the Danube embargo, so we have moved already from 
consultation to cooperation (...) but I think it is important 
that as Bulgaria is moving closer to European Union, you already 
have a treaty of association with the Union, and also close 
relationship with the Western European Union as the security 
dimension of European integration, now, that means that we will 
open up some of our meetings, some of our activities and as far 
as I am concerned, the more, the better." 
  Later today Mr. Van Eekelen met with Foreign Minister 
Stanislav Daskalov to discuss Bulgaria's relations with the WEU. 
  "Our relations with the Western European Union are very 
good. 
Bulgaria's integration with WEU is among the priorities in 
Bulgaria's foreign policy," Mr. Daskalov said after the meeting. 
He added that Bulgaria hopes to be granted the so-called 
"enhanced status" of a WEU associate member "which would provide 
a new basis for cooperation". "I think we had a most 
informative session; I explained to the minister (...) how we 
are looking forward to a meeting in May where he and the defence 
minister will attend and where we will enhance the form of 
consultation and open up some of our activities, bring Bulgaria 
close not only in terms of consultation but also in cooperation." 
  Mr. Daskalov said that they also discussed the crisis in the 
former Yugoslavia and the role of the sanctions. 
  "I stressed the importance of the embargo (...) and I 
expressed my appreciation for the role played by Bulgaria and 
the sacrifices made by your country," said Mr. Willem van 
Eekelen. 
  His visit to Bulgaria coincided with the visit of a 
delegation of the WEU Assembly, led by its president, Sir Dudley 
Smith. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7923 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   WEU Official Meets With Defense Minister </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    WEU Official Meets With Defense Minister </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704082394 Sofia BTA in English 1515 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704082394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- At the meeting of the 
foreign and defence ministers of the member states of the 
Western European Union [WEU] in May, Bulgaria will probably be 
invited to ratify its "enhanced status" of a WEU associate 
member, Sir Dudley Smith, president of the WEU Assembly, told 
Bulgarian Defence Minister Valentin Aleksandrov today. The WEU 
delegation arrived on a visit here on Monday at the invitation 
of the Bulgarian National Assembly. Right from the beginning of 
its association, Bulgaria could get a place on the WEU's 
Operational Planning Group and, later on, in the so-called 
Western European Armaments Group. 
  Bulgaria's inclusion in the WEU Armaments Group will relieve 
the dire straits in which the Bulgarian Army has been plunged by 
the economic crisis, Sir Dudley believes. According to Mr. 
Aleksandrov, Bulgaria's military-technological and technical 
dependence on the former USSR makes the military and 
military-technological need of the country's inclusion into the 
WEU structures all the more pressing. In the near future, 
contacts with the WEU must advance from their get-acquainted 
stage to cooperation in substance, Mr. Aleksandrov stressed at 
the meeting. 
  Membership in the WEU for Bulgaria is comparable to 
membership in NATO, Sir Dudley told Bulgarian MP's yesterday. 
What matters more than signing an association document, 
however, is to take practical action for the country's actual 
integration into the Euro- structures, he told Mr. Aleksandrov 
today. Such action is all the more needed in view of the 
current situation in Europe and, specifically, in the former 
Yugoslavia, according to the president of the WEU Assembly. In 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia] there is a 
risk of a repeat of the Bosnian events, he noted yesterday at 
the meeting with the Bulgarian parliamentarians. According to 
the WEU, Bulgaria is a leading power in the eastern part of the 
Balkans, Sir Dudley pointed out. The WEU countries are members 
of an organization intended to guarantee peace and security, he 
recalled. 
  Later in the day, the delegation visited Ruse (on the 
Danube), where they met with the WEU German and Spanish teams 
monitoring the observance of the Yugo-embargo on the Bulgarian 
sector of the river. Sir Dudley told a news conference that he 
was pleased with the close cooperation of the Ruse executive 
authorities with the European officials and of the understanding 
showed by the public. He confirmed that he is aware of the 
difficulties which Bulgaria and Ruse in particular are 
experiencing as a result of the observance of the sanctions and 
could not promise but would try to help make arrangements for 
compensations. 
  The only problem which he found was the bad communications 
between the WEU teams in Calafat, Romania, and Ruse. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7924 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Bulgaria </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inflation for Mar Marks Two-Year High </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inflation for Mar Marks Two-Year High </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804122794 Sofia BTA in English 1114 GMT 8 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804122794 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BTA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 8 (BTA) -- In March the monthly 
inflation rate was 7.5 percent -- the highest since May 1992, 
said Prof. Zakhari Karamfilov, chairman of the National 
Statistical Institute [NSI] at a press conference today. In 
1993 inflation ranged between 1.9 percent (in June) and 6.9 
percent (in January). This year the monthly inflation rate 
climb persisted from 3.8 percent in January and 4.6 percent in 
February to 7.5 percent in March. Total inflation for the first 
three months was 16.6 percent, which exceeds the 10 percent 
projected by the National Statistical Institute (NSI). 
According to Prof. Karamfilov it is still early to project the 
annual inflation rate, but he believes that the data for April 
will be indicative in this respect. 
  In March consumer prices went up by 8 percent, marking a 
17.2 
percent increase from December last year. The steepest rise was 
registered in the prices of fresh fruit -- 74 percent, followed 
by confectionery -- 20 percent, vegetables -- 9.9 percent, 
coffee -- 8.7 percent, and cigarettes -- 23.7 percent. At the 
same time non- foods went up by 9 percent in March and 18.8 
percent in the first quarter of the year. However, these 
figures are based on data received by March 22, 1994, and do not 
reflect the surge in prices in the last ten days of March. 
  That is why the NSI conducted an express survey of the 
prices 
of 24 foods and 3 non-foods by March 31. The survey covered 
staple foods and commodities, the prices of which are bound to 
the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar. The aggregate increase in 
prices for March was 61.5 percent [figure as received], 
according to the data of the survey. The price of oranges 
soared almost two-fold -- 95.8 percent, coffee went up by 69.7 
percent, sugar by 42.7 percent, yellow cheese 36.3 percent, 
white cheese 33 percent, bananas 20.2 percent, and lemons 13.9 
percent. 
  The prices of monitored non-foods nearly doubled. Cookers 
identified the most dramatic rise, going up 2.5 times, followed 
by automatic washing machines with 2.2 times, colour TV sets 2.1 
times, refrigerators 2 times, and vacuum cleaners with 98.4 
percent. These are mostly imported commodities and the rise of 
their prices was an immediate result of the dollar appreciation 
on the forex market. 
  The prices set in the different regions of the country vary 
within a wide range. Pork, for example, moves from 45 to 104 
leva, beef from 54 to 92 leva, chicken from 45 to 70 leva, some 
sausages from 54 to 92 leva, sheep's cheese from 70 to 144 leva 
and coffee from 160 to 310 leva. This trend holds true for 
non-foods just as well. 
  Another characteristic feature of the current market 
situation is the wide margin between producer and market prices. 
According to Prof. Karamfilov, all this comes to show that 
while the foreign exchange rates fluctuation pushed the 
inflation rate up, the speculative price growth is a no less 
powerful inflationary factor. The major factor that brought 
about the current price jump is the lack of government price 
policy and the launching of price decontrol before the 
liquidation of the monopoly state structures, according to the 
head of the NSI. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7925 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Rejects Bill on Administrative Units </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Rejects Bill on Administrative Units </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604195394 Prague CTK in English 1508 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604195394 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 6 (CTK) -- The Czech Government today 
voted to reject two proposals concerning the administrative 
redivision of the country, calling them "simply unacceptable." 
  At a press conference after the government session, Prime 
Minister Vaclav Klaus said the government had rejected a 
constitutional bill submitted by the Czech-Moravian Centrist 
Party (CMSS) "for being an attempt to split the Czech Republic 
into two parts," a Czech and a Moravian-Silesian part. The 
capital, Prague, would constitute its own division. 
  "The government already rejected this idea in its statement 
of principles last October," Klaus said, adding that the bill 
conflicted with the government's already prepared bill. 
  The second bill, a law on the budget and economic management 
of higher local administrative units, represented an "isolated, 
unsystematic approach in which the law on the economic 
management of these units would be passed before the units and 
their competence were defined," Klaus said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7926 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus on Restitution for Victims of Communism </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus on Restitution for Victims of Communism </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704071594 Prague CTK in English 1557 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704071594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 6 (CTK) -- Czech courts have settled 
218,000 requests for legal rehabilitation and compensated 70,000 
individuals for injustices committed by the communist regime, 
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus told journalists today after the 
government session. 
  The total sum paid out in compensation exceeds 2.7 billion 
korunas ($90 million), he said. Over a billion of this sum was 
paid in cash, the remainder in the form of government bonds. 
  The "overwhelming majority" of applications have been 
processed now, he said, with only cases complicated by the 
destruction of archive material still remaining. These 
outstanding 4,800 requests should be solved by the end of the 
year, he said. 
  Klaus said the cabinet and Justice Minister Jiri Novak in 
particular had often in the past been criticized for the slow 
pace of the rehabilitation process. He said he would welcome it 
if critics took a look at the "figure of 218,000 solved 
rehabilitations." Novak's approach had, on the contrary, 
considerably speeded up the whole process, he said, adding that 
on completing the process the courts would be relieved of a 
great burden and would be able to devote themselves to usual 
matters. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7927 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Slav Union' Wants To Contact Zhirinovskiy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Slav Union' Wants To Contact Zhirinovskiy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704151294 Prague CTK in English 1400 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704151294 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 7 (CTK) -- The Slav Union (SU), a 
citizens' association in the Czech Republic founded in 1992 to 
promote the idea of Slav solidarity, wants to establish contacts 
with the Union of the Slav Nations, presided by Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy, SU chairman Alexej Pludek told journalists today. 
  Pludek said the SU considered the fact it had not been 
invited to the Slav congress held in Moscow early April a wrong. 
As a result, next week it will send a letter to the Union of 
the Slav Nations informing about its activities. The Slav Union 
should become an important member of this international 
organization, he added. 
  The Slav Union, which unites some 3,000 members, is a non- 
political organization designed to promote Slav solidarity, said 
Pludek, a writer highly praised by the former communist regime. 
The idea of the Slav solidarity is part of the struggle for the 
Czech national existence, threatened by the "Pan-German Drang 
nach Osten," (Drive to the East) said Pludek, author of a novel 
called "Vabank" (1974) considered by some observers anti-semitic. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7928 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Communist Party on Klaus Visit to Russia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Communist Party on Klaus Visit to Russia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704191094 Prague CTK in English 1148 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704191094 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 7 (CTK) -- Czech Prime Minister 
Vaclav Klaus' Moscow visit marks the collapse of the exclusively 
pro-Western economic strategy which the Czech Republic 
originally declared, Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia 
(KSCM) spokeswoman Vera Zezulkova told journalists today. 
  She said that Klaus' visit to Moscow on April 4-5 clearly 
showed that the premier had to "strongly reassess his initial 
stands," although outwardly Klaus acted in Moscow sovereignly 
and with self- confidence and even with the attitude of a 
Western and successfully developing country which could teach 
its less advanced neighbor how economic reform should be carried 
out. 
  What is essential, however, is that Klaus has came to 
realize 
at last that Czech Republic's economy cannot do without the 
Russian markets which it had light-heartedly abandoned, and 
without Russian raw materials, she said. The communists 
therefore perceived Klaus' Moscow talks not so much as a triumph 
of the Czech economy but rather as Klaus' and his government's 
victory over themselves, she added. 
  To present Klaus' Moscow talks to the public as a move 
towards a successful completion of an agreement on the repayment 
of Russian debts towards the Czech Republic is merely a 
concealing maneuver, Zezulkova said, adding that the KSCM was 
apprehensive about the Russian repayments of the debt being used 
to "fill the holes" in the Czech state budget. 
  KSCM economic expert Jiri Dolejs said that not only Russians 
should be blamed for Czech claims towards Russia in the two 
countries' post-November 1989 trade. He said this was also 
caused by the Czech Republic's deliberate cutting off all its 
former trade ties and by a new division of Europe. The new 
division of Europe is not merely the invention of Russian ultra 
nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, Dolejs said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7929 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Ministry Denies Sending Weapons to Iran </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Ministry Denies Sending Weapons to Iran </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704064994 Prague CTK in English 1636 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704064994 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 6 (CTK) -- The Czech Republic is not 
presently exporting any weapons to Iran, Ilja Mazanek, director 
of the Foreign Ministry's Middle Eastern and North African 
Department told CTK today. 
  If the ministry ever does grant an export license for 
weapons 
shipments to Iran, it will only be in accord with international 
interests, according to international agreements, and following 
a tough licensing process, Mazanek said. 
  He emphasized that no UN sanctions were currently in place 
against Iran as there were against Libya and Iraq, but that Iran 
nevertheless was considered a "sensitive" area, and consequently 
weapons deliveries that could be "problematic" would not be 
condoned. Such deliveries included not only weapons, but 
components for nuclear power plants. 
  Mazanek said that so far no firm had applied for a license 
to 
export parts to Iran for Warsaw Pact-model tanks which had been 
delivered to Iran in the past. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7930 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   License Refused for Iranian Tank Modernization </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    License Refused for Iranian Tank Modernization </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704191994 Prague CTK in English 1501 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704191994 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 7 (CTK) -- After consultation with 
the Foreign, Defense and Interior Ministries, the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade's Licensing Authority has turned down a 
request by the RDP Group, a company uniting weapons industries, 
for a license to enter the Iranian market. 
  Industry and Trade Ministry spokesman Kamil Cermak said the 
RDP Group's general director had asked the ministry to consider 
the possibility of its exporting technology to Iran for the 
repair of T-72 tanks. Not one of the ministries which the law 
says have to declare their feelings on the issuing of a license 
were positive about it. 
  Ilja Mazanek, deputy director of the Foreign Ministry's 
section for the Middle East and Northern Africa, told CTK on 
Wednesday that the Czech Republic did not export any arms to 
Iran at present. The authorities would only issue licenses for 
the export of weapons to Iran in the future if it was in the 
Czech Republic's interest, he added. In the export of weapons 
the Czech Republic will adhere to international agreements and 
subject each individual order to severe scrutiny. 
  Mazanek stressed that no United Nations Security Council 
sanctions had been imposed on Iran as was the case with Libya or 
Iraq. However, he admitted that Iran was one of the "sensitive" 
areas, and that this would be taken into account when 
potentially "problematic" supplies were being considered. These 
were above all weapons, but also components for nuclear power 
stations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7931 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Czech Republic </F>
<H3> <TI>   Change Needed in Steel Industry in Ostrava </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Change Needed in Steel Industry in Ostrava </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0206B Prague PRAGUE POST in English 22 Mar 94 p 5--FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0206B </F>
<F P=104>  Prague PRAGUE POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrew Hawker: "Restructuring Is `a Question of </F>
Survival' for Czech Steel Industry"] 
  [Text] Vitkovice, north Moravia--With Czech steel 
production expected to plummet to half its 1989 level, the 
industry that was once the pride of the central planners is 
struggling to keep its mills rolling. 
  More than 90 percent of the output and much of the pain of 
restructuring is concentrated in the bleak region around 
Ostrava, north Moravia, which already suffers one of the 
country's highest unemployment rates--6 percent. 
  The Vitkovice company, Ostrava's 160-year-old steelmaker, 
has 
shed 10,000 of the 35,000 employees it had in 1989. Local 
authorities have decided to shut down the smelly blast furnaces 
and sinter plant around which the city grew up, a development 
that could cause another 5,000 workers to be laid off in the 
coming years. 
  "We have to repair our equipment and buy cleaner and more 
efficient technologies while our sales keep on dropping," says 
Jan Svozil, head of development and ecology at Nova Hut, the 
country's largest steel producer. 
  The complex churned out 3.8 million tons of steel five years 
ago, but the company expects production to stabilize around 2 
million tons. Most of its Czech clients do not pay for their 
purchases. Nova Hut officials say that if the company stopped 
supplying those who don't pay, it would not produce any steel at 
all. 
  "We never had to think about marketing under the 
communists," 
Svozil says. "Whatever was produced was sold." 
  Fortunately, the company exports half of its output, helping 
to balance the cash-flow situation. However, the firm owes 
billions of crowns to the Ostrava mines for coal supplies. 
  As for the future, "A lot depends on the state's plans for 
the region," Svozil says. 
  Last week, the Czech Economics Ministry decided to provide a 
loan guarantee for the construction of a sheet-steel mini-mill 
at Nova Hut, which won out over its neighbor Trinecke zelezarny. 
Nova Hut's joint-venture project was better-prepared, according 
to Minister of Economy Karel Dyba. 
  Trinecke zelezarny, however, is threatening to go ahead with 
its project regardless of the governmental decision. Its foreign 
partners are set to go through with the construction even 
without state guarantees, say sources in the office of the 
company's director. 
  Nova Hut Director Svatopluk Velkoborsky reacted by offering 
to let Trinecke plug into its joint venture with American 
producer Intercontinental Steel. 
  Better cooperation between companies is necessary for good 
results, says Ministry of Industry and Trade steel overseer 
Otakar Kopecny. One of Kopecny's main tasks is to encourage 
producers to coordinate their production programs so that they 
do not compete against each other, he says. 
  But simple cooperation may not be enough, according to some 
specialists. The Ostrava factories need to merge production 
horizontally, says Frank Wheeler, senior steel executive at the 
Toronto-based engineering and management consultancy group Hatch 
Associates. 
  "Coordination works as long as interests coincide. As soon 
as 
they don't, the companies could start destructively competing," 
he says. "It would be very inefficient if each one of them tried 
to make it on its own." 
  The steel makers will only start seriously restructuring 
when 
they see how desperately they need to, says Wheeler, who earned 
a doctorate in metallurgy at Ostrava. "Right now, they haven't 
quite realized that it's a question of survival. They're still 
at the denial stage." 
  The industry's challenge is to downsize, modernize and 
become 
environmentally compliant at the same time. 
  "Putting off ecology as an expensive luxury, as [Prime 
Minister Vaclav] Klaus suggested, would be a costly mistake. 
When one accounts for the social costs of pollution, such as 
treatment of lung diseases, environmental investments become 
more attractive," Wheeler says. 
  The Czech steel industry has excellent technical expertise, 
continues Wheeler, but it needs foreign help to prioritize 
problems, evaluate markets and develop strategic plans. "These 
companies often don't know which of their products earn money. 
They need to understand their markets. For decades, they haven't 
had to." 
  Last month, the National Property Fund also guaranteed a 
bank 
consortium loan for the area's steel producers to introduce 
energy-saving continuous casting. The technology, which brings 
the steel into the rolling mill without cooling and reheating, 
was adopted in most Western factories many years ago. 
  "We are grateful for the state-guaranteed loan," says Ivan 
Boros, spokesman for Vitkovice. But he adds that the Czech press 
exaggerated the loan's importance. The state's guarantee affects 
900 million Kc (just over $30 million), less than a fifth of the 
improvements' cost. 
  Companies can grow resentful when the state suddenly backs 
out of industries just when they need the most support. "The 
government has rid itself of its responsibility," charges Nova 
Hut official Svozil. 
  Many Moravians and Silesians look at Prague as a huge 
bureaucratic parasite living off the sweat of the provincial 
economy. 
  "Our taxes go up to Prague, and very little of it trickles 
back down to us. They get lost somewhere along the way," says 
Tomas Pavelko, ecology director of Moravian Chemical Works. 
"Regional authorities are more accountable." 
  Less than 60 percent of the fees paid by north Moravian 
companies into the national environmental fund are reinvested in 
the region, a fact that has angered locals. But the state cannot 
go on mothering industries as it did before, government 
officials counter. 
  "We chose to privatize and let the companies do the 
restructuring," says Kopecny, the Ministry of Industry's steel 
expert. "We are not like England. We can't afford to finance and 
direct the industries' restructuring. All industries here are 
restructuring here at once!" 
  Though the National Property Fund is still the majority 
owner 
of all three Ostrava plants, the national government in Prague 
keeps the steel mills on a very loose leash. The plants hope a 
World Bank loan will help finance the project. 
  Some observers, however, do not foresee this loan coming. 
  "It's unrealistic to expect the steel-saturated West to 
finance any capacity expansion here," argues Hatch Associates' 
Wheeler. 
  Rather than developing new facilities at great cost, better 
use should be made of the existing ones, he recommends. 
  Inside the hulking plants, workers feel the brunt of the 
slowdown acutely. With monthly salaries averaging 8,000 Kc, 
laborers hover around outdated, ill-repaired equipment amid 
noxious gases. 
  A man stands over the open door of a blazing oven manually 
spraying magnetized steel into the huge furnace to patch up the 
visible cracks in its walls. Extreme noise levels--up to 160 
decibels--bombard the workers all day long. In some parts of the 
plant, airborne flakes of steel cover one's clothes in a few 
seconds. 
  "It's all very well to talk about ecology and restructuring, 
but you have to see it from our side as well. We breathe in the 
pollution at its source, you out there get only a bit of it," 
says Vladimir Tajchert, a Nova Hut repairman. 
  "The steel industry," he concludes, "needs more investment." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7932 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Goncz, Boross Address Last Assembly Session </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Goncz, Boross Address Last Assembly Session </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804081794 Budapest MTI in English 1343 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804081794 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 7 April (MTI) -- Parliament this 
afternoon began in a festive mood the 21st session of this 
spring sittings, which is at the same time the last working day 
of the four-year term before elections begin on May 8. 
  Speaker of Parliament Gyorgy Szabad, having arrived home 
from 
the United States not long before the session started, called 
President Arpad Goncz to speak first. 
  The president thanked the delegates for their 
accomplishment. 
  "You have succeeded in laying the foundations of the 
political, economic, institutional, and legal system of the new, 
democratic Hungary. Despite its incompleteness and occasional 
clumsiness, this system works steadily," he said. 
  "The over 400 bills you have passed clearly prove your 
successful continuation along the first, four-year phase of the 
path toward the future," Hungarian President Arpad Goncz told 
deputies today in his final speech to the current parliamentary 
body. 
  He stressed that the bills were hammered out through a 
process of developing a consensus between the ruling coalition 
and opposition parties. In Goncz's view, this indicates that 
the National Assembly, as representatives of the whole of 
Hungarian society, sees the historical and future development of 
the country in a similar way. 
  At the same time, Goncz pointed to the fact that the 
citizens 
did not voice only praise for Parliament. 
  "This is not your fault. The primary cause of disappointment 
is that people were expecting a miracle from the new democracy. 
But fate -- not Parliament! -- has failed to provide this 
miracle," he continued. 
  The president went on to list some issues, most of them 
related to basic human rights, which have not been settled by 
this Parliament and thus await the next one, after the general 
elections in May. 
  He mentioned the establishment of offices of ombudsmen for 
human and minority rights, and parliamentary representation of 
ethnic groups as examples. He also discussed the need for 
creation of a law against all forms of racial discrimination. 
  He went on to list some of the other issues which he feels 
are of vital importance: 
  "I consider a law on the legal standing of those in the Army 
and the police forces another priority, and hope the new 
assembly will place it among the first issues on the agenda," he 
continued. 
  "A media bill must also be passed as soon as possible, to 
settle the issue of control over the state radio, television, 
and news agency, as well as on permitting the operation of 
commercial broadcast media and preventing of any kind of media 
monopoly." 
  "Society should be given the power to monitor the state 
radio 
and television. This is vital because, in my view, it is 
inadmissible that the absence of such control should be the 
source of ceaseless and poisoning tensions in internal 
politics," Goncz stated. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7933 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Preparations for 8 May Elections Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Preparations for 8 May Elections Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704110894 Budapest MTI in English 0630 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704110894 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 7 Apr (MTI) -- As many as 7.8 million 
citizens will soon have the opportunity to go to the polls, with 
half a million of them as first-time voters. 
  Hungary's electoral system incorporates both a simple 
majority system used in Britain and France, and a proportionate 
system, applied in other European states. This combined method 
is completed by an admission threshold similar to Germany's. 
The 1989 Hungarian Election Act originally set forth four 
percent of the votes for each party as a minimum for gaining 
entrance into Parliament. In January 1994, this minimum was 
raised to five percent. 
  The electoral law has undergone minor changes since 1990. 
Keeping the principle of proportional representation in view, 
the law aims at preventing mandates from being scattered among 
too many parties. To achieve this, a two-round electoral system 
was introduced, enabling the electorate to vote for individuals 
as well as for party lists. 
  As in 1990, of 386 seats rivalled for, this year 176 will be 
filled by candidates in individual constituencies. Individual 
candidates can be entered until April 9. 
  Candidates can either be put up by parties and other 
political organizations, or enter the elections independently. 
To be qualified as a candidate, at least 750 recommendations 
have to be collected beforehand. This year, 130 parties wish to 
enter candidates. 
  In 1990, 28 out of 65 parties could enter at least one 
individual candidate but only twelve were able to draw up 
national lists and six reached the four percent threshold. 
  To win the first round and consequently a mandate, 
candidates 
have to poll over 50 percent of the votes. (In 1990, there were 
only five first-round winners.) If none of the candidates obtain 
an absolute majority, a run-off will follow with all candidates 
reaching 15 percent in the first round. Should fewer candidates 
poll the 15 percent minimum, the top three are eligible for the 
second round. As a result, losers of the first round still play 
a determining role, as they can encourage their supporters to 
back another candidate in the second leg. 
  Besides fielding individual candidates, parties also draw up 
regional lists in 19 counties and Budapest. A party is 
qualified to put forward a regional list if it fields a 
candidate in at least 25 percent of individual constituencies of 
the given region. 152 seats are available through such lists. 
  To lose the least amount of total votes, 58 members of 
Parliament will be elected through national lists, which can be 
drawn up by parties having at least seven regional lists out of 
the 20. All the fractional votes are to be distributed among 
national-list candidates. 
  According to analyses, the major parties are to run a 
tougher 
race this year than four years ago. Recent polls show that at 
least six parties could reach the five percent minimum. Such a 
close contest might see the ballots of the half a million 
first-time voters as determining the final outcome. 
  Experts say that people living in a more settled condition 
and having a higher level of education exercise their electoral 
rights to a greater extent. Public polls also show that with 
the elections approaching, the number of citizens who are 
willing to vote and have considered their choice is growing. 
Voting is not an obligation but a right in Hungary as in most 
European states. In 1990, 63 percent of the total electorate 
turned out for the first round of the general elections, and 46 
percent in the second. Analysts and polls forecast a 65-70 
percent participation rate for this year. 
  In February 1994, electoral offices were opened to prepare 
for the collection of recommendation slips from March 9 to April 
9. 
  Party campaigns are vigorously strengthening at meetings, on 
posters and through the media. They will stop only on the day 
before the elections, due to the Hungarian electoral law which 
states campaigning must be suspended for 24 hours preceding the 
election. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7934 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Motion To Drop Proceedings Against Jaruzelski </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Motion To Drop Proceedings Against Jaruzelski </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604123294 Warsaw PAP in English 1123 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0604123294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 6 -- The Sejm Committee for 
Constitutional Accountability on Wednesday decided to submit to 
parliament a motion to drop proceedings against architects of 
martial law Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski and Gen. Czeslaw Kiszczak, 
charged with destroying the 1982-1989 protocols of the Polish 
United Workers Party (PZPR) Politburo meetings. 
  The committee took the decision with 10 votes for, 4 against 
and no abstentions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7935 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sejm Accepts Veto, Rejects Wage Control Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sejm Accepts Veto, Rejects Wage Control Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704165294 Warsaw PAP in English 1547 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0704165294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 7 -- The Sejm on Thursday did not pass 
again a law on new wage-control measures after it had been 
vetoed by the president. Despite the address of the prime 
minister who appealed to reject the presidential veto, only 243 
deputies voted for adopting the law again. To accept the law, 
the Sejm needed an absolute majority, that is, in this instance 
266 votes. 
  146 MPs [members of parliament] voted to reject the law, 
mainly from the opposition parties of the Confederation for an 
Independent Poland (KPN), the Democratic Union (UD), the Union 
of Labour (UP), the Non-party Reform Bloc (BBWR), German 
Minority as well as from the All-Poland Alliance of Trade Unions 
(OPZZ) and the Polish Socialist Party (PPS). 10 deputies 
abstained. 
  The Sejm passed the legislation on new wage-control measures 
this March 18, but two weeks later President Lech Walesa refused 
to sign the law arguing that it aims to halt economic reforms 
and will lead to a comeback of the centrally-controlled economy. 
  Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak addressing the chamber, 
appealed to adopt the law once again and start work on its 
amendmends taking into account Lech Walesa's remarks. After the 
vote the prime minister told journalists that one should not 
dramatise the situation. He hopes that enterprises will operate 
according to their economic prospects and according to the 
economic prospects of the country. 
  The law, aimed to curb inflation, provided that as of April 
1, if enterprises exceeded the permitted limit of wage growth, 
they would have to pay a special penalty amounting to 150 per 
cent of the extra increase figure. The legislation covered all 
state-owned enterprises and companies with more than 80 per cent 
of shares belonging to the State Treasury, state-owned forests 
and banks. 
  The law also included a clause which would allow the 
government to use it against private companies "in order to 
fight special threats to financial stability." 
  The clause stirred up most controversy and Helena Goralska 
from the Democratic Union (UD) said that that is why her party 
decided to support the president's veto. Ryszard Bugaj from the 
Union of Labour (UP) pointed to the fact that different economic 
subjects would be treated unevenly under the law. 
  Deputies from the ruling Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) and 
the Polish Peasant Party (PSL) argued that the rejection of the 
law would lead to uncontrolled inflation, price hikes and even 
destruction of the budget. 
  The legislation was to replace the highly criticised law on 
excess wage tax introduced by the first non-communist finance 
minister Leszek Balcerowicz. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7936 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Spokesman Rejects Candidacy of SLD's Rosati </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Spokesman Rejects Candidacy of SLD's Rosati </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604184494 Warsaw PAP in English 1653 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0604184494 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 6 -- The president does not change his 
mind, the presidential spokesman Andrzej Drzycimski said 
Wednesday assessing chances of Dariusz Rosati, the candidate of 
the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD], to assume the posts of 
deputy prime minister and finance minister. 
  Drzycimski said that President Lech Walesa is open to talks 
with representatives of the ruling coalition or the prime 
minister about the filling of the vacant post in the government 
but stressed that Rosati's candidature was completely out of the 
question since it had already been officially rejected by the 
president. 
  According to Drzycimski, the Thursday meeting between the 
president and the Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy will be devoted to 
discussing the results of a parliamentary delegation's visit 
paid recently to Moscow. 
  The spokesman said also that the president had not taken a 
decision yet whether to sign the law on election to commune 
councils. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7937 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll Reveals Negative Opinions on Walesa's Work </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll Reveals Negative Opinions on Walesa's Work </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604190694 Warsaw PAP in English 1726 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0604190694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 6 -- Seventy per cent of respondents 
to the "Demoskop" opinion polling centre survey sized up 
negatively the work of President Lech Walesa over the past few 
weeks. Eighteen per cent sized up Walesa's work in this period 
positively and only very positively. The remaining respondents 
did not express their opinion on this topic. 
  Forty-four per cent of the respondents sized up Prime 
Minister Waldemar Pawlak's performance positively, 36 per cent 
-- negatively and two per cent respondents assessed it very 
positively and 18 per cent did not have an opinion on this topic. 
  Forty-three per cent of respondents gave negative opinion of 
the government performance over the past few weeks. Twenty-nine 
per cent offered positive opinion and 7 per cent of respondents 
had a very low opinion of the government work. Every fifth 
respondent did not express opinion on this topic. 
  According to 55 per cent of respondents to a poll by the 
Public Opinion Research Centre (CBOS), people ruling before 1989 
are now returning to government and ministerial posts. 
  In the opinion of 41 per cent of respondents, such persons 
return to provincial authorities. According to 34 per cent, 
these people return to posts in the management of state 
enterprises. 
  Thirty-three per cent think that people who ruled before 
1989 
are now returning to boards of banks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7938 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Walesa, Finland's Haavisto Hold Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Walesa, Finland's Haavisto Hold Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604153394 Warsaw PAP in English 1525 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0604153394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 6 -- President Lech Walesa received 
Finnish Foreign Minister Heikki Haavisto on Wednesday afternoon, 
according to the presidential press office. 
  "As countries of medium size we should play a bigger role in 
Europe. Poland and Finland want to find themselves in European 
organisations which have shown themselves to be effective. 
Finland has already succeeded, Poland still faces a long road," 
Walesa said. 
  The talks also covered security. "The stationing of such a 
numerous (Russian) army in the Kaliningrad region is a worrying 
phenomenon. It is difficult to explain this phenomenon in 
peacetime. After speaking to many international politicians I 
have found that this problem is not enough known to world 
opinion," Walesa added. 
  He also drew attention to the insufficient aid given by the 
West to facilitate the changes taking place in east and central 
Europe. 
  Walesa stressed that these countries needed to be included 
in 
the world market economy, something which could not be done 
while thinking in old categories. Europe needed a new vision. 
If this did not take place then the lack of political and 
economic security in the region would adversely affect the rest 
of Europe. 
  Haavisto gave assurances that Finland would support Poland's 
efforts to join the European Union. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7939 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Haavisto Meets With Olechowski </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Haavisto Meets With Olechowski </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604111594 Warsaw PAP in English 1002 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0604111594 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 6 -- European integration and 
cooperation in the Baltic region were the main topics raised by 
Polish and Finnish foreign ministers Andrzej Olechowski and 
Heikki Haavisto during their meeting Wednesday. 
  After the talks Haavisto termed to-date Polish-Finnish 
relations as good. The ministers reviewed bilateral relations 
and thought they should be broadened. 
  Discussed was the situation in the Baltic region and the 
European security as well as negotiations with the European 
Union on Finland and Poland's membership. 
  The sides also discussed Polish-Finnish cooperation in the 
Council of the Baltic Sea States, in particular the Via Baltica 
project. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7940 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Poland </F>
<H3> <TI>   Croatian Minister Seeks Expanded Trade Ties </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Croatian Minister Seeks Expanded Trade Ties </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704172894 Warsaw PAP in English 1703 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> LD0704172894 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, April 7 -- Croatia wants to expand 
cooperation and trade relations with Poland in all possible 
branches of economy, Croatian Minister of Economic Development 
Nadan Vidosevic said in Warsaw on Thursday after the conclusion 
of Polish-Croatian talks in the Ministry for Foreign Economic 
Relations. 
  According to the Croatian minister both countries may 
cooperate in all fields and in some branches such as shipyard 
and petrochemical industries, and tourism, they may compete on 
the third markets. 
  The Polish side hopes for the cooperation in textiles, food 
processing, petrochemical and electrochnics industries. Also 
the Adriatic will hopefully arouse strong interest for Polish 
tourists. 
  Maciej Lesny from the Polish ministry said that Poland will 
soon sign agreements with Croatia on avoiding double taxation 
and on protection of mutual investments. 
  Trade turnover between the two countries have been gradually 
going down from 68 million U.S. dollars in 1991 to 62,4 million 
dollars in 1993, the decrease caused by Croatian unstable 
political situation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7941 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Government Outlines Policy Statement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Government Outlines Policy Statement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704151594 Prague CTK in English 1235 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704151594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- The need of a strong 
private sector as a source of prosperity of Slovakia's economy 
is emphasised in the program of the new Slovak government of 
Premier Jozef Moravcik which he will present to Parliament on 
April 12. 
  The government intends to speed up the privatization process 
with equal use of all its forms so that after the second 
privatization wave is completed more than half state-owned 
property is transferred into private possession, says the 
statement obtained by CTK today. 
  Moravcik's cabinet will seek to facilitate the entrance of 
foreign capital in the country's economy and is also willing to 
offer companies put up for privatization to foreign buyers who 
offer the most "interesting" business projects. 
  The new government, during its six-month term of office, 
will 
seek to bring to zero the growth of Slovakia's gross domestic 
product, to maintain the growth of prices between 10 to 13 
percent and privatization under 17 percent. It will seek to 
achieve such a growth of Slovakia's foreign currency reserves as 
to ensure the internal convertibility of the Slovak currency and 
a positive payments balance. To preserve macro-economic 
stability the government will seek a standby loan from the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the statement says. 
  "The interconnection of the processes of economic and social 
transformation remains the basic approach," the statement says 
in the part dedicated to the social sphere. In order to solve 
the problems of almost 15-percent unemployment rate which in 
some regions rises up to 26.7 percent, the growth in long-term 
unemployment and a situation in which almost half of Slovak 
households live on the border of the sustenance level (15.2 
percent of families live under this border) the government 
intends to reassess the policy of providing material allowances, 
extend job possibilities and protect the labor market. 
  Moravcik's cabinet considers integration into European 
political, economic and security structures to be a strategic 
priority for Slovakia's foreign policy orientation. "The 
government confirms Slovakia's interest in full membership of 
the North Atlantic Alliance (NATO) and of the European Union 
(EU)," the statement says. It will also seek to smoothly 
complete the process of the ratification of an agreement on 
Slovakia's association with the EU. 
  "We would like to achieve a consensus in society which would 
secure stability and calm cooperation of all Slovak citizens 
regardless of their nationality and the color of their skin," 
the document says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7942 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   HZDS `Will Not Support' Manifesto </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    HZDS `Will Not Support' Manifesto </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804094394 Prague CTK in English 1812 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804094394 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- Former Prime Minister 
Vladimir Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) will 
not support the new government's manifesto because it does not 
address its fundamental task -- preparations of early 
parliamentary elections, deputy prime minister of Meciar's 
shadow cabinet Sergej Kozlik said today. 
  The public statements by Deputy Prime Minister Brigita 
Schmognerova and Finance Minister Rudolf Filkus that the 
manifesto was to cover a period longer than what remained until 
early elections (September 30-October 1) give rise to the 
question whether the present coalition really counted on the 
elections. 
  "There are also signals of further HZDS deputies' 
departures," Kozlik said adding that this would give the 
government parties further votes to assert the passage of a 
constitutional law abrogating early elections. 
  Former Finance Minister Julius Toth (HZDS) criticized the 
economic part of the manifesto. He dismissed the part calling 
the preparation of the division of the Czechoslovak federation 
unconceptual and the parts pointing to the vague taxation 
system, double rate of inflation in 1993 compared with 1992 
(25.1 percent) and neglect of writing-off enterprises' debts. 
  Toth said he had received "the Czech-language version of the 
federation's split scenario in August. During the next two and 
a half months we had to take such measures as to prevent 
Slovakia's collapse after January 1, 1993 (when Czechoslovakia 
split)." 
  Both Kozlik and Toth pointed out that the former opposition 
called unfeasible considerations about a zero growth of the 
gross domestic product, an approximately 12 percent inflation 
and a maximum 17 percent unemployment, but now, when it is in 
power it uses the same macroeconomic indicators. 
  Toth said that according to the latest statistical data, 
industrial production in Slovakia rose by 17 percent against 
January 1993. The GDP will grow in the first quarter of 1994 as 
envisaged by the former government, he added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7943 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meciar: Coalition Trying To `Renew' CSFR </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meciar: Coalition Trying To `Renew' CSFR </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704095394 Prague CTK in English 2055 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704095394 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 6 (CTK) -- Former Slovak Premier 
Vladimir Meciar today accused the chairmen of the Democratic 
Left Party (SDL) and of the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH), 
Peter Weiss and Jan Carnogursky respectively, of attempts to 
renew the joint Czech-Slovak state. 
  Meciar was speaking at a meeting of his Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) which was marked with strong 
criticism of President Michal Kovac and especially of Jozef 
Moravcik's government. 
  Meciar said that "Peter Weiss is playing a big game going 
beyond the borders of his party, and this even at the cost of 
the SDL's disintegration," Meciar said referring to the 
unsuccessful talks between the HZDS and the SDL on the formation 
of a coalition government before Meciar's government fell on 
March 11. 
  Meciar claimed that during his meeting with President Bill 
Clinton last year, Carnogursky presented a three-point plan 
aimed at disintegration of the HZDS with the help of Milan 
Knazko (fired by Meciar from the post of foreign minister in 
March 1993), to be followed by the restoration of Czechoslovakia. 
  Meciar also said that present Premier Jozef Moravcik and 
Deputy Premier Roman Kovac "would have had to leave the 
government because they had made gross mistakes." Moravcik was 
foreign minister and Kovac held the same post as now. 
  Meciar today accused both of them of inactivity and of 
telling lies. "In the material which he had prepared for me 
before my trip to Rome, Moravcik called the Vatican the center 
of ideological subversion," Meciar said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7944 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   HZDS Denounces Cabinet on Talks With Czechs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    HZDS Denounces Cabinet on Talks With Czechs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704095594 Prague CTK in English 2219 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704095594 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- The division of the 
former Czechoslovak Army has not been completed, former Slovak 
Defense Minister Imrich Andrejcak said at a meeting of the 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) last night. 
  He claimed that "the Czech Republic owed Slovakia part of 
the 
archives of two intelligence service divisions, part of the 
archives of the Military Historical Institute, historical 
monuments and 800 million crowns worth of values which could not 
be transferred without harming the Czech party." 
  "I doubt it that the present government would deal with 
problems related to property division," transport minister in 
the former government of Vladimir Meciar Roman Hofbauer said. 
  He denounced the "accommodating attitude" of the new cabinet 
of Jozef Moravcik in negotiations with Prague on the mutual 
recognition of food quality certificates and the will to discuss 
Czech demands, including the recognition of Slovakia's 24 
billion crown debt arising from the former Czechoslovak State 
Bank's final account. 
  At a session of the Customs Union Council at the end of 
March, Prague and Bratislava agreed to mutually recognize the 
certificates on the condition that Slovakia's customs 
legislation is amended. 
  During the March talks between the banking councils of the 
Czech and Slovak National Banks on the abolition of the "old 
bloc" on the clearing account, the Czech bank's Governor Josef 
Tosovsky praised the fact that Slovakia had not challenged the 
results of an audit carried out in the former Czechoslovak bank. 
According to it, Slovakia owes the Czech Republic more than 24 
billion crowns (over $800,000). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7945 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik Denies Allegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik Denies Allegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704095694 Prague CTK in English 0726 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704095694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- Slovak Premier Jozef 
Moravcik has rejected the criticism from the opposition 
surrounding ex-premier Vladimir Meciar that the new government 
had retreated from the positions won in the division of former 
federal property with the Czech Republic. 
  "Talks are going on, almost nothing has yet been concluded," 
Moravcik said on Slovak Television last night. 
  He described as the most urgent problem the division of the 
assets and liabilities of the former Czechoslovak State Bank 
(SBCS). According to Czechs Slovakia owes to the Czech Republic 
more than 24 billion crowns ($820 million USD). Moravcik 
strongly denied that his government had accepted the claim. 
  "We have to negotiate, but we do not as yet intend to 
recognize this debt," Moravcik said commenting on Czech National 
Bank Governor Josef Tosovsky's optimistic statements made after 
a meeting of the banking boards of the two republics' central 
banking institutions two weeks ago. 
  Moravcik said an analysis was essential to find out how the 
sum of 24 billion crowns was set and also to consider "other 
connections." 
  "We have to think hard whether, during the division of the 
former federal property, a just approach was adopted concerning 
all property rights, know-how, and the usage of different trade 
marks. If we put all this into the package of interconnections 
then it will be possible to look for and to find a compromise," 
Moravcik said. 
  "Given the complicated nature of the issue I do not see a 
real possibility of settling it at the moment," he said, adding 
that the settlement of the problem would depend on the Czech 
Republic being accommodating. 
  Moravcik rejected criticism that the mutual recognition of 
quality certificates on imported and exported goods with the 
Czech Republic would threaten Slovakia's integration into the 
European Union (EU). 
  "The EU assumes the unification of the certificates which 
existed in the framework of the former Czechoslovakia. The 
former Czechoslovak standards have also been valid in Slovakia 
after Czechoslovakia's division. In no case can we be said to 
be threatening our commitments towards the EU," Moravcik said. 
  He pointed out that the complication of relations with the 
Czech Republic, should Czech exporters have to ask for Slovak 
certificates, would bring bigger losses than profits. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7946 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Earlier Privatization Deals Declared Illegal </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Earlier Privatization Deals Declared Illegal </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704092194 Prague CTK in English 1819 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704092194 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 6 (CTK) -- The approval of 13 
privatization projects on February 15-16 by the government of 
former Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar was illegal, according to 
a report by the parliamentary Committee for Privatization. 
  The report said that Meciar's government had violated its 
own 
privatization concept by agreeing without justification to give 
advantages to a select group of buyers. Committee member Jozef 
Zselenak read the report in parliament today. 
  After accepting the report, parliament asked the committee 
to 
look into the government's approval of privatization projects 
approved between February 17 and March 11, the date the Meciar 
government fell from power. 
  According to the report, the Meciar government approved the 
direct sale of state companies to pre-selected buyers even if 
the buyers could not demonstrate their ability to make the first 
payments. For some firms -- such as Tesla Stropkov, Skloobal 
Nemsova, ZOS Vrutky and ZOS Trnava -- the buyers could not 
demonstrate that they had enough financial resources for 
developing the company. 
  In several cases, direct sales were approved even when there 
were competing buyers, whose offers were often better than the 
approved buyer. 
  Deputies of Meciar's now-opposition Movement for a 
Democratic 
Slovakia (HZDS) attacked the report as subjective, misleading, 
and "full of lies." One HZDS deputy said the report reminded 
him of the nationalization of 1948. "I hope the elections are 
not nullified and the 1950s replayed," he said. 
  Privatization Minister Milan Janicina dismissed HZDS 
accusations that members of the new coalition government wanted 
certain privatization projects for themselves, and reassured 
deputies that all of the 13 enterprises, whose privatizations 
were rescinded, would be re-entered in the privatization process. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7947 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Molnar: SNS Leaders Knew About Moscow Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Molnar: SNS Leaders Knew About Moscow Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704191494 Prague CTK in English 1228 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0704191494 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 6 (CTK) -- Information given to 
CTK by Slovak National Party (SNS) deputy Marian Andel 
concerning participation of SNS Deputy Chairman Juraj Molnar in 
the World Pan-Slav Congress in Moscow is erroneous, Molnar told 
CTK today. 
  On Sunday Andel said that "neither himself nor SNS honorary 
Chairman Jozef Prokes knew about Molnar's visit to Moscow to 
attend the congress organized by Russian ultra nationalist and 
Chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) Zhirinovskiy. 
SNS Chairman Jan Slota said on Monday that Molnar was sent to 
Moscow by the SNS leadership as an observer. Molnar said that 
although Andel could not know about his visit due to illness, 
Prokes was informed about it. 
  According to unofficial announcement provided by the SNS 
today it neither had established nor intended to establish 
contacts with any liberal party as it does not share liberal 
values. Informal and unofficial consultations with LDP 
representatives could not be considered the SNS's orientation 
towards the LDP's political line just as the presence of Peter 
Weiss, chairman of the Democratic Left Party (SDL) at the 
Bratislava Central Market place cannot be considered proof of 
the SDL's inclination towards a market economy, says a SNS 
statement. 
  Molnar declined to answer the question of whether or not he 
would meet Zhirinovskiy during his anticipated visit to Slovakia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7948 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94036" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Slovakia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Carnogursky Backs `Loose Cooperation' of Right </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Carnogursky Backs `Loose Cooperation' of Right </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804084494 Prague CTK in English 1815 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804084494 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague CTK </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- The Christian 
Democratic Movement (KDH) and the Democratic Party (DS) have 
discussed cooperation between the right-wing parties, KDH 
Chairman Jan Carnogursky told CTK today. 
  The KDH is for loose cooperation of all the parties right of 
the centre, in particular the DS (extra-parliamentary), the 
National Democratic Party-New Alternative and the Party of 
Entrepreneurs and Tradesmen, added Carnogursky, Slovak prime 
minister between 1991 and 1992. 
  The KDH has also established contacts with "Knazko's 
followers" and "Moravcik's followers" who want to create the 
Slovak Democratic Union on April 23. Milan Knazko is a former 
Slovak Foreign Minister who heads the Alliance of Slovak 
Democrats (AD SR). Josef Moravcik, current prime minister, 
recently created the Alternative of Political Realism (APR). 
  "National differences seem to be stronger than ideology," 
Carnogursky commented on contemplations of possible contacts 
with the ethnic Hungarian parties. 
  However, he did not rule out cooperation with them because 
"apart from some aspects of ethnic policy our views are very 
close." 
  "Bilateral meetings of the right-wing parties will continue 
and we would also like to stage a multilateral session this 
month," Carnogursky announced. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7949 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_b_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Official on U.S. Visit, Turkish Troops </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Official on U.S. Visit, Turkish Troops </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704174894 Sofia BULGARSKA ARMIYA in Bulgarian 30 Mar 94 
pp 1, 3 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704174894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia BULGARSKA ARMIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bulgarian Deputy Defense Minister Boyko Noev </F>
by Lieutenant Colonel Georgi Vuchev; place and date not given: 
"The United States Is Helping To Strengthen Bulgarian Defense"] 
  [Excerpts] [Vuchev] Mr. Noev, you headed a group from the 
Defense Ministry that spent more than one week on a working 
visit to the United States under the Bulgarian-U.S. military 
cooperation plan. What were the chief aims of this visit? 
  [Noev] I was accompanied on the U.S. trip by Krasimira 
Boneva, chief of the Information and Cultural Relations 
Department, and by Captain First Rank Tsvyatko Donchev, head of 
the Defense Ministry Press Service, and the visit was financed 
by the U.S. Information Agency. Our U.S. visit had two main 
aspects: to become acquainted with the practices used at the 
U.S. Department of Defense in the field of information and 
public relations, and also to have meetings with U.S. Defense 
Department officials. [passage omitted] 
  In the course of our discussions it was reaffirmed that the 
relations between the United States and Bulgaria in the military 
field are in complete conformity with the development of 
bilateral relations as a whole. I would even say that they are 
continuously improving and entering a qualitatively new stage. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Vuchev] During your meetings, was sufficient attention paid 
to the situation in our region and Europe? 
  [Noev] Naturally, we did cover these topics quite 
comprehensively. We confirmed that our practical positions 
coincided on all main issues. Of course, there were some 
nuances, such as in connection with the UN resolution on adding 
a military contingent from the Republic of Turkey to the 
peacekeeping forces in Bosnia. In essence, this resolution was 
adopted during and following my meetings. However, even before 
it was made and especially after it was made public, we ensured 
that the U.S. side clearly understood that Bulgaria is far from 
enthusiastic about this decision. In fact, it has turned out 
that for the second time (the first was Resolution 730 on the 
sanctions], when an issue of strategic importance for the 
conflict in the former Yugoslavia was being decided, not only 
was Bulgaria's view not taken into account, but a decision was 
passed that conflicted with our fundamental interests. I wish 
to make it clear that we have nothing against any state taking 
part and appreciate the UN's difficulties in obtaining troops 
for Bosnia. However, at the same time we stressed that there is 
no change in our position of opposing the participation of the 
armed forces of states in the region, or of states that display 
an active interest in joining this specific operation. 
  During the roundtable meeting at the National Defense 
University it was mentioned that the main characteristics of the 
Bulgarian contribution to the international efforts to find a 
solution to the Yugoslav crisis are the clarity, principled 
nature, and predictability of our conduct. We consider that our 
participation, as a permanent value in the complex equation of a 
future peace settlement, should considerably assist the efforts 
to solve the equation. However, when such a policy leads to 
disregard for Bulgaria's interests, we should evidently draw the 
appropriate conclusions. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7950 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_b_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Neftokhim Signs Fuel Deal With FYROM </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Neftokhim Signs Fuel Deal With FYROM </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804094894 Sofia NOVINI 5 in Bulgarian 5 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804094894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia NOVINI 5 </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Staff report: "Neftokhim Concludes $5 Million Deal With </F>
Macedonia"] 
  [Text] During their visit to Macedonia [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM], the chiefs of 
Neftokhim signed a contract on the sale of car gasoline, 
propane-butane, diesel, and reactive fuel to the tune of $5 
million. 
  After Greece imposed its embargo Neftokhim remains the sole 
supplier of fuel to Macedonia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7951 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_b_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   BSP Ends 1993 With 4-Million-Leva Debt </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    BSP Ends 1993 With 4-Million-Leva Debt </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704134394 Sofia DUMA in Bulgarian 4 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704134394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia DUMA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["DUMA PRESS" report] </F>
  [Text] The BSP [Bulgarian Socialist Party] ended 1993 with 
unpaid debts of 4.289 million leva, it was announced following 
yesterday's meeting of the BSP Supreme Council, at which the 
Council passed the accountants' report on the party's finances 
and the balance sheet for 1993. 
  Income from party dues fell short of expectations by about 
the same amount, namely 4.770 million leva. According to [BSP 
leader] Zhan Videnov, the reasons for this were poor financial 
control and failures to submit proper accounts. The BSP 
chairman thinks the party must also seek ways to increase its 
income from economic activities. 
  The BSP had a balance of 2.039 million leva at the end of 
1993. Its assets were valued at 25.972 million leva, after 
deducting the value of some of the party's buildings, its 
shareholdings in state companies, the BSP library stock, and 
other assets sequestered under the Party Property Confiscation 
Act. However, the balance sheet continues to record business 
inventory items and movable property that have not yet been 
confiscated or have been seized without any authorizing 
documents. 
  No accounts and balance sheets were submitted by the 
regional 
BSP councils in Blagoevgrad, Veliko Turnovo, Vratsa, Lovech, 
Kyustendil, and Turgovishte, and by certain oblast BSP councils. 
  In conformance with the law, the BSP will submit its 
accounts 
for 1993 to the Parliamentary Commission on Party Property. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7952 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Boross, Goncz Address Assembly's Final Session </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Boross, Goncz Address Assembly's Final Session </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704160794 Budapest Kossuth Radio Network in Hungarian 
1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704160794 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest Kossuth Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] The National Assembly's last working day started 
with speeches by the president of the Republic and the prime 
minister. Andras Domany reports: 
  [Domany] If the deputies can conclude the past four years 
with a clear conscience, it is because they managed to lay the 
foundation of the institutional legal system of the new and 
democratic Hungary. This, even if haltingly, operates without 
hitches -- an achievement of both the government coalition and 
the opposition equally, President Arpad Goncz said. 
  He praised the work that was accomplished and said that one 
of the reasons why the assembly could not manage to gain the 
heart of the country completely was that the country had 
expected miracles from the newborn democracy. However, fate, 
and not the National Assembly, failed to deliver that miracle. 
Although an inappropriate tone was sometimes used, it was the 
failing of a few. Hopefully, the head of state continued, the 
majority of those deputies saying farewell would be able to use 
their experience in their next tenure. 
  There are things that the assembly still has to do, Goncz 
said. The commissioner of human rights was not elected and the 
assembly representation of minorities has not been settled. The 
head of state is to submit a bill to the next assembly about 
amending the Penal Code, which will serve to prevent racial 
discrimination. He also considers the media law and social 
supervision of the public service radio and television 
important, deeming it inadmissible that the lack of these laws 
should create a source of ceaseless and poisonous internal 
political tension and put in doubt the enforcement of the 
freedom of expression of opinion and freedom of speech granted 
by the constitution. Hoping for a fair and clean election 
fight, Arpad Goncz said the following: Whatever the people's 
choice is, we have a duty to take heed of that, winners and 
losers alike, for the mutual aim remains the same -- the good of 
the country and the service of the people. 
  He hoped that the Hungarian people, owing to its wisdom, 
would emerge victorious from the elections. 
  After this, Prime Minister Peter Boross asked permission to 
speak. He said that the performance of the National Assembly 
over the past four years may perhaps be disputed today, but 
looking back from a distance it will be seen as an historic 
period marking the change of the epoch and the regime. 
  He also mentioned the election period, hoping that it will 
take place in an atmosphere of fairness and that everybody will 
participate, which would serve the prosperity of the country 
ensuring that in the next assembly everybody could meet in a 
good and friendly atmosphere. The legislative work will cease 
now, but the government will function, Peter Boross said. 
During its operation, among other things, the government will 
create all possible conditions for clean elections and the 
election of an assembly, the composition of which is realistic 
and meets the public will. Furthermore, this government, for 
the first time in several decades, will give a detailed account 
of its four-year activity, the prime minister said. 
  After this, the National Assembly began its last working 
day. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7953 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_h_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Emergency Committee Session Debates Radio Issue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Emergency Committee Session Debates Radio Issue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704125494 Budapest Kossuth Radio Network in Hungarian 
1000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704125494 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest Kossuth Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] The parliament's cultural committee is 
holding an emergency session. The committee chairman convened 
deputies to discuss the letter of Laszlo Csucs [Hungarian Radio 
deputy chairman] on the radio dismissals. Edit Schranz reports 
on the details: 
  [Schranz] If the cultural committee session does not lead to 
results today, the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] will 
consider, in accordance with the Constitution, the convention of 
an extraordinary parliamentary session to establish the extent 
of the government's responsibility in the radio matter, Tamas 
Fodor, SZDSZ deputy in the cultural committee, told "Chronicle." 
  Tamas Fodor also said that the parliament's mandate did not 
cease today, as committee sessions could be convened at any 
time. In his view it is doubtful that the Hungarian Radio deputy 
chairman had justified his measures in his letter to the 
committee. 
  Committee Chairman Attila Zsigmond from the Hungarian 
Democratic Forum told today's dailies that he could accept some 
of the details of Laszlo Csucs's letter. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7954 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. General, Iliescu Discuss NATO Ties </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    U.S. General, Iliescu Discuss NATO Ties </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704064894 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1900 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704064894 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The issue of Romania's participation in the 
Partnership for Peace program and the prospects for complete 
integration of our country into Euro-Atlantic structures were 
issues discussed today by the supreme commander of the allied 
forces in Europe, U.S. General George Joulwan, during his 
meeting with Romanian President Ion Iliescu, Prime Minister 
Nicolae Vacaroiu, and other officials and government members. 
  After the reception at Cotroceni Palace, the guest stated to 
the press that Romania's association to the North Atlantic 
structures is a political decision that depends on the wishes of 
Romania and NATO. 
  During his talks with the Romanian prime minister, the U.S. 
general assured Vacaroiu that NATO clearly wishes to assist 
Romania. He said that the visit to Romania confirmed his 
confidence in fruitful cooperation in the military area and this 
could set a positive example for the entire region. 
  The supreme commander of the allied forces in Europe 
affirmed 
that all details of the programs of cooperation between Romania 
and NATO will be completed shortly. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7955 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meeting With Defense Minister Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meeting With Defense Minister Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704125194 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704125194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Nicu Popescu] </F>
  [Text] The visit by U.S. General George Joulwan, supreme 
commander of allied forces in Europe, to Bucharest at the 
invitation of Romanian National Defense Minister Gheorghe Tinca 
ended at noon today. Before leaving Romania for Albania, Tinca 
and Joulwan met with journalists in the Byzantine Hall of the 
National Military Circle and held a news conference. 
  In his opening statement Tinca extended heartfelt thanks to 
the U.S. general for the talks and said that the first visit by 
the supreme commander of allied forces in Europe beyond the 
borders of the NATO member states, that is, to Romania, has 
clear political significance. It is considered recognition of 
our country's geostrategic importance in this region. 
  The Romanian minister mentioned that during the talks the 
sides had discussed the political and economic situation in 
Romania and stressed the irreversible nature of options for a 
democratic system, pluralism, and market economy. 
  During the talks the guests were told about the importance 
of 
foreign financial support this year for relaunching Romania's 
economy. Likewise, the Romanian side described plans to 
reorganize the army, taking into account its new status as a 
fundamental institution of the rule-of-law state. Tinca said 
that an important topic of the talks was the Partnership for 
Peace [PFP] program. He stressed that our county views this 
formula as an element ensuring the consolidation of stability in 
this area. The Romanian minister noted that the sides had 
assessed the intention of Russia and other countries to sign the 
PFP framework document as a positive element and a new element 
in the actions to strengthen stability in Europe. 
  Tinca said that the guests were informed about the current 
stage in preparing the document of Romania's presentation, which 
will be approved very soon by Romania's Supreme Defense Council 
and then sent to Brussels. The defense minister stressed that 
General Joulwan views the Romanian Army's orientation toward 
developing relations with the armies of its neighboring 
countries as an element that helps to increase confidence and 
good neighborliness. The defense minister reported that the 
U.S. general had visited the Romanian peacekeeping battalion, 
which, together with the other two battalions that are to be 
established soon, will be trained in accordance with a joint 
concept for peacekeeping operations organized by NATO. 
  In his statement, Gen. Joulwan again stressed that he had 
chosen Romania for his first visit outside NATO first of all 
because our country had showed its willingness to join the PFP 
and because of its important position in Europe. The general 
mentioned that during his talks with Romania's president, prime 
minister, defense minister, and chief of general staff he had 
noted a consistent team that is concerned with the PFP, 
achieving peace through freedom, and the commitment to continue 
this partnership. 
  Gen. Joulwan also noted that in leaving Romania he was 
taking 
with him a clear impression of Romania's commitment to respect 
this program. 
  In the second part of the news conference, Gen. Joulwan said 
in answering reporters' questions that in the PFP, treatment 
will be equal for all partner states, including the Russian 
Federation when it signs the document, and he expressed the hope 
that this would take place this month. Gen. Joulwan mentioned 
that the decision to participate in the PFP is a matter for each 
sovereign nation. Regarding specific ways to implement the 
Partnership program, an issue raised during the talks in 
Bucharest by the NATO dignitary, speaking on behalf of NATO, he 
noted that one must first see our country's document of 
presentation, which will include Romania's strategy or desire to 
carry out a number of military activities, and then a working 
plan will be established to include all requirements. 
  Tinca wished to stress that the PFP makes an indirect 
contribution to prosperity. Since the PFP is directed toward 
everyone equally, it will help preserve stability and will 
strengthen the sense of security. Thus Central and East 
European countries will be able to concentrate on development 
and the continuation of reform. 
  The climate of stability, the Romanian national defense 
minister added, will have positive effects also regarding 
foreign investors. 
  In connection with the tragedy in the former Yugoslavia, 
Gen. 
Joulwan said that this worries everybody and the only solution 
is diplomatic and political and not military. He said that all 
efforts must be in the direction of reaching solutions solely 
through negotiations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7956 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Experts' on Zhirinovskiy's `Elipton' Weapon </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Experts' on Zhirinovskiy's `Elipton' Weapon </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704143894 Bucharest ROMANIA LIBERA in Romanian 4 Apr 94 p 
1 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704143894 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMANIA LIBERA </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oana Stanciulescu: "ROMANIA LIBERA Has Obtained </F>
a Sensational Document -- The Study Was Done by Military Experts 
Under the Coordination of the Foreign Intelligence Service: 
Zhirinovskiy's Earthquakes Are Threatening Romania"] 
  [Text] Related to various speculation that is being made 
in connection with the mysterious weapon mentioned by Russian 
ultra- nationalist leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, Romanian 
experts have reached the conclusion that actually one has to 
deal with a maneuver launched by special Russian bodies intended 
to intoxicate public opinion, and which, owing to lack of 
information, have managed to fool the mass media in the West and 
even in our country. Thus, they went so far as to consider the 
Elipton a sonic weapon, a biological weapon, and even a 
microwave weapon, while the true nature of this 
military-technical system was lost in the general cacophony. 
  Elipton is a weapon system based on gravitational 
interference. After the last catastrophic earthquake that shook 
Yerevan, U.S. military analysts revealed two strange things: 
The catastrophe, which seemed to be a natural one, occurred at 
a "providential" moment to halt Armenia's autonomist tendencies 
and it also offered the Soviet political-military authorities a 
good pretext to liquidate the Armenian nuclear power industry, 
and thus impose an acute energy dependence on that central 
republic; the second element refers to the fact that 
early-warning satellites recorded an orbital "double lightning," 
which preceded, by a very short time, the earthquake. That was 
an unmistakable sign of the detonation of a small-size nuclear 
load, contravening all currently valid international treaties. 
It was easy to draw conclusions: The Soviets have discovered a 
way to trigger earthquakes. Ten months later, using a rocket 
launched from an F-15 fighter-bomber (ASAT system), the United 
States managed to intercept, for the first time, a low-orbit 
satellite. The system was allegedly designed to destroy Soviet 
spy satellites, but actually it was the sole efficient defense 
to counter the use of the Elipton over U.S. territory. However, 
certain rumors had already reached the ears of the mass media -- 
it was the time when many people believed in an imminent and 
catastrophic reactivation of the San Andreas fault, some sources 
even held it possible that "half of California would sink into 
the ocean," as a consequence of a devastating earthquake. 
  The advantages of the Elipton are obvious: It is a discreet 
weapon, and any accusations can be brushed off by saying it is a 
"phantasm," provided that it is used by daylight, so that its 
lightning could be camouflaged by the sun's natural light. 
  It is quite significant, that merely three days after 
Zhirinovskiy's extremely allusive statement regarding the 
Elipton, the Geophysical Institute of the Russian Academy 
organized a news conference on the issue of seismic weapons, 
although no one had explicitly talked about such a thing. That 
news conference seems to be rather the result of panic. The 
Russians did not know precisely to what extent Zhirinovskiy, the 
former GRU [Soviet Military Intelligence] agent, had divulged 
about the Elipton, and they assumed that Western journalists 
were at least aware of the exact nature of that weapons system 
and the name of the person coordinating the program, which, as 
it later turned out, was not the case at all. During this news 
conference they claimed that in fact the Elipton does not exist 
at all: "Earthquakes cannot be triggered except in the places 
where nature has already prepared them," said the official 
statement, which, as a matter of fact, was quite precise. The 
statement actually confirmed previous information about the 
existence of the Elipton-type weapon systems and about their 
nature, and it also offered an exact description of the way in 
which they work. The Hammer [as published] triggers earthquakes 
wherever there is accumulated tension in the ground, which can 
be unleashed by a minimal variation of the gravitational 
acceleration. Thus, they can trigger earthquakes -- the 
magnitude of which, it is true, is very difficult to predict -- 
in areas in which over the past 1,000 years there has not been 
any seismic activity at all. 
  The Romanian state is directly vulnerable to weapons such as 
the Hammer or the Hole [as published] that are part of the 
Elipton program. Important industrial centers of our country 
and vital establishments of our defense industry are situated in 
valley areas such as Tara Barsei [central Romania, where the 
Carpathian Mountains turn], in which the triggering of 
catastrophic tornadoes could cause enormous damage to our 
industrial infrastructure. Moreover, owing to the existence of 
the seismic area in Vrancea [north-eastern Romania], the 
possible use of Hammer-type weapons there would cause a 
catastrophe in Bucharest, considering the current precarious 
state of the buildings in our capital city. 
  Such weapons might be used in the near future if a 
geopolitical conflict breaks out as a consequence of the 
unification of the Republic of Moldova with Romania or of our 
country's active integration within NATO. No methods are known 
to counter such weapons. However, one could count on warning 
signs offered by attempts to use them, which fail owing to 
insufficient precision. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7957 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Report on `Failure' of Grachev Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Report on `Failure' of Grachev Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704195994 Bucharest ROMANIA LIBERA in Romanian 5 Apr 94 p 
1 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704195994 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMANIA LIBERA </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oana Stanciulescu: "A Secret Document of the </F>
National Defense Minister -- Pavel Grachev `Defends' Dniester 
Region; The Russians Wish To Cross Over Romania With Their 
Troops"] 
  [Text] The political events of the last week were marked 
by the visit to Bucharest of the Russian Federation's defense 
minister, Army General Pavel Grachev. 
  In accordance with a secret report compiled on this occasion 
by the Romanian Ministry of National Defense, General Grachev's 
visit was a complete failure. Not pleased with the way in which 
the negotiations with the Romanian side were unfolding, at the 
end of the meeting the Russian defense minister directly 
approached the Dniester issue. According to General Grachev, 
the local Russian leaders, mostly maneuvered by the former KGB, 
are making difficulties for the Russian military buffer forces. 
Therefore, the Russian Army intends to occupy the Dniester 
region with its military troops. The reason invoked for this 
action is to prevent the worsening of the current situation in 
the region, which is characterized by "passing the control over 
the republic into the hands of certain groups of gangsters," and 
also to prevent the reopening of the conflict with Moldova. 
Romania's leadership was informed about this intention both by 
Ukraine and Turkey. 
  The position adopted by the Bucharest authorities toward 
this 
problem was evasive. The Dniester region, from a legal point of 
view, does not even exist, thus, this means deploying troops on 
the territory of Moldova. Therefore, one should ask for 
Moldova's and not Romania's consent, although Bucharest doubts 
that the Chisinau authorities would agree to turn the Dniester 
region into a military base. The Romanian National Defense 
Ministry document also stressed that Romania is firmly against 
the increase in the number of military personnel and combat 
technology in East Europe because, first of all, those would be 
at variance with the spirit of the treaty on reduction of 
conventional weapons. 
  As far as solutions to the crisis in Yugoslavia are 
concerned, Russia asked Romania to permit the passage of its 
troops, logistics, and military equipment through Romania's 
territory to Bosnia. 
  Romania's leadership was informed about such demands by 
Ukraine's defense minister, Vitaliy Radetsky. Just like 
Ukraine, Romania showed willingness to submit only the necessary 
air corridors, but only upon special request by the United 
Nations, when the world organization will consider it necessary. 
Although the Russian general insisted on obtaining a favorable 
answer on the issue of using Romania's territory for the passage 
of heavy weapons, he was politely refused, on the pretext of 
negative reaction from the Romanian people. 
  According to Romanian experts, the aforementioned document 
shows that Russia's intention for the future is to install a 
solid expeditionary corps in Bosnia, which should also 
participate in all NATO and West European maneuvers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7958 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Melescanu, Belgian Counterpart Discuss Ties </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Melescanu, Belgian Counterpart Discuss Ties </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704082794 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1900 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704082794 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Romanian Foreign Minister Teodor Melescanu and 
Willy Claes, deputy prime minister and foreign minister of 
Belgium, held official talks in Bucharest today on political 
relations between the two countries, economic relations, and 
possibilities of making use of judicial and parliamentary levers 
to stimulate commercial exchanges between the two countries. 
  According to our correspondent's report, the Belgian 
minister 
expressed the determination of his country to support Romania 
both in the PHARE [Economic Reconstruction Aid for Poland and 
Hungary] program as well as in the Group of 24. The two 
ministers also examined the possibility of facilitating trips of 
certain Romanian citizens to Belgium. 
  In a statement made at the end of talks, Claes said that the 
most important message that he brings to Romania is that the 
Group of 12 has no intention of promoting a discriminatory 
policy between Central European countries and that Romania is 
not a second-class Central European country. 
  As far as Romania's association with the European Union [EU] 
is concerned, Willy Claes said that the treaty of association 
should be regarded as a last step before the association, 
however, before 1996 no negotiations can begin on this issue 
because neither Romania nor the other Central and Eastern 
European countries are prepared for this stage. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7959 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Adopts Draft Bill on 1994 Budget </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Adopts Draft Bill on 1994 Budget </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604082494 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
0400 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604082494 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The government met in a special session yesterday 
to discuss this year's state budget. Florin Georgescu, state 
minister and finance minister, who presented the objectives and 
the structure of the draft budget, emphasized that the current 
document reflects to a greater extent than previous bills on the 
state budget the dynamics of the reform and the goals stipulated 
by the government program, including the ones agreed with the 
IMF. The document aims to improve the structure of state 
incomes from taxation and to avoid higher taxes, as for this 
year the planned average level of taxes reaches 31 percent, 
whereas in 1993 and in 1992 that level was 32 and 35 percent 
respectively. 
  The draft budget's chapter dedicated to state spending 
stipulates the continuation of boosting investments, especially 
in the infrastructure, ensuring social protection, support for 
the agricultural producers, the decentralization of the 
activities paid from the budget, and the stimulation of exports. 
In a statement made to our reporters, the finance minister said 
that it will be an austerity budget with the strict limitation 
of state spending, especially related to personnel. 
  GNP is expected to grow by 1.5 percent compared with last 
year, whereas the budget deficit is expected to grow by 3.5 
percent, and the inflation rate by 75 percent. 
  According to information released by the government, the 
executive adopted the draft bill on the [1994] state budget with 
certain corrections that are to be applied without delay, after 
which the document will be submitted to parliament as soon as 
possible. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7960 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_r_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army's Lack of Supplies, Housing Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army's Lack of Supplies, Housing Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604090194 Bucharest ADEVARUL in Romanian 28 Mar 94 pp 1, 8 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604090194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ADEVARUL </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Nicolae Militaru: "Romania's Army Is Struggling </F>
for Survival"] 
  [Text] For the second time within a short period, Defense 
Minister Gheorghe Tinca was among the officers and soldiers of 
the Transylvanian 4th Army. Immediately following his 
appointment, Tinca had accompanied, about two weeks ago, the 
head of the executive [Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu] on his 
tour in the counties of Brasov, Covasna, Harghita, and Mures. 
Following this, on 26 March he attended the oath-taking 
ceremony that took place in the Someseni garrison, together with 
General Paul Cheler, commander of the 4th Army, the Cluj County 
prefect, Grigore Zanc, and the mayor of the city of Cluj-Napoca, 
Gheorghe Funar. 
  After the solemn moment of the soldiers' taking their oath 
of 
allegiance to the country, the defense minister talked with the 
parents and relatives of the soldiers, after which he visited 
some of the barracks of the "General Avramescu" motorized 
battalion, the shooting and training grounds, as well as the 
military equipment maintenance and repair bases. At the end of 
his visit, at the headquarters of the 4th Army, the minister met 
with the Transylvanian army corps, with generals, and 
high-ranking officers. The press was admitted to that meeting. 
Despite the fact that it is the first time ever that this has 
happened -- which proves that the Army is trying to be open in 
its relations with the press and, through the press, with public 
opinion -- we have to admit that we did not learn too many 
"secrets." We were already aware, as everyone else in today's 
Romania, that the budget allotted to the army has decreased each 
year, that the country's defense industry is almost not 
functioning at all, and that the pay given to the soldiers is 
hardly sufficient for them to buy food and pay for the rent and 
their families' other expenses. We had known that over a number 
of years the army has ceased to have that spirit of 
competitiveness it should have, being much rather characterized 
by a state typical of those struggling for survival. 
  Thus we went there to learn, straight from the source, how 
much truth there is in such information, so that we can sound 
the alarm bell while there is still time to correct things. 
What we heard from generals and high-ranking officers of the 
4th Transylvanian Army confirmed that things are much graver 
even than we had believed. In Transylvania alone, and just in 
the near future, the cadres of that army would need a total of 
4,587 apartments. The Ramnicu Sarat clothing factory is 
seriously behind with its deliveries of uniforms, and therefore 
the recruits have been given worn-out clothing. The boots, and 
generally, all the footwear produced in Bacau come apart the 
first time they are used in the sleet. Food prices increased so 
much that officers detached to other units can hardly afford to 
maintain themselves, let alone support their families left 
behind hundreds of kilometers away. Many people do not know that 
officers are expected to teach their soldiers a total of 22 
various disciplines, and if they want to sound convincing when 
they order: "Soldiers, follow me! Forward!" they have to be 
considered genuine models by their men. "What is even more 
serious, General Paul Cheler said, -- and this holds true for 
the entire Romanian Army, not just the Transylvanian one -- is 
the fact that the officers and other military cadres in all 
military units will not complain about their low pay or other 
personal problems, but rather about the fact that their units 
lack ammunition and fuel needed for drills, their Russian-made 
radio equipment, for instance, is 40 years old, and that their 
night ammunition is almost identical to that used at the 
beginning of the century, because its phosphorus needs to be 
activated with a flashlight." In order to keep its tanks and 
armored carrier vehicles operational, the 4th Army needs several 
dozens of thousands of batteries, 11,000 tires, 2,700 trucks, 
and several hundred buses and vans, as the ones they are 
currently using are 20 years old. 
  Besides the shortage in equipment, now they are taking away 
the army's firing ranges too. A firing range near the town of 
Turda, spreading over 12,000 hectares, which was in the army's 
possession before the last world war, is now reduced to merely 
2,700 hectares, and that land is also claimed by the inhabitants 
of an Alba County village. Another firing range in Harghita 
County, previously used to practice artillery fire in mountain 
regions, was declared a "natural monument" by local authorities, 
which also denied the soldiers access to that area. A more 
serious matter is that they are unable to ensure training for 
the reserve cadres. According to the law, the army has to pay 
the called up persons the same amount they earn in their 
civilian life. However, the army's budget does not provide for 
such payments, and, if the called up person works for RENEL 
[Romanian National Electricity Network Corporation], his payment 
would exceed the salaries of three officers. At the same time 
the fines to be paid by persons who do not carry out certain 
military duties amount to merely 24-40 lei. 
  The crisis currently facing the army is not a new one. It 
has been going on for 10 years. However, one would expect that 
the modernization process that began over the past few years in 
Romania would also include the army structures, its endowment 
with the necessary means to increase its defense ability. 
Because being a modern country, which we claim we began to be 
after our admittance to the Council of Europe and after the 
signing of the Partnership for Peace with NATO, also presupposes 
our having a modern army. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7961 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   DELO: Muslims Preparing Sarajevo Attack </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    DELO: Muslims Preparing Sarajevo Attack </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604163494 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1558 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604163494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Ljubljana, 6 Apr (TANJUG) -- The Muslim Army will 
attack Serb parts of Sarajevo if Gorazde were to fall -- DELO 
claims today, citing sources within the Muslim leadership. 
  Units of Izetbegovic's army are preparing to attack 
Grbavica, 
Vogosca, Ilidza, and other Serb-held districts of Sarajevo. 
High-ranking Muslim military officials and Izetbegovic's close 
aides have worked out a plan to attack Serb positions, 
encouraged by the fact that Serb units have no heavy weaponry in 
the area. They have been left without artillery and tanks and 
the Muslim leadership is aware of this, the Slovene daily 
stresses. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7962 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_s_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Free Trade Agreement Signed With Hungary </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Free Trade Agreement Signed With Hungary </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604165294 Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network in Slovene 
1330 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604165294 </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Hungary and Slovenia signed a free trade zone 
agreement. Today, in Ljubljana, the document was signed by Dr. 
Bela Kadar, Hungarian minister for international cooperation, 
and Dr. Davorin Kracun, minister for economic relations and 
development. The ministers presented the contents and the 
significance of this agreement at the news conference. Tomaz 
Gerden reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Gerden] Hungary is an important trade 
partner of Slovenia. The free trade zone agreement will, as of 
1 July, abolish two-thirds of customs duties, while the rest 
will be gradually abolished by 1997, that is to say, by 2001 for 
the most sensitive articles. In three years' time, the 
agreement signed today will be reexamined and supplemented, if 
this proves necessary. Kadar was very pleased with the agreement 
signed. 
  The agreement can be assessed from several points of view. 
In December 1992, Slovenia and Hungary signed a basic agreement 
on mutual relations. This was followed by several other 
agreements. Dr. Kadar believes that today's agreement on the 
formation of a free trade zone merely confirms good relations 
between two neighborly states. 
  He touched particularly upon the issue of agriculture, as 
Hungary exports $20 million worth of agricultural produce and 
raw materials to Slovenia, which represents a fifth of all 
Hungarian exports to our country. The agreement signed today 
will allow a greater competitiveness of this Hungarian produce 
on the Slovene market. Slovenia and Hungary will continue to 
cooperate at the regional level within the Alpe-Adria community. 
  Minister Kadar especially emphasized that such an agreement 
also means drawing closer to the European integration processes. 
  Minister Dr. Kracun added here that, regarding integrations, 
one should not merely wait for the initiatives of the European 
Union. He assessed the agreement as follows: 
  [Kracun] The agreement that we signed with the neighboring 
Hungary today is a very important milestone in the development 
of bilateral cooperation with Hungary and in Slovene orientation 
toward European integration. Namely, Slovenia has already 
signed some free trade zone agreements, however, on this 
occasion we have for the first time signed one with a 
neighboring country. [passage omitted] [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7963 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_s_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll Shows Views on Jansa, Parties, Events </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll Shows Views on Jansa, Parties, Events </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704173994 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704173994 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Ljubljana DELO in Slovene in its 2 April 
edition on pages 1 and 2 carries a roundup report about the 
results of an opinion poll about the impeachment of the former 
Defense Minister Janez Jansa and the political events 
surrounding this affair. The poll was carried out over 
telephone by DELO's Stik research group on 31 March and 1 April. 
As it is reported, out of 1,000 randomly chosen telephone 
subscribers from all over Slovenia, 789 took part in the poll. 
The report consists of 6 graphs and an accompanying explanatory 
text. 
  The first graph shows replies to the question: "Which of the 
present parliamentary parties would you vote for if the 
elections were tomorrow?" 
  The party that won the most votes is the Liberal Democracy 
of 
Slovenia (LDS) with 19.3 percent, followed by the Social 
Democratic Party of Slovenia (SDSS) with 10.3 percent, the 
Slovene Peoples' Party (SLS) with 7.5 percent, the Slovene 
Christian Democrats (SKD) with 7.2 percent, the United List of 
Social Democrats (ZLSD) with 4.7 percent, the Democratic Party 
with 1.5 percent, the Slovene National Party with 0.8 percent, 
the Greens of Slovenia with 0.8 percent, and an independent 
group of deputies of the Slovene National Party with 0.1 percent 
of votes. Of the pollees, 29.3 percent replied with "I do not 
know," 9.6 percent would vote for none of these parties, while 
8.9 percent would not take part in the voting at all. 
  The second graph on page 1 shows the opinions as to whether 
the State Chamber did the right thing in impeaching former 
defense minister Janez Jansa. To this question 37.1 percent 
replied affirmatively, 41.9 percent negatively, while 21 percent 
did not know. 
  As DELO writes "despite considerable dissatisfaction with 
the 
parliamentary decision regarding Janez Jansa, the pollees mostly 
(54 percent) expect that Jelko Kacin will be a good defense 
minister." As it is written further "a good half of the pollees 
is also of the opinion that the departure of Janez Jansa from 
the post of the defense minister cannot influence adversely the 
Slovene defense situation and its independence. A little over 
30 percent fear that this could happen." 
  "However," paper continues, "a staggering 74.4 percent of 
DELO's pollees believe that the demands of the demonstrators and 
the State Chamber deputies that the President of the State Milan 
Kucan accounts for some of his statements and also for his 
possible involvement in the Smolnikar affair, are perfectly 
legitimate." As a graph on the page 2 illustrates, 12.8 percent 
disagreed, while 12.8. percent were undecided on this question. 
  "Regardless of this," DELO writes on, "more than a half 
believe that after the Monday events the Smolnikar affair will 
never be thoroughly investigated." 
  According to the paper, more than a half (56 percent) find 
the demands for early elections "nonsensical" while 30 percent 
approve. 
  Regarding the demand of some parties that the United List 
leaves the coalition, 38.3 percent replied negatively, 24.1 
percent positively, and 37.6 percent were undecided on the 
matter. 
  "Because the three men -- Kucan, Drnovsek, and Jansa -- in a 
way symbolize three rival or at least different political 
orientations, DELO's pollees could also answer to the question 
of which of the political orientations they supported the most," 
paper says. As an accompanying graph on page 2 shows, Jansa's 
political orientation won the most votes -- 27.5. percent -- 
followed by that of Janez Drnovsek with 24.1 percent, and Milan 
Kucan with 17.5 percent: 14.4 percent were undecided while 16.5 
percent said that they do not support any of the above three. 
  A separate analysis on page 2 by Aleksander Bratina, which 
examines correlation between the education of pollees and their 
choices, shows that "in terms of sex, age, and place of 
residence (we have classified the pollees according to whether 
they live in a bigger town, smaller town, or a village, although 
there is also a possibility of regional classification, which we 
leave to the marketing experts) there are no significant 
differences in support for the above three political 
orientations." As Bratina writes, "there is an important 
difference only in terms of education. Jansa is favored by 
those with completed primary and secondary education and a 
little less by those with higher education. The opposite is the 
case with Janez Drnovsek, who is supported by the voters with 
higher education. The support for Kucan is the same as the 
support for Janez Jansa; however, the latter is currently 
leading." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7964 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_s_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Talks on Future Government Coalition Underway </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Talks on Future Government Coalition Underway </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704172794 Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network in Slovene 
1330 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704172794 </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] The negotiating teams of the Slovene Christian 
Democrats [SKD] and the Liberal Democracy [LDS] met this 
morning. They held an hour of consultations in view of the 
recent SKD proposal to form a government coalition of two 
parties, that is, without the United List, while the Social 
Democrats have already announced their departure from the 
government. 
  As it was expected, today's meeting did not produce any 
concrete decisions about the fate of the future government 
coalition. After the meeting of the negotiating teams of both 
parties, we can also expect a meeting of the members of the LDS 
executive council and the SDK council. The SKD will make the 
final decision about this next week and definitely before the 
annual party conference that will take place between 22 and 24 
April. 
  A segment of the party's membership demands departure from 
the coalition. However, a sober examination shows the great 
political damage that the party would suffer if it left the 
coalition at a moment when tangible results in new spheres that 
will also bring electoral points are in sight. 
  One, therefore, should not expect any more explicit 
decisions 
from the afternoon meeting of the SKD council. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7965 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   NATO Accused of Violating UN Charter </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    NATO Accused of Violating UN Charter </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704153694 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1317 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0704153694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Pool report] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, April 7 (TANJUG) -- The North Atlantic 
Council ignores the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (F.R.Y.) plea 
to the International Court of Justice in The Hague against all 
NATO member-countries for resorting to ultimatum and threatening 
to use force in the former Yugoslav republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  TANJUG has learned from reliable sources that when the North 
Atlantic Council recently met at the level of permanent 
representatives it held a debate on the F.R.Y. plea for the 
Hague court to institute proceedings against the NATO 
member-countries for violating international law by resorting to 
ultimatum and the threat with the use of force. 
  The North Atlantic Council on February 9 threated to launch 
air strikes against Bosnian Serbs and Moslems unless they 
withdrew or placed under U.N. control their heavy weapons in and 
around Sarajevo within ten days. The ultimatum was interpreted 
in the West as applying only to the Bosnian Serb side. 
  TANJUG has learned from the same sources that a broader 
discussion about the F.R.Y. plea at the meeting of the North 
Atlantic Council was prevented by the U.S. representative, who 
insisted on his government's position that the F.R.Y. plea did 
not deserve a reply because it was politically motivated. The 
U.S. representative urged the NATO member-countries not to 
recognize the Hague court's jurisdiction in the case. 
  It is set out in NATO circles that the U.S. prevented a 
substantive debate and avoided a confrontation with the NATO 
member-countries, such as Greece, who had reservations when 
decisions concerning military operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
were being taken. 
  According to the available information, the International 
Court of Justice is still waiting for replies from the NATO 
member-countries whom it has asked in writing to let the court 
know whether they accept the court's jurisdiction in the 
respective case. 
  The F.R.Y. on February 18 filed the plea against the NATO 
member-countries. 
  The NATO ultimatum and threat to use force were gross 
violations of Articles 2 and 53 of the U.N. Charter. Article 2 
bans the threat with or use of force, and Article 53 enables 
certain measures to be taken but only on condition they are 
decided on by the U.N. Security Council. 
  It is well known that the U.N. Security Council had not 
taken 
a decision for the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons 
in the Sarajevo area by February 20, and that U.N. 
Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali had asked NATO only to 
report to him about whether it was ready possibly to intervene. 
Neither the Security Council nor the secretary-general had 
authorized NATO to set ultimatums and threaten with the use of 
force. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7966 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Discusses Finances, Foreign Relations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Discusses Finances, Foreign Relations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0504192994 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1808 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0504192994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Belgrade, 5 April (TANJUG) -- According to a 
statement by the Federal Ministry of Information, at its 
session, chaired by Prime Minister Radoje Kontic, today the 
Federal Government examined and adopted the draft law on a 
foreign currency loan to be raised by the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia [FRY] both at home and abroad to the tune of $300 
million to finance its program of transforming monetary system 
and the strategy of the country's economic recovery. [passage 
omitted] 
  Under the draft law, the loan would be paid off over 
two-year 
period with a one-year grace period and at the interest rate and 
other terms as customary on the financial market. The loan will 
be repaid in 12 equal monthly installments and the loan 
repayment fund -- to equal the amount used up -- will be secured 
by the FRY, or rather the republics. [passage omitted] 
  At this evening's session the Federal Government considered 
and approved a document entitled: "FRY Government stances on the 
initiatives of other states to conclude agreements on friendship 
and cooperation." 
  Bearing in mind the changes which have taken place in 
Europe, 
globally and in the Balkans, as well as changes in the 
international position of the FRY, the Federal Government 
assesses that it is necessary to accept the initiatives of 
friendly, neighboring countries to conclude general agreements 
on friendship, good-neighborliness and cooperation in order to 
strengthen the country's international position and stimulate 
bilateral and multilateral cooperation. [passage omitted] 
  The government at the same time approved the Yugoslav draft 
text of an agreement on friendship and cooperation between the 
FRY and Romania, the Federal Information Ministry's statement 
says at the end. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7967 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Entrepreneurs Called On To Violate Sanctions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Entrepreneurs Called On To Violate Sanctions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704172194 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704172194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Radoje Djukic, minister for private enterprise in 
the Serbian Government, attended a joint meeting of the private 
enterprise council of the Belgrade Economic Chamber, a group of 
private companies, an executive committee of the association 
Nova Privreda, as well as other general associations of 
Belgrade's independent companies. The topic of the meeting was 
the program of work of the Ministry for Private Enterprise. 
Vesna Tenjovic reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Tenjovic] The first task of the Ministry 
for Private Enterprise will be above all the revision of the 
taxation laws and the creation of a long-term tax system, 
Minister Radoje Djukic said. Our goal will be, Djukic 
emphasized, to reorganize all departments selectively to 
facilitate work for as many people as possible. The 
rationalization of the state administration is under way as the 
economic program also envisages the reconstruction of the state. 
  Minister Djukic said that three sectors will function within 
the ministry -- a sector for singular, private, and individual 
enterprise, a sector for development and promotion of this 
department, and a powerful legal sector. 
  There are approximately 400,000 private entrepreneurs in 
Serbia. For this reason we must create a more favorable climate 
for their work and then the foreign investors will come by 
themselves. 
  Promising that the government will persist in the 
implementation of the economic recovery, by which the economy 
will after the abolition of sanctions integrate easier into the 
world economy, Minister Djukic had the following message for the 
entrepreneurs: 
  [Djukic] As I have said, until we have dealt with the 
problem of fundamental and system solutions -- decrees and law 
-- in case of excessive situations I am always free for you to 
call me to resolve them ad hoc. President of the EU 
entrepreneurial community Mr. (Jeanrou), who was a guest of the 
Serbian Government, replied when asked by reporters what he 
would do had he been in Djukic's shoes, that he would call upon 
all the entrepreneurs to violate sanctions. Therefore, I also 
call to violate sanctions just as you have done so far. [end 
recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7968 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Moderate Left Political Party Registered </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Moderate Left Political Party Registered </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704192294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1412 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704192294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Belgrade, 7 Apr (TANJUG) -- The Radical Party of 
Serbia [Radikalna Stranka Srbije -- RSS] is a national party of 
the moderate left. It will advocate a democratic state in which 
the Serb states will be united, it was stated at today's 
promotion of this party in Belgrade. 
  The RSS, which was officially registered on 29 March this 
year, elected Zvezdan Babovic its president at the assembly held 
on 6 April. Four vice presidents and Zoran Stojkovic, the 
president of the Executive Committee, were also elected on this 
occasion. 
  Twenty-six members of the Executive Committee were elected, 
21 of them had previously been members of the Serbian Radical 
Party. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7969 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Human Rights Workers Denied Visas </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Human Rights Workers Denied Visas </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604181394 Stockholm Radio Sweden in English 1615 GMT 6 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604181394 </F>
<F P=104>  Stockholm Radio Sweden </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Serb officials have refused to let three 
representatives of Swedish human rights organizations travel to 
the Kosovo Province of Yugoslavia to check on the status of 
ethnic Albanians. The visas were denied to representatives from 
the Swedish Helsinki Committee, the International Commission of 
Lawyers, and the Association of Swedish Authors and Writers. 
The three wanted to do research on human rights in Kosovo and a 
follow-up report on Albanians who have been denied asylum in 
Sweden and sent back to Kosovo. Meanwhile, 60 Swedish aid 
workers scheduled to transport food and help build emergency 
housing in Bosnia are still waiting for visas from Serb 
authorities. The Swedes were to relieve a group of Swedish 
convoy workers who returned from Bosnia last week. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7970 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Albania Reportedly Training Kosovo Separatists </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Albania Reportedly Training Kosovo Separatists </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0504192594 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1855 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0504192594 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pristina, Yugoslavia, April 5 (TANJUG) -- The public 
prosecutor in Pristina has ordered an investigation of six 
ethnic Albanians suspected of plotting to set up an ethnic 
Albanian paramilitary force in Serbia's province of 
Kosovo-Metohija in order to detach it from Serbia and its parent 
Yugoslavia and annex it to neighbouring Albania. 
  The suspects -- Fehmi Lestrani, 21, Skelzen Bajrami, 21, 
Nexhmedinpsadriju, 31, Luan Heta, 23, Beqir Muleci, 38, and Isni 
Franc -- are all in investigative detention. 
  In the course of 1992 and 1993, the group is suspected of 
having undergone military training in Albania under the orders 
of the self- proclaimed government of "the republic of Kosovo." 
The training included instruction in the use of all sorts of 
small arms, armoured personnel carriers, tanks and explosive 
devices and in sabotage. 
  Many ethnic Albanians from Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro) 
and 
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia [FYROM] have been 
trained by Albanian army officers near Elbasan in Albania. 
  A strong separatist movement has been active for decades in 
Kosovo-Metohija whose population is mostly ethnic Albanian. The 
separatists allege human and minority rights violations in an 
effort to justify their struggle for separation. 
  The Yugoslav police has irrefutable proof that dozens of 
ethnic Albanians from the province have undergone military 
training in Albania, but fears that many more have gone 
undetected. 
  In mid-1992, eight ethnic Albanians received prison terms 
for 
smuggling into Kosovo-Metohija 74 automatic rifles, 14,000 
rounds of ammunition and other military equipment from their 
training camp near Tirana. 
  This and the latest case show that ethnic Albanians from 
Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav republics are being trained 
in several camps in Albania, that the practice has been going on 
for years and that such activities have been intensified of late. 
  Ethnic Albanian separatist leaders have recentty decided to 
form a 40,000-strong paramilitary force, to help them in their 
unlawful efforts to set up their own bodies of power throughout 
the province. 
  A number of officials of the self-proclaimed defence 
ministry 
of "the republic of Kosovo" are soon to stand trial in Pristina. 
  "Defence Minister" Hajzer Hajzeraj and his lieutenants in 
Pristina, Podujevo and Lipljan were directly subordinated to 
Anton Kolaj, vice-president of the leading ethnic Albanian party 
-- the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo -- who has fled the 
province when the circle around him began to tighten. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7971 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Situation After Rejection of Popiwek Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Situation After Rejection of Popiwek Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0804110094 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 8 Apr 94 pp 1-2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0804110094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ewa K. Czaczkowska and Jan Bazyl Lipszyc: </F>
"Summit Meeting After Rosati's Resignation; Popiwek--A Political 
Issue"] 
  [Text] The government coalition met a double defeat on 
Thursday [7 April]: It did not override the president's veto, 
and, second, the summit meeting of the president, the prime 
minister, and the head of the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] 
will be held only after the coalition officially abandons the 
candidacy of Dariusz Rosati for the post of deputy prime 
minister and finance minister. 
  On Thursday, Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy, who paid a visit to 
the president, made efforts to organize such a meeting. Perhaps 
as soon as today the Sejm will discuss the new bill on wage 
control. 
<H5>  The New Bill as Soon as Today? </H5>
  The coalition is of the opinion that the president's 
rejection of the new popiwek [tax on excessive wage increases] 
law was a political decision. The opposition claims that it 
voted against it because it was a bad law. The president's veto 
was not rejected because the only deputies who voted against it 
were those of the Polish Peasant Party [PSL] and the SLD--and 
not all of them at that. The deputies of the All-Polish Trade 
Unions Agreement [OPZZ] voted contrary to the coalition's 
decisions, and a substantial number of the PSL deputies did not 
take part in the ballot at all. 
  Before the voting, Prime Minister Waldemar Palwak said that 
the debate on the law was a discussion "over who is who on the 
political scene." When it turned out that the result of the 
voting was negative for the government and the coalition, he did 
not respond to the question of whether the government already 
had another bill on wage controls and, if so, when it would be 
submitted in the Sejm. Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy said that, if 
the Sejm decided to shorten the legislative procedures, the new 
bill might be discussed as early as today. 
  "I am counting on a responsible attitude of the managers of 
enterprises, on trade unions, when they have thought this issue 
over," the prime minister appealed and asked not to dramatize 
the situation. 
  Marek Borowski still maintains his opinion that the 
president's veto was of a political, not a substantive, nature. 
He said: "It is some kind of a success for the president; 
however, it may turn into his failure if the government and the 
coalition close ranks and are able to oppose the destructive 
activities of Lech Walesa. As a result of this, further such 
successes by the president will be impossible, and the coalition 
will be strengthened. The president has decided to make himself 
felt on the political scene in a manner that is detrimental to 
the economy." According to Marek Borowski, the government must 
start controlling wage increases with other methods, which are 
more time-consuming and more difficult than the popiwek. 
Treasury Partnerships may be controlled directly, other 
state-run enterprises through fiscal offices. "This calls for 
firm action by the government, and it is more inconvenient for 
enterprises; however, in this situation, there is no better 
solution. This is a challenge for the government and the 
coalition," stated Borowski. 
  President's Spokesman Andrzej Drzycimski said that if the 
Sejm amends the new popiwek law, the possibility cannot be ruled 
out that the president will then sign this law. 
<H5>  A Meeting Yes, Rosati No </H5>
  While visiting the president, Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy 
tried 
to arrange a summit meeting between the coalition and the 
president; he also attempted to persuade the president to sign 
the budget law. 
  After the talk, Andrzej Drzycimski once again declared on 
behalf of the president the desire to meet with the coalition 
leaders. However, the condition for such a talk was "an 
unequivocal decision concerning the candidacy of Rosati"--that 
is, abandoning it, as well as "joint topics"--the name of a new 
candidate for deputy prime minister. 
  "Rosati is out of the question," Drzycimski repeated once 
again. "The president should be consulted on the new candidacy 
before it is announced to the public," the spokesman said. "If 
one wants to obtain the acceptance of a candidacy, it is 
customary to hold such consultations." 
  Following the meeting with the president, Jozef Oleksy said 
that the "summit" meeting is possible "any day now." "The date 
of the meeting is not up to us," stated Drzycimski. It seems 
that the conditions necessary for holding this meeting may be 
met no sooner than next week. 
  The president wants to talk with politicians who think 
seriously about the country's affairs. Seriously, he 
explained--that is when they do not call one another names. 
  During the talk with the president, Oleksy proposed holding 
meetings with "the leading people" in the country, not in order 
to make decisions but to agree on a joint opinion. Drzycimski 
explained that the president believes that the meetings among 
the leading politicians should be held within constitutional 
bodies, such as the National Security Council, for instance. He 
recalled that the law on the general defense duty had gotten 
stuck in the government. It is worth recalling that the bill 
was drafted by the military specialists from the General 
Headquarters. It seems that its first chapter, which defines, 
among other things, the powers of the president in the area of 
controlling the issues of the state's defense, prepared in line 
with the Belweder's suggestions, would probably be unacceptable 
for the present coalition. 
  According to Drzycimski, the president has not yet decided 
whether to sign the budget law and the electoral law to gmina 
[smallest administrative units] councils. The Sejm speaker 
feels that the president will most likely not sign the latter. 
<H5>  The Defeat of the Coalition </H5>
  The PSL deputies agreed that the result of the voting on the 
president's veto was a definite defeat for the coalition. Roman 
Jagielinski said that the defeat was caused by the fact that 
some SLD as well as PSL deputies were not entirely convinced 
that this law was right; in the previous voting, they were 
forced to support this law, even though in the election campaign 
both parties were against the popiwek. "The president's 
decision was political, and we gave him good reason to make such 
a decision by extending wage control to the private sector," 
Jagielinski stated. "We should draw the following conclusion 
from this: It is necessary to close our ranks because there is 
no alternative to the coalition. Then this defeat will turn out 
to be beneficial to us." 
  "The irresponsible statements that a new law will be 
forwarded to the Sejm are the worst. As a result of them, wages 
will go up very fast," fears Maciej Manicki, who, along with 
other OPZZ deputies, supported the president's veto in the Sejm 
ballot. According to him, the unionists did not vote like the 
rest of the coalition because they had much more important 
issues in mind than merely the game played between the Belweder 
and the government. It was a law that was supposed to be 
retroactive--from 1 April--and was thus a violation of the law. 
"The Constitutional Tribunal would immediately query it, so it 
was better to put an end to it today," Manicki believes. 
According to him, the fact that the union's deputies voted 
differently will cause friction within the SLD Club; however, it 
will only be temporary. He also draws attention to the fact 
that as many as 20 PSL deputies did not vote at all. 
  "This was a bad law, and the opposition voted against it in 
the previous voting," said Andrzej Potocki, of the Democratic 
Union [UD]. "No one should have expected that we would change 
our minds. We do not side with anyone in the dispute between 
the coalition and the president." According to Andrzej Potocki, 
before the debate, the coalition did not try to speak with the 
opposition or try to persuade it to change its opinion. He said 
that, if a new bill is submitted that would not have all of the 
defects found in the rejected law, UD might support it because 
it believes that it is necessary to curb wage increases. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7972 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Olesky: Rosati Only Candidate for Finance Post </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Olesky: Rosati Only Candidate for Finance Post </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804145994 Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network in Polish 1400 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804145994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] At a press conference in the Sejm, Jozef Oleksy 
[Sejm speaker] and Marek Borowski [deputy leader of the 
Democratic Left Alliance] have announced that Dariusz Rosati 
remains the only coalition candidate for the posts of deputy 
prime minister and finance minister. 
  They also said that the media had distorted yesterday's 
statement by Leszek Miller [labor and social policy minister], 
reporting that there was already a new candidate. They 
explained that Leszek Miller had only said that the coalition 
could put forward another candidate if there was a need for it. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7973 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Opposition Leader Predicts Social Unrest </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Opposition Leader Predicts Social Unrest </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804093794 Warsaw PAP in Polish 0755 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0804093794 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Wroclaw, 8 Apr--New parliamentary elections are a 
foregone conclusion and will be held within a year. Any excuse 
suffices for the president to dissolve the present parliament, 
the leader of the Confederation for an Independent Poland [KPN], 
Leszek Moczulski, maintained in an interview with a SLOWO 
POLSKIE journalist on 8 April. According to him, the "KPN 
parliamentary floor group as well as several other political 
groupings in the Sejm are capable of providing the president 
with such an excuse when the time is right for them." Moczulski 
is also of the opinion that a breakup of the governing coalition 
is unavoidable. Should it happen, it will be difficult to 
establish a majority in the present Sejm. 
  The KPN leader warns that Poland is facing events similar to 
those of 1980. According to him, none of the problems put 
forward "so forcefully" then have ever been resolved. "If 
society realizes now that the confidence placed in all corners 
of the political scene, apart from the Confederation, has been 
ill-placed and that it has been let down, we are going to have 
events similar to those in August [1980]," Moczulski maintains. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7974 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Daily Views Situation of Solidarity </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Daily Views Situation of Solidarity </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0704130094 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 7 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0704130094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Piotr Adamowicz and Pawel Reszka: "Solidarity </F>
Needs a Success"] 
  [Text] The Presidium of the National Committee [KK] of 
Solidarity ["S"] decided on Wednesday [6 April] in Gdansk that a 
meeting with President Lech Walesa should soon be held at the 
union's headquarters. 
  "There is a good prognosis; the president is always willing 
to discuss the problems of laborers," was the comment by 
Belweder Spokesman Andrzej Drzycimski. 
  "The fact that the president did not sign the new popiwek 
[tax on excessive wage increases] law is a step in the right 
direction and also a gesture for the union," said "S" Chairman 
Marian Krzaklewski. He expects that the president will act 
similarly when it comes to the budget law. "Then one will be 
able to evaluate the true intentions of the president," 
Krzaklewski believes. 
  Minister Mieczyslaw Wachowski has recently held several 
meetings with a member of the KK Presidium on the organization 
of a meeting between the union's leadership and the president. 
Opinions within "S" were divided. Some believe that such talks 
are necessary because the president may become an ally in the 
union-government dispute. Another group of KK Presidium 
members, including Kwasniewski, was skeptical. They believe 
that Walesa would want to take advantage of the temporary 
rapprochement with "S" for his game with the government 
coalition. 
<H5>  The Unsuccessful Strike </H5>
  One of the "S" leaders said during a serious talk that the 
present strike situation was caused by the impulsiveness of the 
chairman, who, at a 9 February demonstration, delivered an 
ultimatum on the "Pact on Enterprise" to the government (Marian 
Krzaklewski demanded that the entire packet of the "pact" laws 
be passed by 15 March). 
  "We were not prepared for strikes; however, one must defend 
a 
young chairman whose nerves turned out to be too weak," our 
informer told us. 
  Now it seems that the union once again wants to save face 
after the unsuccessful strike action, which started on 7 March. 
  One could find several examples of the union's 
inconsistency. 
  On 11 March, trains were supposed to be stopped. However, 
the 
railroad directors managed to break the strike, and the affair 
ended up in mere announcements of a strike. "S" was supposed to 
picket the Sejm from 0830 on 17 March and continue the action 
until a decision on the popiwek was made. The Sejm deputies put 
off the voting until the following day, and the picketing broke 
up after a few hours. Permanent statements about staging a 
general strike depreciated the most dangerous weapon of the 
union. 
  The "S" leaders are themselves beginning to doubt the sense 
of the strike action. Some KK members have started voicing 
opinions that the strike should be stopped. The "S" leaders 
know very well how difficult it is to stage a protest in a 
situation when enterprises are going bankrupt and even the 
lowest-paid employees are afraid of losing their jobs (last year 
Mazowsze Region chief learned about it himself--the general 
strike of the region was, generally speaking, nothing more than 
putting up banners at the enterprises). People's opinions about 
the protests are also rather unfavorable: A definite majority of 
them believe that, in the present situation, strikes will not 
yield any results. 
  "S" managed, however, to collect the strike fund. It is 
not known how large the fund is, but it is said to be a 
considerable sum. Another problem then appeared: Some want to 
use this money at once, while others would rather invest the 
money to multiply it. 
  "Then one could go to a meeting with the prime minister and 
show him how large the bank account has become. If the sum is 
enormous, it will make an impression on him. One does not have 
to stage a strike; the threat would be strong enough. However, 
this might be possible in three or four years, if we do not 
fritter this money away before that," says one of the younger KK 
members. 
<H5>  Controlled Talks </H5>
  Because it wanted to find a way out of the difficult 
situation, "S" decided on talks between the experts of "S" and 
those of the government. From the very beginning, each party 
wanted to discuss different things, and, as a result, no 
agreement was reached. However, "S" believed it was a success 
that the joint communique included the union's demands because 
the communique would be read by the Council of Ministers. 
  "Here the game is played in the foreground, and on two 
levels 
of each of them," journalists were told by "S" Spokesperson 
Piotr Zak. 
  The union activists were aware of the fact that the experts' 
talks were an element of the game in the triangle of the prime 
minister, the president, and the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD]. 
Waldemar Pawlak wanted to have an additional advantage, the 
possibility (for the SLD, the threat) of giving in to "S." 
Until 13 April, "S" is waiting for the ministers to make the 
political decision--namely, whether to accept the demands. 
However, a solution favorable to "S" is almost out of the 
question. The All-Polish Trade Unions Agreement and its partner, 
Social Democracy of the Polish Republic, would protest such a 
decision. 
<H5>  Only the President Remains </H5>
  Nevertheless, Marian Krzaklewski seems to need a success. 
The "S" congress is drawing closer. He will have to explain the 
election failure and show what he has done since last June. 
Therefore, if talks with the government prove unsuccessful, the 
unionists will have to turn to the president, who most clearly 
feels like trying to build an alliance with "S" once again. 
  A year ago, we saw a similar situation. Marian Krzaklewski 
did not want to speak with the government. Therefore, a team of 
experts was set up, but the talks did not result in anything. 
  Can the president do more than he could last year? He does 
not exert great influence over the government's decisions, and 
he is in conflict with the parliament. However, he can veto laws 
(last year, when he held talks with "S," the parliament was 
already dissolved). The budget law is waiting for his signature. 
  There is no doubt that, even though the president's veto 
would not satisfy the demands of "S," it would certainly be a 
success, something the union has not had for a long time. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7975 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kaczmarek on Progress of Privatization </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kaczmarek on Progress of Privatization </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PM0804102894 Szczecin GLOS SZCZECINSKI in Polish 31 Mar 94 p 
5 </F>

<F P=103> PM0804102894 </F>
<F P=104>  Szczecin GLOS SZCZECINSKI </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Wieslaw Kaczmarek, head of the Ministry for </F>
Ownership Transformations, by correspondent Jerzy Kocowski; 
place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Kocowski] The process of implementing the 
ownership transformations program generates much excitement 
among the public. Above all, many questions are raised about 
the pace at which it is being realized. In your opinion, are 
the charges of incorrect choice of the chosen privatization 
paths justified? Or the accusation that they are not effective 
from the economic viewpoint? 
  [Kaczmarek] It seems that the all-too-frequent debates on 
whether we could privatize faster and better are not to be taken 
seriously. This is because, in my opinion, we have reached the 
level of effectiveness and efficiency expected of the 
privatization process at the present stage of its 
implementation. Our financial results to date are illustrated 
by the budget revenue of 13.5 trillion zlotys [Z]. However, we 
must remember that it is estimated that, between the years 1994 
and 1998, the countries of the former Eastern bloc will put up 
for sale assets to the value of $190-200 billion. Consequently, 
it is hard to compare these two figures today and analyze on 
this basis whether much or little has been done in Poland so 
far. As regards the concepts on which the ownership 
transformation programs are based, I believe that the programs 
implemented so far were perfectly correct. 
  [Kocowski] Would you give a similar rating to the West 
Pomeranian firms that have already been privatized? 
  [Kaczmarek] Privatization progresses at very different rates 
in different regions of the country. In your voivodship, there 
are no strikingly exceptional projects of ownership 
transformations with, say, the involvement of foreign capital. 
But there are other excellent ideas. One of these is the 
pioneering solution adopted by the Szczecin Shipyard. This 
concept should be imitated throughout the country as an example 
of a wise contract entered into by managers and employees of an 
enterprise. Such solutions are exactly in line with my 
philosophy of viewing the ownership-transformation process. 
  [Kocowski] Nevertheless, not all firms were able to follow 
the road to privatization as easily as that. That road has 
proved far more tortuous for the Szczecin Brewery, which is 
still trying to change its ownership status. 
  [Kaczmarek] Indeed, that case has taken many months and we 
are only at the stage of the preliminary agreement. This is 
because the investor who wants to buy shares in the enterprise 
must first pay an agreed-upon sum in a down payment, within a 
specified time. If he fails to do so, we will be forced to begin 
new negotiations, which will naturally delay the completion of 
the process. 
  [Kocowski] Recent opinion polls by the Public Opinion Survey 
Center [CBOS] investigating the population's attitude toward the 
Universal Privatization Program [PPP] show that 33 percent of 
our citizens are in favor of the program. The rest are not 
interested in it. Do these results bode well for the future of 
the privatization process? 
  [Kaczmarek] Of course they do because they indicate that 9 
million adult Poles accept the idea of privatization. This is, 
in any case, a very high index of popular support for the 
government program. I do not recall a country in which this 
index is higher. Of course, we need to educate the public 
further in order to explain to the people the economic and 
financial intricacies of the program. Anything thatch is new 
and hard to understand at first glance is bound to have a 
difficult time winning the public's acceptance. 
  [Kocowski] Surely, the present situation, with a budget that 
has not yet been approved and a vacant office of the head of the 
national economy sector, cannot make it easy for you to convince 
anyone that privatization is a system superior to the present 
model of economic management. 
  [Kaczmarek] It certainly makes it much more difficult. The 
economy must have a leader--someone who will realize the program 
course mapped out by the budget policy. After all, 
privatization is not a short-term proposal. It is a concept for 
long-term economic development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7976 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Privatization of Szczecin Shipyard `Successful' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Privatization of Szczecin Shipyard `Successful' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PM0804095094 Szczecin GLOS SZCZECINSKI in Polish 31 Mar 94 
pp 1, 5 </F>

<F P=103> PM0804095094 </F>
<F P=104>  Szczecin GLOS SZCZECINSKI </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "Koc, Zar": "Minister W. Kaczmarek in Szczecin: </F>
Privatization of Shipyard a Success"] 
  [Text] "The privatization of the Szczecin Shipyard is one 
of the most successful prototype models of privatization of 
Polish enterprises and of the whole process of ownership 
transformations," Minister Wieslaw Kaczmarek said yesterday 
during a meeting with the leaders and representatives of the 
shipyard's trade unions. "Thanks to it," he added, "the shipyard 
returned to life from the condition of clinical death and 
entered a phase of development that can legitimately be the envy 
of other enterprises." 
  During yesterday's visit to Szczecin, Wieslaw Kaczmarek, 
head 
of the Ownership Transformations Ministry, met first with the 
Szczecin Voivoda and a group of people representing various 
local institutions, including the Treasury Chamber, the Economic 
Tribunal, the West Pomeranian Chamber of Industry and Commerce, 
an employers union, and the region's sugar-manufacturing plants. 
The longest amount of time was devoted to the 
sugar-manufacturing industry and the projects to create holding 
groups to bring sugar-manufacturing plants together. There is a 
proposal stipulating that such holding groups should be set up 
before this year's sugar-refining campaign--that is, by August 
at the latest. The sugar manufacturers agreed with the proposal 
and added that, while they view the questions of ownership 
transformations as important, they regard the matter of proper 
organization of the sugar market--that is, an efficient sugar 
sales system designed to protect them against mounting interest 
liabilities on the loans they had taken out--as even more 
essential to them now. 
  There was also discussion on the subject of ownership 
transformations in Szczecin Voivodship, backed up by figures and 
examples quoted to illustrate the current situation. 
  During the visit to the Szczecin Shipyard that came next on 
his agenda, the minister spoke with approval of the shipyard 
management's achievements. However, he also observed that the 
tragedy of Polish shipyards consisted in the fact that each of 
them had its own, different political sponsor. "It would be 
best if these sponsors withdrew from that particular role and 
looked at the shipyards from the perspective of economic 
interests," Minister Kaczmarek added. 
  Going back to the questions of privatization and the 
distribution of shares, the minister suggested to the trade 
union representatives that they abandon the demand that 5 
percent of shares be allocated to their unions and, instead, 
have them placed in a pension fund as long-term capital 
investment against the future pensions of employees who are 
currently working at the shipyard. 
  At the headquarters of the Board of Directors of the Port of 
Szczecin and Swinoujscie, where another press conference took 
place, the minister spoke in favor of preserving a uniform model 
for the port complex of Szczecin and Swinoujscie. He said that 
he would support this view in parliament during the coming Sejm 
debate on the maritime ports act. 
  In the afternoon, Minister W. Kaczmarek met with the 
employees of the Ownership Transformations Ministry's Szczecin 
agency, and later with the directors of three large construction 
firms: ESPEBEPE SA [joint-stock company] Holding, Mostostal, 
and SPBO Trojka. 
  Next on the minister's agenda came an open meeting with 
political activists representing the Democratic Left Alliance 
[SLD] group. During the debate, the participants voiced an 
equal number of reservations about the methods used in the 
privatization process and its social and economic effects, and 
acknowledgments of the soundness of arguments pointing to the 
evident progress in the implementation of the Polish model of 
ownership transformations. A large number of questions asked 
and points raised concerned matters extending far beyond the 
minister's brief in relation to his sector. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7977 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   50% of Conscripts Want To Avoid Service </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    50% of Conscripts Want To Avoid Service </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0604213794 Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network in 
Polish 1730 GMT 6 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0604213794 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Relayed by TV Polonia network] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Unidentified correspondent] The National 
Defense Ministry, which is beginning the spring conscription 
today, believes that more than half the conscripts want to avoid 
doing their military service. Commissions are to check about 
250,000 19-year-olds. 
  Doctors say that an increasing number of young men suffer 
from psychological disorders. [passage omitted] 
  Among those who attend the consciption commissions, less 
than 
half, about 120,000, actually reach the Army. The remainder 
manage to avoid military service thanks to postponements or on 
medical grounds. 
  [Begin Colonel Kazimierz Cieslik recording, main Military 
Medical Commission] In the past three years, personality 
disorders were the main reason for being unfit to undergo 
military service. Whereas in the 1980's this reason was recorded 
in 15 percent of cases, the figure has now risen to 27 percent. 
[end recording] 
  [Correspondent] On the list of ailments, second place 
belongs 
to eye defects, and third to bad posture and hearing problems. 
  More than half the conscripts think that their time in the 
Army is time wasted. They also fear the discipline and 
harassment from soldiers from earlier conscriptions. [passage 
omitted] 
  The majority of young men believe that the Polish Army 
should 
be a professional army. They think that those serving should be 
those who want to be in the Army and who are predisposed toward 
it. But there are not many chances of such an army being 
created in Poland. [passage omitted] 
  Just a few years ago, basic military service in Poland 
lasted 
two years; service in the Navy could be as long as three years. 
Today military service lasts 18 months. The General Staff has 
announced that, as early as next year, it might be possible to 
shorten it to 12 months. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7978 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Moravcik Contrasts New Cabinet With Meciar's </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Moravcik Contrasts New Cabinet With Meciar's </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704174394 Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak 5 Apr 94 p 
12 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704174394 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of interview with Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik </F>
by an unidentified SLOBODNY PIATOK correspondent; place and date 
not given: "Foundations of Long-Term Development; From an 
Interview on the Goals of Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik's 
Government"--reprinted from SLOBODNY PIATOK No. 13] 
  [Text] On what will you place further emphasis of 
continuity, SLOBODNY PIATOK No. 13 asked Prime Minister Jozef 
Moravcik. [sentence as published] 
  [Moravcik] On integration. We want to eliminate our lag 
within the framework of the Visegrad Four group, especially in 
the sphere of security systems, where we have been evidently 
assigned the last rank of late or even a place outside the group. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] What course do you intend to pursue in the 
economy? 
  [Moravcik] The previous government can be reproached for 
lack of concept. And, even when certain concepts were approved, 
poor emphasis was placed on their implementation. The 
government was improvising, more or less. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] Do you think that in the six months the 
interim government has at its disposal you will manage to be 
more consistent? 
  [Moravcik] We want to set a clear program and clear targets 
and implement them consistently. We realize that we will not be 
able to fulfill any major program in this brief period, but we 
want to lay the foundations for long-term development. We 
reckon that we have some chances of continuing after the 
elections. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] Does this mean that the time frame of your 
policy will be limited by the election date? 
  [Moravcik] No. We want to look further ahead, even though, 
after the elections, our policy might be represented by 
different people than today. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] In which regard would you not want to 
follow in the footsteps of the previous government? 
  [Moravcik] In its improvisation. Even though it is possible 
to resolve some burning problem by this method, the 
extinguishing of fire in one place, without precise targeting, 
can cause a fire elsewhere, which could lead society into a 
state of permanent conflict. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] How will the approach of Moravcik's 
government to privatization differ from that of Meciar's 
government? 
  [Moravcik] By the depoliticization of privatization. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] What guarantees do you offer that this 
depoliticization will be real? 
  [Moravcik] Control by parliament and more clarity of the 
privatization process. It is high time for the principle of 
professionalism to assert itself at the ministries. We are not 
going to make any changes that would violate this principle. 
However, some changes are inevitable in the interest of a good 
operation of state administration. 
  [SLOBODNY PIATOK] Compromise was characteristic of the 
opposition's joint course of action against someone. Will it 
last until the elections? In this period, it will be necessary 
to address a number of practical and urgent social problems, on 
which the Christian Democratic Movement and the Party of the 
Democratic Left, for example, can have different opinions. 
  [Moravcik] What is involved is a permanent process of 
achieving and renewing consensus? The mechanism is laid down in 
the coalition agreement. What determined the formation of the 
current government coalition were discussions on practical 
problems, on the solution to which we had agreed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7979 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Meciar: Predicting Shape of HZDS `Premature' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Meciar: Predicting Shape of HZDS `Premature' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804085694 Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak 30 Mar 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804085694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava REPUBLIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpt" of interview with Vladimir Meciar, chairman of </F>
the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, by Frantisek Melis; 
place and date not given: "I Will Stay Until the 
Elections"--reprinted from 29 March issue of Bratislava PRACA in 
Slovak] 
  [Text] [Melis] At its assembly in Trnava a year ago, the 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] adopted a resolution 
on its transformation from a movement into a party. This 
resolution has not been fulfilled, however, and, even after its 
Presov assembly [on 26-27 March], the HZDS remains a 
broad-spectrum movement. 
  [Meciar] The discussion about the shape the movement should 
take is a permanent one. Half of our members and functionaries 
are in favor of its transformation into a party and the others 
are opposed. They say that they have never been, and will never 
be, members of any party. It is premature to say how the HZDS 
will evolve because this is also connected with the support of 
the changing social base of society and the profile the other 
parties will assume. Everything will become more legible after 
the elections. We are holding on to the pragmatic center and 
will surely eventually shift somewhere, even though the 
evolution on the European political scene is taking another 
direction, away from the traditional right-center-left division. 
  [Melis] Judging according to the present [polls on party] 
preferences, it can be assumed that you will score another 
electoral victory--one, however, that need not be as striking as 
that of 1992. The question therefore arises whether you will be 
able to set up a new government should the president entrust you 
with its formation, as this should be a broad-coalition 
government. 
  [Meciar] Forecasting the outcome of the elections is 
premature because it can be influenced by a number of factors. 
The present preferences represent a good foundation for 
success, but we shall seek the broadest possible support. Two 
sorts of decisions will have to be made after the elections: 
what the citizen will say and whom I will accept and who will 
accept me. There is no point in sitting in the government at 
any price and implementing someone else's program. I do not 
expect many people to stay away from the polls, nor do I expect 
the miniparties to succeed. Those who let themselves be 
intoxicated by the vision of getting into the government fast 
miscalculated. 
  [Melis] The government parties want to offer you one seat 
each in the leadership of the Supreme Inspection Office [NKU], 
in the National Property Fund [FNM] Presidium, and in the FNM 
Supervisory Board. Will you accept these offers? 
  [Meciar] They would be well advised not to corrupt us with 
offers of seats in the NKU leadership because we will not 
recognize the NKU. The preceding leadership was recalled in 
contravention of the Constitution. After all, the National 
Council cannot, by means of a resolution, violate the 
Constitution and the laws of this state that it had itself 
passed. We cannot provide legitimacy to breach the 
Constitution. Let them lie on the shameful bed they made for 
themselves. Regarding the FNM bodies, we have proposed one 
candidate for each of them. We reserve the right to our own 
viewpoint when it comes to approving the FNM Presidium. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7980 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Duray Accused of Dividing Ethnic Hungarians </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Duray Accused of Dividing Ethnic Hungarians </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804082694 Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 5 Apr 94 pp 1, 12 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804082694 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "zr": "Loyalty Verging on Servility; Miklos </F>
Duray Interferes in Hungarian Election Campaign"] 
  [Text] Miklos Duray, chairman of the Egyutteles 
(Coexistence) movement, has recently aroused controversy in 
Hungary and among ethnic Hungarians in Slovakia. Istvan 
Szent-Ivanyi, foreign policy spokesman of the Alliance of Free 
Democrats, currently the largest opposition party in Hungary, 
accused Duray of interfering in the Hungarian election campaign. 
  It is evident, according to the spokesman, that Duray played 
a part in the cancellation of an invitation for Gabor Kuncze, 
the Free Democrats' (Liberals') candidate for prime minister, by 
the mayors of four communities in southern Slovakia. Gabor 
Kuncze was supposed to attend the festivities marking 15 March, 
the day of the memorable revolution of 1848, which is Hungarian 
national day. Duray denies, however, that he was behind the 
cancellation of this invitation and told a correspondent of the 
[Hungarian-language] Bratislava daily UJ SZO: "Someone wanted to 
use this against me politically." 
  Tension was to be felt already when Duray spoke out against 
the Hungarian Socialist Party on Budapest television, and it 
escalated after a statement in which Duray claimed that, in the 
coming May parliamentary elections, 60-70 percent of Hungarians 
in Slovakia would vote for the leading party of the present 
government coalition, the Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF], if 
they could vote. 
  UJ SZO commentator Mihaly Toth protested against this 
statement late last week when he wrote, among other things: "We 
must understand this statement to mean that, in the opinion of 
Hungarians in Slovakia, an accommodating attitude (in policy 
toward neighbors--editor's note), which was repeatedly 
emphasized by the Hungarian liberal parties in the course of the 
preceding year and which has also been assimilated by the 
Hungarian Socialist Party, is actually misguided because it does 
not tally with the MDF foreign policy concept. The main 
difference between the "neighborly policy" of the MDF, on the 
one hand, and that of the Hungarian Liberals or Socialists, on 
the other, is that, whereas the present policymakers were not 
able to take even one step toward Hungarian-Slovak 
rapprochement, the present opposition parties have indicated 
that, if they manage to get into the government, they are ready 
to conclude a treaty on the absolute unchangeability of 
Hungarian-Slovak borders in exchange for guarantees of ethnic 
Hungarians' rights in Slovakia. I suppose that I am not 
exaggerating when I contend that, in this matter (which is of 
the greatest relevance to us), at least 70 percent of Hungarians 
in Slovakia agree with the Liberals or the Socialists in 
Hungary." 
  The commentator writes that Duray's loyalty to the MDF is 
comprehensible from an individual and narrowly conceived party 
viewpoint--"this loyalty has ideological and material roots." 
However, this loyalty, which almost "verges on servility," has a 
clearly harmful influence on the effectiveness of ethnic 
Hungarians' policy in Slovakia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7981 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Implications of Referendum Law Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Implications of Referendum Law Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0203A Bratislava NOVE SLOVO BEZ RESPEKTU in Slovak 14 
Mar 94 p 7 </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0203A </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava NOVE SLOVO BEZ RESPEKTU </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ladislav Orosz: "Referendum Controversy"] </F>
  [Text] In connection with the drive to collect signatures 
for a petition calling for a referendum, the greatest 
controversy is engendered by the second question, which concerns 
the fate of the electoral mandate of those deputies who left the 
ranks of the political parties on whose ticket they ran in the 
elections. Views have been expressed that this question is 
unconstitutional and cannot be the subject of the referendum. 
Many are asking what the position of the president of the Slovak 
Republic [SR] is in this respect: Can he refuse to hold a 
referendum on this issue? 
  In searching for an answer to this question, we come up 
against the fact that the pertinent provisions of the SR 
Constitution are ambiguous and even contradictory. According to 
Article 93, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution, "basic rights and 
freedoms, taxes, levies, and the state budget cannot be the 
subject of a referendum." It would follow from the quoted phrase 
that a referendum cannot be held on these questions. On the 
other hand, the text of Article 95 of the Constitution is 
formulated in such a way that it makes it incumbent on the SR 
president to call a referendum if a petition containing the 
signatures of at least 350,000 citizens requests it. Therefore, 
if the SR president were not to call a referendum, he could be 
accused of violating the Constitution, specifically its Article 
95. 
  What remains unanswered is who will judge whether the 
question proposed for the referendum cannot be the subject of 
the referendum according to Article 93, Paragraph 3 of the 
Constitution. The conception of the Constitution implies that 
the instrument should be the SR Constitutional Court as the 
independent judicial institution for the protection of 
constitutionality. The problem lies in the fact that the 
Constitution does not specifically entrust the determination of 
these questions to the jurisdiction of the SR Constitutional 
Court. The authority of the SR Constitutional Court to give an 
opinion on the problem under discussion can be indirectly 
implied from Article 128, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution: "The 
Constitutional Court interprets constitutional laws when there 
is a controversy. The conditions will be determined by law." 
  The conditions referred to in the quoted provision of the 
Constitution are set down in Law No. 38/1993 of the SR National 
Council on the organization of the SR Constitutional Court, 
proceedings before it, and the standing of its judges in 
Sections 45 to 47. Accordingly, the Constitutional Court 
interprets the constitutional laws only when a controversy 
arises about their interpretation between the proposer (it could 
even be the president) and some state agency. From what is 
mentioned above, it appears that, under the existing laws, the 
president cannot, in the case of the planned referendum, turn to 
the Constitutional Court for an interpretation before the 
referendum is announced because there is no controversy with a 
state agency. The possibility of using such an approach could be 
provided to him only by an amendment of the mentioned law. 
  The president could have some possibility of turning to the 
Constitutional Court under the existing law only after the 
referendum has taken place. If the Constitutional Court arrives 
at the opinion that one of the questions asked in the referendum 
could not have been the subject of the referendum as determined 
in Article 93, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution, it could, in my 
opinion, declare such a referendum invalid. But the 
Constitutional Court would obviously make such a ruling in an 
extremely tense political situation and in a state of 
constitutional turmoil, which the results of the referendum 
could create in view of the conflicting nature of the several 
provisions of the Constitution in respect to the question 
concerning the fate of the deputies' electoral mandates. 
  Under such circumstances, before announcing the referendum, 
it would be more appropriate to create a way, through 
legislative means, for the Constitutional Court to determine the 
constitutionality of the planned referendum, an additional 
reason being the initial very negative responses from abroad. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7982 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Ministry Secretary Views Tasks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Ministry Secretary Views Tasks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804084294 Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 31 Mar 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804084294 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Ministry Secretary Andrej Sabol by </F>
Imrich Modrocky; place and date not given: "To Change the Style 
of Work"] 
  [Text] The Slovak public has favorably accepted the 
appointment of Major General Engineer Andrej Sabol as Slovak 
Defense Ministry secretary. On this occasion, we asked for an 
interview with him. In the beginning, we were interested in who 
had proposed him for this post and why he had accepted it. 
  [Sabol] I believe that it is not important to know who 
proposed me for this position. They are people who considered 
this step thoroughly. Anyway, this is the way it was announced. 
My reaction is very simple. I do not want to be a member of 
any political party. Slovakia's interests are, and will be, the 
only politics I will be engaged in. 
  [Modrocky] What has your predecessor left for you, and what 
are your work priorities? 
  [Sabol] Your question is very suggestive, but my answer will 
be very simple. In the Army, we have to transform our 
individualist method of control into a systemic method of 
administration. Our priorities are to trust the people and to 
give them appropriate powers. On the other hand, we have to 
demand an energetic and active fulfillment of all of the tasks, 
including those that have been neglected in the past few months. 
  [Modrocky] The appointment of a new manager is often linked 
to personnel changes. Are you going to replace some people? 
What qualities should your colleagues have? 
  [Sabol] We must judge people not according to how others 
look at them but according to their work capabilities. I have a 
simple requirement. They must be active collaborators, full of 
initiative, who do not have to be "pushed to work" and who come 
up with their own ideas and proposals for solving problems that 
arise. If this is not the case, they have to realize that, as 
long as they, in their position, are unable to contribute to the 
solution of their tasks, they have to search for a job where 
they could assert themselves. 
  [Modrocky] New Slovak Defense Minister Pavol Kanis spoke 
about a certain tension between the Slovak Republic's Defense 
Ministry and the Slovak Republic's Army Command. It will 
certainly be in your interests to change this situation. 
  [Sabol] I have to say that we, Mr. Kanis and I, are 
extremely interested in eliminating misunderstandings and 
tensions that really have existed between Bratislava and Trencin 
[seat of Army Command]. We want to clearly define the roles of 
the Slovak Defense Ministry and the Army Command. One is a 
political and the other a military body. We are not going to 
interfere in one another's jurisdiction. On the contrary, we 
will demand responsible and perfect fulfillment of the tasks. 
We will introduce systemic administration. Higher levels of 
administration will provide methodical help to lower levels. 
Moreover, lower levels of administration will be given more 
jurisdiction and will be raised to higher levels. 
  [Modrocky] What should be the optimal relations between the 
minister, who is a politician, and the state secretary, who is a 
soldier? 
  [Sabol] This problem is a very easy one. I am convinced 
that it is all right if the defense minister is a civilian, with 
clear military and political concepts. A soldier in the 
position of state secretary is a plus in that he is able to 
formulate essential principles regarding the development of the 
Army and its training, because he is a professional, and to help 
implement structural changes within the Army. I believe that, 
if the roles of the two men are understood in that way, their 
roles will become complementary, which will contribute to the 
solution of the problems that still have not been sorted out in 
the Army. 
  [Modrocky] It is a known fact that you were involved in the 
arms industry. Will you continue to be active in that sphere? 
  [Sabol] The Slovak economy certainly has to deal with 
problems linked to the production of arms systems and military 
technology. This is what Slovakia has inherited. In the world, 
this problem is quite clear-cut. On the other hand, it is quite 
clear that our arms production has to meet certain demands. It 
is true that the Slovak Republic Army is only a very small 
customer for the advanced arms industry in Slovakia. If the 
Army places orders for weapon systems and military technology 
only from time to time, we should not expect that the industry 
would produce them right away. This is why we have to harmonize 
and organize, as they do in advanced democratic countries, our 
exports and the innovation of technology in such a way as to 
allow the Army's weapons to be modernized and replaced in case 
of need. I also want to say that it is not possible for the 
Slovak arms industry to produce weapons on its previous scale. 
Today, we have to sort out two problems: first, the production 
of new systems after they are brought to a certain level of 
modernization, and second, the modernization of the systems that 
have already been manufactured in quite large amounts. They are 
scattered all over the world and are due to be modernized. Arms 
production has been stopped in Slovakia, but that has not 
stopped the military conflicts in the world, of course. We have 
discontinued production, but others have become richer as a 
consequence. I do not believe that Slovakia should surpass the 
world's framework and standards. Slovakia must have its place 
in the sun as regards this matter. We do not want more than we 
are entitled to. We want this society, Europe, and the entire 
world to conduct a healthy life. 
  [Modrocky] In your view, what do the Defense Ministry and 
the Army Command need at present? 
  [Sabol] The ministry has to change the style of its work. 
It must fulfill its legal obligations and meet the standards. 
The Army Command has to take over the jurisdiction of such a 
large body as the General Staff. I have to say that we do not 
have enough skilled experts. This means that we have to fulfill 
our tasks while simultaneously educating our people. 
  [Modrocky] The Army lacks important laws. Do you expect 
that, in your position of state secretary, you will be able to 
repair this flaw? 
  [Sabol] Yes. We are decided, the defense minister and I, to 
do our best for the laws to pass so that we might live in a 
law-abiding state that respects legal standards. Laws are very 
much needed and are important for the further development of the 
Army. This development will depend on the economy and foreign 
policy and on our image in Europe. We are prepared to do all we 
can to make the Army really respect all the laws that apply to 
it. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7983 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tension Noted Between Defense Ministry, Army </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tension Noted Between Defense Ministry, Army </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704174994 Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak 2 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704174994 </F>
<F P=104>  Bratislava PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Slovak </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [TA SR report: "The Cause of Tense Relations; Partnership </F>
for Peace--Means to NATO Membership"] 
  [Text] Trencin--On Thursday [31 March], Pavol Kanis, 
minister of defense of the Slovak Republic, met in Trencin with 
functionaries and civilian employees of the Army Command of the 
Slovak Republic. In his address he stated, among other things, 
that we understand Partnership for Peace as a means toward NATO 
membership. 
  Speaking about the tasks of the Army of the Slovak Republic 
in the coming period, Kanis described as one of the most 
important the preparation of an optimal variant of the Army's 
transformation into new organizational structures while abiding 
by the limits concerning troop numbers and weapon systems set by 
the Vienna and Paris agreements. 
  At a news conference following the meeting with 
functionaries 
and civilian employees of the Army Command of the Slovak 
Republic in Trencin, Kanis analyzed the causes of the tense 
relations between the Ministry of Defense of the Slovak Republic 
and the Army Command of the Slovak Republic. One of the causes, 
in his opinion, was that, in the process of division of the 
former federal Army and the establishment of an independent Army 
of the Slovak Republic, the Army Command was set up first and 
the Ministry of Defense only later. In his opinion, this has 
caused problems in the search for the optimal structure of 
relations and powers between the two institutions. Specific 
problems of this relationship rested, according to Pavol Kanis, 
also in the fact that the minister of defense was a soldier. 
  Dealing with the reduction of basic military service to 12 
months, Lieutenant General Julius Humaj, commander of the Army 
of the Slovak Republic, stated, among other things, that this 
period is sufficient for the military training of rank-and-file 
soldiers but not for NCO's. Their specialized training has been 
reduced from six to three months, which is generally considered 
insufficient. The Army wants to address this problem by means 
of the gradual professionalization of some NCO's, as is common 
in NATO armies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7984 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   _O_Study Assesses State of Economy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    _O_Study Assesses State of Economy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P20579A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20579A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
CSO 

    [Editorial Report] In a study prepared at the request of 
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, a team of 
economists from a leading Slovak economic institute has 
concluded that, in 1993, the Slovak economy was strongly 
affected by the breakup of Czechoslovakia and the subsequent 
currency division, by extensive tax reforms, and by the 
recession in developed economies, especially in West Europe. The 
study by the Bratislava-based SAV Economic Institute was 
reported in the 28 February issue of the Prague daily 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY. 
<H5>  GDP Decline Slows </H5>
  The SAV Institute economists noted that the decline in 
productivity moderated only slightly from the first-quarter 
drop. However, compared to 1992, when the GDP dropped by 7 
percent, the estimated 1993 GDP decline was only 3.7 percent, 
and the institute expects improved performance in 1994. The 
decline in industrial production was 17.1 percent in constant 
prices, and exports of industrial goods remained relatively 
high. Reduced production was only partially reflected in 
unemployment but caused about an 8-percent decline in overall 
labor productivity, in contrast to 1992, when it was almost 
constant. 
  Developments in the construction sector were unfavorable. 
The 
study attributes at least 25 percent of the decline in the 
construction industry to the Slovak recession and concludes that 
it will only be possible to use the excess capacity abroad. 
Structural changes in the industry are reportedly proceeding 
rapidly. Up to 50.9 percent of construction-material production 
came from private or nongovernmental businesses. Agricultural 
production declined by 6-7 percent in 1993, about half the rate 
of 1992. Because of significant price increases, the 
agricultural economy has actually improved. 
<H5>  Inflation, Wages </H5>
  On the positive side, the study points out that, in spite of 
numerous problems, Slovakia remained part of a small group of 
transforming countries with relatively low inflation, with 
consumer prices increasing by only 15.9 percent in the first 11 
months of 1993. Continued nominal wage raises increased labor 
costs expressed in Slovak korunas (Sk), but the devaluation of 
10 July 1993 reduced such costs in dollars. 
<H5>  Unemployment </H5>
  The labor market situation was influenced by the domestic 
recession and somewhat exacerbated by the effects of recessions 
in Germany and Austria. The rate of unemployment increased from 
10.4 percent at the end of 1992 to 14.4 percent by the end of 
1993. (The study, however, also points out that this is only the 
statistical unemployment rate; hidden unemployment, especially 
in the nationalized and privatizing industries, accounts for an 
additional unrecorded number of unemployed.) During the year, 
the number of industrial workers declined by 11 percent and 
construction workers by 16 percent. Trade-sector employment, 
however, increased by 22 percent, and the number of people 
employed by the private sector as a whole increased by 49 
percent. 
<H5>  Foreign Trade </H5>
  Initial estimates of foreign trade volume in 1993 indicate a 
continued decline, especially in trade with the Czech Republic. 
Compared to 1992, imports from the Czech Republic dropped by 
approximately 38 percent, while exports fell by approximately 24 
percent, leading to a rough overall balance of trade between the 
two countries. Trade with other countries showed a relatively 
small decline. The trade deficit with countries other than the 
Czech Republic increased from Sk2 billion korunas in 1992 to 
approximately Sk17.5 billion in 1993. 
<H5>  Budget Deficit </H5>
  The budget approved for 1993 was balanced. However, because 
some of the macroeconomic assumptions on which it was based 
proved to be wrong, the preliminary review of the budget 
indicates a deficit of Sk22.6 billion. Net Slovak Government 
indebtedness reached approximately Sk61 billion in 1993. 
<H5>  Outlook for 1994 </H5>
  In assessing the prospects of the Slovak economy for 1994, 
the SAV Institute economists point out that the ongoing 
transformation process will continue to have a major impact and 
will make accurate forecasts difficult. Nevertheless, their 
evaluation of general conditions leads them to believe that 
economic performance in 1994 will be better than that of 1993. 
  The SAV Institute study predicts an overall 14-15 percent 
increase in consumer prices in 1994. It qualifies its inflation 
forecast with the proviso that stagnant or very slowly improving 
labor productivity, combined with low inflation rates in Western 
countries, could weaken the Slovak koruna, leading to further 
devaluation. A policy to counteract these pressures has not yet 
been developed. Devaluation could lead to additional consumer 
price increases of 2-3 percent, resulting in a consumer price 
increase of 16-18 percent. 
  The SAV Institute study warns that liquidation of 
unprofitable business operations could have an additional 
negative effect on economic performance. Elimination of all 
highly unprofitable companies could cause a 1-percent drop in 
the GDP. A growth in private enterprise could possibly negate 
this effect, provided it continues at least at the 1993 levels. 
The SAV Institute economists also expect that foreign trade will 
be negatively influenced by the economic recession in much of 
the rest of the world. With the exception of several large 
investments in energy and communications, foreign investors are 
expected to remain rather conservative. On this basis, the 1994 
GDP is expected to range from a negative 1.5 to a positive l 
percent. Unemployment is expected to remain in the 
17-to-18-percent range. 
  In the opinion of the study's authors, relatively positive 
economic performance will be accompanied by relatively high 
levels of inflation and a deficit in the range of 5.2-5.9 
percent of the GDP. These factors could make tighter monetary 
policy necessary, leading to a moderate decline in living 
standards. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7985 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Protocol on Cooperation With Russia Signed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Protocol on Cooperation With Russia Signed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704091794 Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA in Macedonian 6 Apr 94 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704091794 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Macedonian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Mirce Adamcevski: "A Protocol on Cooperation </F>
Signed"] 
  [Text] Moscow, 5 April -- In Moscow today, Victor Gaber, 
under secretary of the Foreign Ministry of the Republic of 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia], and 
Vitaliy Churkin, deputy foreign minister of the Russian 
Federation, signed a protocol on cooperation between the two 
ministries. 
  Among other things, the protocol will promote contacts and 
consultations between the two ministries in relation to the 
situations and perspectives in bilateral relations. The 
protocol establishes that the ministries will also hold 
consultations within the international organizations and forums 
on the current international questions of mutual interest. This 
document gives the possibility for an exchange of experts, 
organization of seminars, and joint researches, assistance in 
the cooperation between the archive services of the two 
countries, and so on. 
  Macedonia and Russia agreed that the problems in the Balkans 
should be overcome only through negotiations. These should also 
provide the framework for the solution of the dispute between 
Macedonia and Greece. This was emphasized today in the 
discussions between the delegations of the Macedonian Foreign 
Ministry and the Russian Federation Foreign Ministry. The 
delegations were headed by Victor Gaber, under secretary in the 
Macedonian Foreign Ministry, and Vitaliy Churkin, deputy foreign 
minister of the Russian Federation. 
  In the discussions the Macedonian delegation pointed out 
that 
neither threats, preconditions, nor any kind of restriction can 
serve as a basis for negotiations, and it welcomed Russia's 
prompt efforts to create a suitable climate for the solution of 
the open questions in the region. 
  When asked about the meeting of the two delegations and 
about 
Russia's silence in relation to the Greek blockade, Vitaliy 
Churkin stated the following: "We discussed the Balkans, our 
bilateral relations, and what more we could do for their 
promotion. We also discussed the problems you asked about. We 
must underline that we very actively observe everything that 
takes place, and not only observe, but also act the way I think 
is fair and efficient in the given situation." 
  Political consultations between the two delegations on 
bilateral relations were also viewed, and were evaluated as very 
good. In so doing, latent possibilities were emphasized, 
particularly those on the economic and cultural plane, arising 
from the transitional period that both countries are in, as well 
as the promotion of commercial and economic relations on the 
level of the needs and possibilities of both countries. Plans 
were also made to regulate relations by reviewing the current 
ones and then signing new interstate agreements in the economic, 
health, social, and other fields of cooperation. 
  Moreover, last night in the Macedonian Embassy in Moscow, 
Victor Gaber met a group of Macedonian businessmen living and 
working in Russia. On that occasion they exchanged opinions on 
the present situation in the Republic of Macedonia and the 
problems facing the Macedonians working in Russia. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7986 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary Questions U.S. Policy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Commentary Questions U.S. Policy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804070894 Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA in Macedonian 7 Apr 94 p 
2 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804070894 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Macedonian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by S. Jovanovska: "Snail-Like Steps of the White </F>
House"] 
  [Text] "Do we have diplomatic relations with Macedonia 
[The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] or not?" 
"Who is the U.S. secretary of state, Stephanopoulos or 
Christopher?" "Who is shaping U.S. policy toward this 
republic?" "Whose interests is President Clinton protecting?" 
These are almost unavoidable questions at present briefings in 
the State Department, threatening to make our small country a 
big subject for discussion. The whole U.S. press has numbered 
the "Macedonian question" as one of the weak points of President 
Clinton, even the pro-Democratic THE WASHINGTON POST, which 
could not keep quiet about the inexplicable -- and by U.S. 
standards timid -- attitude of the leader of a superpower, who 
had the courage to threaten China, North Korea, Japan, and the 
European Community, while he always has to feel the "pulse" of 
the Greek lobby whenever Macedonia is mentioned! 
  Until what point will the establishment of diplomatic 
relations between Macedonia and the United States go at a 
"snail's pace" and why did the United States allow itself to be 
at the tail end of all those who long ago normalized their 
relations with this state? These are dilemmas in which our 
republic is most interested, particularly after the appointment 
two days ago of Victor Comras as chief of the U.S. liaison 
office, because whichever way we try to understand and interpret 
it, it still is not an embassy, and it still is not a diplomatic 
penetration. Although it is difficult to find answers from this 
distance, judging by what various official and non-official 
sources say, there is a conflict of interests (political) 
between the State Department and the White House, due to which, 
as Comras himself stated, the decision on full diplomatic 
relations is yet to come. 
  In order to confirm this claim, it is worthwhile making a 
small recapitulation. Namely, as a result of synchronized 
recognition by the EEC countries and of stronger pressures by 
the State Department for recognition and the establishment of 
diplomatic relations with Macedonia, on 9 February the White 
House announced its decision to approach this action, naming a 
number of conditions which were positively met in President Kiro 
Gligorov's reply. Soon Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
conveyed an unequivocal message saying that "the United States 
is interested in maintaining the integrity and stability of 
Macedonia," explicitly stating that any possible attempts at its 
destabilization would be met with U.S. countermeasures. In the 
meantime, Victor Comras was appointed future ambassador to 
Macedonia. However, nobody knew until yesterday when he would 
come, and on what position. After all, it seems that the March 
meeting with the Greek priests and influential Greek Americans, 
one of whom is a big financier of the Democratic Party and the 
other an adviser of the President himself, who is doing his best 
to "conceal the traces" of the "Whitewater" affair, was fatal. 
The outcome is known -- as Senator Frank McKloskey stated 
publicly, and the White House implemented it tactfully, the 
United States froze the establishment of diplomatic relations 
with Macedonia, appointing Matthew Niemitz as special envoy, who 
was designated to find a solution for the dispute with Greece, 
something that cannot be solved for two whole years. 
  Apparently, the new formula of Clinton and Stephanopoulos is 
to link the establishment of diplomatic relations with the 
negotiations -- with the aim of keeping the question permanently 
open, and to avoid the inconvenient pressures from the one or 
the other side, even from the inside, from the State Department, 
which is still on the "Macedonian line," assessing the 
prolongation as a great danger for the stability of the region. 
However, despite the great influence of the Greek lobby 
(particularly its money and votes), it is difficult to 
understand that a destructive policy, as is the Greek in this 
case, can deserve the support of a country which is pledging for 
democracy and peace, which is subordinating its foreign policy 
to the state, national, and generally accepted interests. 
Moreover, all the U.S. efforts to protect Macedonia from the 
spreading war are undermined by Greece with its embargo and 
other actions. 
  The visit of Shalikashvili to Macedonia was obviously the 
axis of the "equilibrium" which should keep balance between the 
non- establishment of diplomatic relations and the determination 
to maintain the statehood of Macedonia, and at the same time it 
represents an indirect reply to the revealed Greek plans for the 
creation of a security zone in Macedonia under some more 
convenient circumstances. However, Macedonia is no more 
satisfied with indirect support and "slow recognition," 
especially because it is evident that the "slow pace" is 
misinterpreted and misused, turned back on the United States as 
a boomerang, if it really means what it publicly states and if 
there are no other reasons for the tactics. 
  For now, the arguments that President Clinton is making 
cautious diplomatic moves with the aim of maintaining peace are 
very strong, as well as that U.S.-Macedonian relations are 
moving upwards, which becomes more evident if we remember his 
firm stance when he entered the White House more than a year 
ago. In a way, the statement of spokesman McCurry is another 
confirmation, according to whom "a number of steps should be 
taken" -- not stating exactly until when and how many. 
Nonetheless, the disposition in the United States and the 
growing critics of Clinton's "Macedonian policy" can speed the 
pace, because with such an internal conflict, with such critics 
in the press, and with such a freedom-loving public opinion, it 
is becoming hard to endure. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7987 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   UN Troops Crossed Yugoslav Border `by Mistake' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    UN Troops Crossed Yugoslav Border `by Mistake' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704111894 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0941 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704111894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Skopje, 7 Apr (TANJUG) -- The UN Protection Forces 
[UNPROFOR] command in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] announced today that three UNPROFOR soldiers 
detained by the Yugoslav Army on Monday entered Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia territory by mistake. 
  A statement said the UNPROFOR members "thought they were on 
Macedonian territory" and were taken to the Yugoslav border 
watchtower of Slavujevac "before they realized they were on FRY 
[Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] territory." 
  The statement says the blue helmets were allowed to return 
to 
Macedonia on the same day after several hours of questioning. 
  UNPROFOR sees this incident as a "minor" one, and believes 
that its members crossed into Yugoslav territory because of "the 
confusion over the exact location of the border line." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7988 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Crvenkovski Views Problems in Economy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Crvenkovski Views Problems in Economy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604164894 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 6 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0604164894 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Crvenkovski Meets With Businessmen"] </F>
  [Text] Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] businessmen met with Prime Minister 
Crvenkovski in the Chamber of Commerce yesterday. They 
discussed the situation and problems in the economy and the 
enforcing of the government stabilization program in the first 
three months of the year. They said the situation in the 
economy was extremely difficult. Some firms' reproduction 
processes are highly endangered by financial instability. The 
total production is on a decrease due to high working 
expenditure and foreign blockade. The decrease is even up to 40 
percent in some companies. All this is accompanied with big 
losses, debts, no current reproduction, considerable unpaid sums 
by foreign firm, restrictive monetary and interest rate 
policies, public expenditure, and absence of foreign 
investments. The situation is most difficult in agriculture, 
the metallurgy, production of the means of transportation, the 
textile industry, construction, and trade. 
  Prime Minister Crvenkovski agreed the situation is alarming 
and pointed out government's readiness to react daily to it, but 
said long-term solutions must be sought. Macedonia must produce 
high-quality products and find markets for their distribution, 
Crvenkovski said. 
  As for the reconstruction of 25 Macedonian firms, Minister 
Jovan Andov said the World Bank would aid only those with 
programs which guarantee the firms would work effectively in a 
market economy after the reconstruction. 
  Chamber President Dusan Petreski said Macedonia still has no 
market economy and businessmen must sit down and work out a way 
out, instead of only criticizing. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7989 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Factors in Deteriorating Economy Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Factors in Deteriorating Economy Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804094994 Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA in Macedonian 7 Apr 94 p 
3 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804094994 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje NOVA MAKEDONIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Macedonian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Cvetkovska: "Losses Amounting to 11.7 Billion </F>
Denars"] 
  [Text] What businessmen constantly warned about last year, 
and what they constantly feared, became true in practice. 
Taking into account the latest indicators about the financial 
outcome of last year's business, expressed in the final economic 
assessment and summed up in the Balance of Payments Department, 
last year there was a real economic debacle. 
  With the continuing fall in industrial production increasing 
to 13.9 percent last year, all other financial indicators 
deteriorated. Losses in the economy rapidly increased nine times 
over, compared to the slowed-down increase in gross profit of 
approximately 2.5 times. Total expenditures last year exceeded 
the total income realized by companies by 4.5 percent, because 
of the high interest rates paid to banks, and the high costs 
involved in maintaining normal production. Moreover, the 
liquidity problem greatly deteriorated, because it was unable to 
obtain payment for one-third of what it produced and sold. Under 
such working circumstances, burdened by the present blockades to 
the north and south, increased transport costs for alternative 
transit, lost markets, and the minimum use of capacities, the 
economy in 1993 succeeded in realizing a total income of 185.8 
billion denars. Nevertheless, expenditures were higher than 
income, amounting to 194.1 billion denars. Of that, the minimum 
gross profit was 2.5 billion denars, just 1 percent of the total 
income. That is why last year's loss beat the record, and at 
11.7 billion denars, it also exceeded gross profit by some 9 
billion denars. 
<H5>  The Debts Rise </H5>
  Negative tendencies are also evident in the income share, in 
that the economy provides less money for economic needs, for 
what could revive production, particularly for investment. 
Nevertheless, money for salaries is given away in abundance. 
The state economy is more pressed by the short-term and 
long-term loans, its debts are constantly rising, and according 
to some Chamber of Commerce assessments the economy's debts 
reached 1.75 billion denars at the end of last year, with a 
rising trend, thus they reached 2.2 billion denars in January 
and February this year. 
  Although the companies' final accounts indicated that last 
year, compared to the year before, they succeeded in increasing 
total income to 4.4 percent, their expenditures also rose 4.6 
percent, which was more than the realized income. Regarding the 
structure of total income in the economy, it came mainly from 
the sale of products, goods, and services (on that basis in 14 
percent of cases income was less than in 1992), and what they 
succeeded in "getting" was mainly from financing, that is, 
interest rates and positive exchange rates. However, not even 
that income was sufficient to cover expenses, and one-third of 
the companies had greater expenses of 11.6 billion denars, while 
the other two-thirds had only 3.3 billion denars greater income. 
Thus, the overall account of the economy is for 8.3 billion 
denars deficit. Several vital economic branches had greater 
expenses than income, for instance metallurgy, the iron 
industry, and the textile industry, as well as trade. There are 
very symptomatic indications in the expenditure structures, that 
is, the least is spent on materials, energy, spare parts, and 
small accessories that relate directly to the production 
process, thus the previous expenses of one-fifth were reduced to 
only 19 percent. Moreover, the private and social sectors in 
industry have greater orientation to trade, as something that 
pays more at this moment. While production expenses decrease, 
the non- material expenses rise, for instance salaries and 
interest rates, as well as extraordinary expenses. The bank 
interest rates are high, and along with the negative exchange 
rates, they were responsible for removing 21.5 percent of the 
total income, which exceeds costs for materials. Interest rates 
have consumed 8 percent of the total income of private, and 25 
percent of the state and mixed companies, which is a burden that 
even the best companies cannot sustain. 
<H5>  Each Third -- a Loser </H5>
  The gross profit in the economy last year, compared to the 
year before, has literally been halved and has almost 
disappeared, and loss is more dominant. Gross profit has been 
calculated as being almost the same in private and state 
companies, the reason being that the private ones are more 
efficient, have lower interest rates, but they also give smaller 
salaries to their workers. The financial experts have 
calculated that if private owners gave the same salaries as the 
state ones, they would have no profit at all. To illustrate, if 
the average salary last year was 3,274 denars, a smaller than 
average salary was given to 84.2 percent of the employees in the 
private sector, and 54.8 percent in the state sector. 
  On the other hand, the economy paid out 20 percent more 
income than it earned last year, and this uncovered expenditure 
is due to salaries and the financing of public consumption. 
That is, last year the money for salaries was 5 percent 
greater, 2 percent greater for public consumption, and 4 percent 
greater for taxes. Half of the money in state companies went on 
salaries last year, while the private owners spent more money on 
investment. 
  Losses reached 11.7 billion denars, with every third company 
in the state sustaining a loss (over 8,000 companies). Although 
over 90 percent of the loss-making companies are private, 91 
percent of the loss is in the state sector, and the total sum of 
the loss indicates a more difficult situation than ever in the 
economy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7990 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Chief, UN Commander Discuss Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army Chief, UN Commander Discuss Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704221794 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
2000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704221794 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] General Janko Bobetko, Croatian Army chief of 
general staff, held talks this evening with UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Forces] Commander General Bertrand de Lapresle. They 
discussed the implementation of the cease-fire agreement, the 
Washington agreement and UN Security Council resolutions. Gen. 
Bobetko stressed that he had informed his guest about the fact 
that Croatia has fulfilled all its tasks, and that there can no 
longer be any pretexts for the other side not to comply with the 
agreement. 
  He mentioned that one such problem is the fact that the Serb 
side had not withdrawn from one part of the battlefield north of 
Zemunik, from where the airport in Zemunik can be targeted. 
Another concrete problem is that a Jasenovac-bound road 
remained closed today and therefore a Croatian delegation was 
unable to lay a wreath at the monument there. Gen. Bobetko 
stressed that Gen. de Lapresle had promised him that UNPROFOR 
would insist with the Serb side that they resolve these problems. 
  Gen. de Lapresle said that he is pleased with the course of 
the implementation of the cease-fire agreement in Croatia so 
far, adding that not all the provisions of the agreement have 
been implemented 100 percent, but that the newly created 
problems would be resolved by joint committees which had been 
established for that purpose. He empahized his pleasure at the 
cooperation with the Croat authorities, saying that he and Gen. 
Bobetko shared the wish that the cease-fire agreement should be 
implemented, which is a precondition for the second step in the 
normalization of Croatian-Serb relations -- the resolution of 
economic problems. 
  The UNPROFOR commander will chair a meeting of a central 
joint committee in Turanj near Karlovac tomorrow, at which the 
implementation to date of the Zagreb cease-fire agreement will 
be examined. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7991 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Explosion at Weapons Depot Near Zagreb </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Explosion at Weapons Depot Near Zagreb </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704133494 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704133494 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A general alert has been sounded due to an explosion 
in the military weapons depot in Duboki Jarak in Sesvete, near 
Zagreb. Fire raging in one of the warehouses is threatening to 
spread to other buildings, which could have serious 
consequences. The residents of Sesvete have, therefore, been 
urged to go to shelters, and everyone should avoid going to 
Sesvete -- particularly drivers, because roads through Sesvete 
will be closed. The residents of Dubrava near Sesvete, as well 
as of the surrounding villages have also been warned to be 
cautious and not stay in the streets but seek shelter in houses 
or basements. 
  Mr. Sindicic, on duty in the Zagreb police station, has 
confirmed this talking to Gordana Cukon. 
  [Begin recording] [Sindicic] There have been a series of 
explosions of stored powder in Duboki Jarak in the Sesvete area, 
and we are asking residents to move to a safe distance to avoid 
casualties. Everyone should protect themselves. They should 
not stay on the road but move to a safe distance. There should 
be no panic. This is not an attack. The situation is under 
control, and it will probably (?calm down) in 10 to 20 minutes. 
  [Correspondent] Have the explosions stopped? 
  [Sindicic] Not yet, and we cannot estimate when they will 
stop. When they stop, there will be no more danger. The most 
important thing is to inform the residents to stay away, not to 
panic, and that this is not an attack. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7992 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Casualties Expected </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Casualties Expected </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704143494 Paris AFP in English 1424 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704143494 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, April 7 (AFP) -- A series of explosions 
ripped through a munitions dump outside the Croatian capital 
Thursday [7 April], prompting the authorities to place the 
surrounding suburbs under alert and stop all traffic. 
  The dump was ablaze and shells were exploding every few 
seconds, eyewitnesses said. Residents near the munitions depot 
in Sesvete, about 12 kilometres (seven miles) outside Zagreb, 
were told to take refuge in bomb-shelters. 
  There were no immediate reports of casualties but Sesvete 
police told AFP they expected that people had been injured. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7993 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Firemen Unable To Approach Blaze </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Firemen Unable To Approach Blaze </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804122994 Paris AFP in English 1132 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804122994 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, April 8 (AFP) -- Giant flames licked a 
munitions dump in the Zagreb suburbs Friday [8 April] a day 
after massive explosions injured 17 people, and five others were 
still missing, authorities announced. The explosions stopped at 
1:00 a.m. (2300 GMT Thursday), 11 hours after the dump was 
rocked by a first blast. 
  Croatian Prime Minister Nikica Valentic, who Thursday 
announced an evacuation order for all residents within a 
2.5-kilometre (1.5-mile) radius, said the blasts in the depot in 
Sesvete, about 12 kilometres (seven miles) outside Zagreb, were 
a "disaster." 
  Deputy Defense Minister Josip Juras said he did not rule out 
sabotage. 
  Damage was huge but could not be immediately assessed. 
Firemen were still unable to get near the flames Friday at 
noon. Ten buildings near the military facility were destroyed 
by exploding ammunition and 100 others were damaged. 
  Fragments of exploding mortars and, according to western 
experts, probably of ground-to-ground and anti-tank missiles, 
flew around and even seriously injured a man in a central Zagreb 
street Thursday. Authorities maintained a general alert but 
traffic near the dump was reopened. 
  The numerous blasts opened up a huge crater at the dump 
which 
is one of Croatia's biggest. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7994 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Valentic on `Disaster' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Valentic on `Disaster' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704173894 Paris AFP in English 1716 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704173894 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, April 7 (AFP) -- Croatian authorities 
Thursday ordered the evacuation of all residents within a 
2.5-kilometre (1.5- mile) radius of a major munitions dump 
licked by giant flames and rocked by five straight hours of 
explosions. 
  Prime Minister Nikica Valentic, who announced the evacuation 
order, dubbed the blasts in the depot in Sesvete, about 12 
kilometres (seven miles) outside Zagreb, a "disaster." He said 
he had no information on casualties but that the government was 
without news of some of the staff working at the depot. 
  Valentic, who also announced that a special crisis cabinet 
had been set up to deal with the emergency, gave no details on 
the cause of the blast but dismissed the possibility of sabotage. 
  An AFP reporter at the scene some five hours after the 
blasts 
began at 2:00 p.m. said three fires were blazing, sending plumes 
of smoke into the sky, while shells continued to explode at the 
depot. 
  Earlier, shells exploded every few seconds, according to 
eyewitnesses near the depot and nearby residents were told to 
take refuge in their cellars and not to panic. 
  A radio appeal was broadcast calling on the capital's 
emergency fire service personnel to help deal with the blaze. 
Sesvete police told AFP they expected people had been injured. 
  Traffic was stopped in the whole of the surrounding region, 
and schoolchildren and their teachers abandoned classes to flee 
the area. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7995 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman Addresses HDZ Session </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudjman Addresses HDZ Session </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704192194 Zagreb HTV Television in Serbo-Croatian 1730 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704192194 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb HTV Television </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The Croatian Democratic Union's [Hrvatska 
Demokratska Zajednica -- HDZ] deputies from the Chamber of 
Deputies and the Chamber of Counties have held a joint session 
in parliament. 
  The deputies were addressed by Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian 
president and the president of the HDZ. The session was 
attended by members of the ruling party's presidency. Here is 
the full text of the statement: 
  In his speech, President Tudjman briefly restated the 
guidelines of Croatia's foreign policy, in particular in 
relation to Bosnia-Herzegovina. He stressed that Croatia 
achieved its present standing in the world -- which has never 
been higher -- because the world could see for itself the 
stability of Croatia's democratic system, to which the HDZ has 
made the largest contribution, and could also see that Croatia's 
leadership knew how to coordinate its national and state 
interests with international interests, and that such a Croatia 
could be an important and active factor in the creation of the 
international order in this part of Europe. 
  As regards the policy relating to Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
Washington agreement, the president stressed that there had been 
no U-turns in Croatia's policy, but the policy had consistently 
taken into consideration interests of the Croat people as a 
whole and strategic interests of the Croatian state. It is 
precisely because of this consistent position that the world has 
accepted Croatia's policy. 
  The president also said that the reputation and the position 
that Croatia has acquired in today's world ought to be used for 
the speedier development of our country in political, economic 
and cultural spheres. 
  The case of Josip Manolic was also discussed at the session. 
Unanimous support was expressed for the policy pursued hitherto 
by the HDZ under the leadership of President Franjo Tudjman. 
  In the light of the conclusions adopted at the second HDZ 
general convention, it was emphasized that the HDZ is a 
democratic party of the people, which bases its program on the 
principles of Christian democracy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7996 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK President Martic on Relations With Croatia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK President Martic on Relations With Croatia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604113594 Split NEDJELJNA DALMACIJA in Serbo-Croatian 23 
Mar 94 pp 4-6 </F>

<F P=103> AU0604113594 </F>
<F P=104>  Split NEDJELJNA DALMACIJA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Milan Martic, president of the republic of </F>
Serbian Krajina, by Jovo Paripovic; place and date not given: 
"We Are Asking Nothing of Croatia!"] 
  [Text] That he changed the camouflage uniform for a suit, 
put on a tie, entered the preelection race, and then took the 
chair of president of the so-called republic of Serbian Krajina, 
Milan Martic accounts for by the fact that the "latest elections 
in the republic of Serbian Krajina were a significant step in 
actualizing its statehood," but, as in all other elections, 
"politicians and parties appeared whose ultimate wish was to 
seize power," which, according to Martic, means that this 
"desire for power can go beyond the global national interests," 
which made him avert all this and prevent these "careerists" 
from seizing power. So much for his attitude toward the taking 
of the presidential seat, and as far as concerns the "strategic 
orientation," which "will never be given up," according to Milan 
Martic, it is "a historical task, with which the Serbs in the 
republic of Serbian Krajina should secure the same rights as the 
Slovenes, Croats, and other nations on the territories of the 
former Yugoslavia have been given." 
<H5>  Milosevic Is a Politician of International Caliber </H5>
  [Paripovic] Did the fact that you are Slobodan Milosevic's 
man, which you admitted yourself, help your "victory" after the 
elections were repeated? 
  [Martic] It is correct that I once said I was Slobodan 
Milosevic's man. That cannot be interpreted as some blind 
obedience or subjection. I am Slobodan Milosevic's man to the 
extent to which we are both dedicated to the historical task of 
establishing Serb national interests. The president of Serbia 
has become a politician of international caliber, respected by 
the international factors that participate in the resolving of 
the crisis on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Not even 
the greatest Serb-haters and his opponents can dispute that. 
Not even opposition leaders, such as Vuk Draskovic, attack 
Slobodan Milosevic any more, because it is no longer popular 
even abroad, let alone in Serbia and the republic of Serbian 
Krajina. My relation toward the president of Serbia is clear, 
but I think that did not have a crucial impact on the results of 
the elections. 
  [Paripovic] How do you account for the sudden change of the 
voters' decision to your benefit? 
  [Martic] In the first round my opposing candidate Milan 
Babic won more votes only because there was no control in that 
round. In the second round we established the control mechanism 
and ensured that the voting was regular. 
  Milan Babic has an extremely bad political rating in Serbia, 
and this he can primarily ascribe to the tactless actions and 
statements with which he seriously endangered the unity of the 
Serb people. 
<H5>  Nothing Behind Knin's Back </H5>
  [Paripovic] You talk of Babic's bad rating in Serbia, but 
the elections were not held in Serbia. There is no doubt that 
your nomination was aided by a shameless soliciting of the votes 
of certain members of the SPS [Socialist Party of Serbia] 
leadership who are close to Milosevic. 
  [Martic] Babic's prediction was that the opposition would 
win in Serbia, and he gave verbal support to the opposition 
several times before the elections. That is normal. However, 
this is why he could not expect the support of the authorities 
in Serbia. In fact, both of us received the support of those 
who saw the similarity between their political programs and ours. 
  [Paripovic] What condition is the economy of the "Krajina" 
in, and what is the social situation of its citizens? There is 
talk of the economy and the citizens being exhausted, of poverty. 
  [Martic] It is understandable that the economic situation in 
the state, after several years of war, is difficult. At the 
same time, we are waging a war, building the state institutions, 
and trying to revive the industrial and agricultural production. 
However, the situation is not nearly what it is believed to be. 
  [Paripovic] Goran Hadzic, your predecessor, has again raised 
the issue of the justifiability of the unification of Slavonia, 
Baranja, and western Srem with the so-called Knin Krajina, 
adding that it was a formal unification, and he has asked how 
justifiable it was to send aid to Knin "when there is no one 
there who is not too lazy to unload it." Could you comment on 
that? 
  [Martic] I am not familiar with these statements by Goran 
Hadzic, but I think that they are not important. He is the 
former president of the state, who, I deeply believe, was not 
suited for the job he was entrusted with. I really do not want 
to comment on his statements, as I do not consider them to have 
any political importance. 
  [Paripovic] All right. May I remind you of Jovan Opacic's 
statement, according to which Serbia "is making a colony out of 
Krajina," which Opacic called creating an "Indian reservation," 
and Serbia's attitude an "anti-Serb act"? 
  [Martic] The process of the integration of the Serb lands, 
which has assumed its latest dimensions with the establishment 
of a unitary monetary system, a unitary market and economy, can 
certainly not be called by that name. I believe other steps 
will be taken in the upcoming period, after which the issue of 
unification will really be sheer formality. 
  [Paripovic] How do you see the normalization of the 
relations between Serbia and Croatia, and the signing of the 
Joint Statement in Geneva? According to certain estimates, this 
normalization was done "behind Knin's back," while some have 
interpreted Slobodan Milosevic's statement that the relations 
between Croatia and the so-called republic of Serbian Krajina 
should be resolved directly by the negotiators of these two 
sides as "Belgrade's giving up on the republic of Serbian 
Krajina." 
  [Martic] The normalization of the relations between the 
FRY and Croatia represents quite a normal and logical factor in 
the context of the strengthening peace initiatives for resolving 
the crisis on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. If this 
normalization contributes to resolving peacefully the conflicts 
between Krajina and Croatia, that is, through political means, 
we will welcome it. I see nothing there that could make the 
position of the republic of Serbian Krajina more difficult, and 
nothing that could have been done "behind Knin's back." The 
statement of the president of Serbia Slobodan Milosevic is in 
fact a confirmation of our position that only representatives of 
the republic of Serbian Krajina and Croatia can discuss any 
disputable issues. In order to establish negotiations, it is 
necessary for Croatia to stop the constant attacks on the 
republic of Serbian Krajina, that is, it is necessary to 
establish a permanent cease-fire. 
<H5>  Demarcation Is the Way to Peace </H5>
  [Paripovic] According to some political analysts, you are a 
man who will only carry out, on the side of the so-called 
republic of Serbian Krajina, what is possibly arranged with Mr. 
Tudjman. 
  [Martic] We will insist on the negotiations being held on an 
equal basis and on the principle of reciprocity. I see no 
reason why such a dialogue should not be established, as I see 
no way of resolving the disputes in another way. We are 
prepared to discuss the economic and communication problems of 
both sides, as well as of the demarcation between the republic 
of Serbian Krajina and Croatia. I believe that is the best and 
fastest way of reaching the normalization of relations very soon. 
  [Paripovic] In your statement: "Martic will exist as long as 
there is Knin, and Krajina will exist as long as I do" many have 
recognized the position that war with Croatia is inevitable. 
  [Martic] Our orientation is peace, not war. We have no 
reason to attack Croatia if the other side accepts the peace 
option. However, the experience we have had so far has taught us 
that there is an extremely militarist atmosphere in Croatia, and 
that the leading HDZ [Croatian Democratic Community] regime thus 
suppresses the social and political tensions. This is why we 
have no illusions about the real intentions of the Croatian 
authorities. We are prepared to convince them that they will 
not be able to solve a single thing with a war against Krajina, 
and that sooner or later they will have to sit at the 
negotiating table with us. Another of Croatia's great delusions 
is that Germany will do the job for them. All these delusions 
lead to a long, exhausting war, which will bring neither side 
any good. 
  [Paripovic] What is the lower limit in the negotiations and 
the arrangement of relations with Croatia; how far will your 
side go? 
  [Martic] As far as the relations between the republic of 
Serbian Krajina and Croatia are concerned, I have already said 
that there was no reason for them not to improve in the future. 
In fact, we are asking nothing of Croatia. We expect the 
international community only to give us what it has already 
given the Croats, Slovenes, and Macedonians, that is, the right 
to self-determination. We are prepared to hold a referendum in 
the Krajina, most strictly controlled by the international 
community, on whether our people want to live in Croatia, and 
that is the limit below which we will not go. 
<H5>  The United States Has Imposed It </H5>
  [Paripovic] How do you see the Croat-Muslim agreement? 
  [Martic] As far as the agreement between the Croats and 
Muslims in the former Bosnia is concerned, clearly that is 
something the United States has imposed, and something that is 
far from reality. That marriage was made out of interest, and I 
do not believe in it, especially after everything that has 
happened. As far as possible repercussions are concerned, they 
are not insignificant, but I do not think they can have a 
significant impact on the position of the republic of Serbian 
Krajina. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7997 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Fierce Fighting' in Gorazde </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Fierce Fighting' in Gorazde </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704154194 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704154194 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 1300 GMT on 7 April carries within 
its regular 32-minute cast several reports on the situation in 
the republic. 
  Enes Musovic reports that "four members of the UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Forces] Internal Commission sent by General Michael 
Rose, commander of UN forces in Bosnia-Herzegovina, arrived in 
Gorazde this morning in order to see the real situation in the 
Gorazde region. They immediately went to the lines of 
separation in order to visit this territory, which has been and 
still is the venue of fierce fighting between aggressor's forces 
and Gorazde defenders. As I report, the Drina Valley is shaking 
with strong explosions. Chetniks have continued shelling all 
defense lines around the besieged Gorazde as well as the 
civilian districts. The most recent reports say that a fierce 
artillery-infantry attack by the mad aggressor on [name 
indistinct] Kamen and [name indistinct] from the direction of 
Mesici is under way." 
  Mirza Aldobasic reports from the zone covered by the 7 South 
Operations Group that "in the early morning hours, the aggressor 
attacked the defense lines of the 203d Glorious Doboj-Bosna 
Motorized Brigade, particularly in the Putnikovo Brdo region. 
However, it was somehow calmer on other battlefields on these 
free territories, although on a few occasions the enemy 
attempted breakthroughs along the defense lines at Crni Vrh." 
  Studio announcer Arijana Barucija says that "it is somewhat 
calmer in the zone of the 3d Corps and other battlefields in our 
country, albeit still with occasional aggressor's activities 
from infantry weapons and artillery pieces." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7998 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Urgent' Hospital Needs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Urgent' Hospital Needs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704201494 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704201494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] You have heard at the beginning of the program 
what the momentary situation in Gorazde is like. A radio bridge 
with Gorazde has been organized for foreign and domestic 
reporters in Sarajevo this afternoon. Our reporter Mediha Colo 
listened to the radio bridge and prepared the following 
reportage: 
  [Begin recording] [Colo] Riad Rasic, president of the 
Gorazde district assembly; Esad Orhanovic, president of the 
Gorazde district executive council; and Alija Begovic, director 
of the Gorazde war hospital, were answering the questions of 
domestic and foreign reporters via radio link. Riad Rasic, 
president of the Gorazde district assembly, gave a brief [word 
indistinct] of the latest situation in Gorazde. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Rasic] The situation is also difficult in the hospital, 
regarding the number of beds, accommodation space, lack of 
medication, and so forth. At 0800, that is to say, from the 
beginning of the offensive until 0800 this morning 67 people 
have died and 325 have been injured. Of these, 10 were children 
and 19 women and older people, while 38 children and 49 women 
have been injured. [passage omitted] 
  [Colo] One of the reporters' questions referred to the 
critical line on the right bank of the Drina River in the 
vicinity of Vidkovic and the aggressor's current intentions. 
  [Rasic] Yes, the lines have been consolidated a little there 
and most probably we will hear better news from Gorazde. 
Ferocious battles are being fought in that direction and our 
defenders are holding well, therefore, we can expect better news 
from that part, which is the only [word indistinct] at this 
moment, as all other lines are holding (?extremely) well. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Colo] Alija Begovic, director of the Gorazde hospital, 
answered questions about the situation in the Gorazde war 
hospital. Dr. Begovic said the following about the most urgent 
requirements of the Gorazde hospital: 
  [Begovic] In brief, we need sanitary articles, [word 
indistinct] material, gauze, bandages, and powerful analgesics. 
Regarding [word indistinct], also surgical implements, string, 
certain substances to stop bleeding such as [word indistinct] or 
similar. We have not had oxygen for a year and a half almost, 
we had it only at the beginning for a short while. Therefore, 
we do not even have oxygen for [word indistinct] and, therefore, 
I cannot even talk about this. We more or less have the most 
basic antibiotics, therefore, we (?need more sophisticated) 
antibiotics for bone infections and so forth, we lack this. 
Then, [words indistinct] in the present situation when there is 
a great number of injuries. Otherwise, we suffer constant 
shortages of medication for chronic patients, for example, eye 
patients with glaucoma, for patients with diseases of the 
thyroid gland, patients in need of cancer therapy, and so forth. 
  Regarding blood plasma, we have not received any. However, 
since we have a marvelous response of volunteer blood donors, 
mostly women, who at any moment... [pauses] It has not happened 
yet that we would not have enough of any blood type, therefore, 
we more or less supplement blood with blood and we use very 
little blood plasma. Actually, at the beginning when we had 
some we used it for a while but now not any more. 
  I must say that the number of medical staff in Gorazde has 
been cut down to a third of that before the war, therefore, far 
below the requirements. The scope and the type of work [words 
indistinct]. There never was a hospital, a surgical department, 
and this secondary aspect of medical care here. There are 
really very few physicians and we all do three or four jobs at 
once. 
  [Colo] According to the information that we have obtained 
via the radio bridge, the latest offensive at Gorazde resulted 
in the number of refugees in this town increasing by 2,000. 
[passage omitted] [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-7999 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Civilians Killed in Bihac </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Civilians Killed in Bihac </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704215094 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704215094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Five people were killed and 30 wounded, among them 
two pregnant women and several children, in the shelling of the 
Bihac area today. The town and its surrounding areas were 
shelled three times during the day. The material damage is 
vast. Hundreds of mortar and howitzer shells fell on the 
positions of the defenders on the Grmusa-Srbljani plateau and in 
Grabez. The attacks intensified in the afternoon. 
  The attacks by paramilitary formations of the so-called 
Kladusa autonomy also continued throughout the day. They fired 
on the Cazin villages of Privala, [place name indistinct] and 
Cajici, using mortars and antitank weapons. There were several 
casualties. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8000 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Army Sets Conditions for Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Army Sets Conditions for Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704224294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704224294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] In connection with UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] 
reports concerning the possibility of a meeting between 
representatives of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army and the Serb 
aggressor side under the chairmanship of General Michael Rose, 
the press center of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army has been 
authorized to issue the following statement: 
  1. In order that talks on a general cease-fire between the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army and the Serb aggressor side can start it 
is vital that the Serb aggressor side immediately stop all 
offensive actions against the towns of Gorazde and Bihac, which 
have been proclaimed protected areas by the UN Security Council. 
  2. The Serb aggressor formations should return to their 
starting positions, which they held on 3 March this year when 
they launched an offensive against Gorazde. 
  3. In order that talks with representatives of the Serb 
aggressor side can begin it is necessary to have clearly defined 
political prerequisites which guarantee the continued political 
process of resolving the Bosnia-Herzegovina problem as a whole. 
  4. Representatives of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army, led by 
Army General Rasim Delic, are ready at any time to have talks 
with representatives of the UNPROFOR and with other 
international organizations concerning the situation in Gorazde 
or in any other part of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Gen. Rose was told 
this during his talks today with Army Gen. Delic, the statement 
issued by the press center of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army reads. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8001 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mladic Sets Conditions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mladic Sets Conditions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704144694 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704144694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marica Lalovic from Pale] </F>
  [Text] The talks between the military commanders of the 
Serbian and the Muslim sides -- General Ratko Mladic and [B-H 
Army Commander General] Rasim Delic -- which were scheduled to 
take place at Sarajevo airport yesterday, have not started yet. 
The mediator in the talks, which should result in the signing of 
a cease-fire agreement, today held talks with General Mladic and 
conveyed to him the new demands posed by the Muslim side. 
Namely, General Rose reported that Rasim Delic was making his 
arrival to the airport and the talks conditional upon the 
withdrawal of the Serbian army from all the positions around 
Gorazde to the lines held prior to the outbreak of the latest 
clashes. 
  General Mladic warned UN Protection Force Commander General 
Rose not to accept any conditions for talks and said that only 
an instantaneous halt of all combat activities on all the 
separating lines in the former Bosnia-Herzegovina can be 
discussed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8002 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mladic: Muslims Backing `War Option' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mladic: Muslims Backing `War Option' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704214294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 2058 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704214294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 7 Apr (TANJUG) -- Lieutenant Colonel 
General Ratko Mladic, chief of general staff of the Srpska 
republic army, said that he held two separate and very useful 
talks with General Michael Rose, UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] 
commander for former Bosnia-Herzegovina, this evening. 
  In a statement for the Serb Sarajevo Radio, Gen. Mladic did 
not give any details of the talks, but said that "on the whole 
everything boils down to the fact that the Muslims do not want 
to sign an agreement to end of hostilities." 
  Mladic did not wish to comment on the present situation in 
the areas in which Muslim units launched an offensive. He said 
that the Muslims had smuggled units from central Bosnia into the 
area toward Gorazde and that it is obvious they are backing the 
war option. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8003 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ambassador to UN Views Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ambassador to UN Views Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804105994 London ITV Television Network in English 1800 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804105994 </F>
<F P=104>  London ITV Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Muhamed Sacirbey, Bosnian ambassador to the </F>
United Nations, in New York, by Zeinab Badawi in London on 7 
April -- recorded; from the "Channel 4 News" program] 
  [Text] [Badawi] Why does it seem that it is the Bosnian 
Government that is now holding up the peace talks? 
  [Sacirbey] I'm afraid the whole issue here isn't any more 
talks; we've had over a hundred cease-fires called for in 
Bosnia. We have still one town that is under severe attack by 
Serbian forces. Those forces have refused to allow General Rose 
to go into that town, and I'm afraid that until in fact they 
stop there attacks on Goradze, there is no assurance that 
Serbians are any more serious about this cease-fire than any 
other. It seems that every time someone utters the words 
cease-fire the whole world thinks that means magic, that all of 
a sudden we have peace. There is an opportunity for the Serbian 
forces to prove their goodwill in Goradze; they have failed to 
do so. They have said countless times that they will stop the 
attacks on the city; they have not. That is really the issue 
here. 
  [Badawi] But your real concern therefore, Mr Sacirbey, is 
that by signing a cease-fire now you may freeze Serbian lines as 
they stand now? 
  [Sacirbey] That is of course a real issue and a real concern 
for us, but it doesn't do us any good to sign cease-fire 
agreements if in fact the attacks continue. Why should we give 
the Serbians any more public relations ammunition in meeting 
their calls or their demands for cease-fires, when in fact they 
have no intention of honoring cease-fires. And I must also say I 
find it rather disappointing that the agenda this time, as in 
almost any other case, is being set by the Serbian forces. 
General Rose had in fact stated that he was going to go to 
Goradze; the Security Council had endorsed his trip to Goradze. 
The next day the Serbian forces prevented him going to Goradze 
and Serbian forces then called upon him to hold a meeting at 
Sarajevo airport and he agreed. Are we now having the Serbian 
forces setting the agenda, are they in fact going to tell not 
only the Bosnian's but the United Nations, a British general, 
what is the next process that we are to undertake to reach peace 
in Bosnia? 
  [Badawi] But if you want the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw to 
the 
positions that they held 10 days ago, you're not talking about a 
cease-fire, you're actually talking about maps again and that's 
only decided on the ground, not at the negotiating table? 
  [Sacirbey] Those are not maps. That is a boundary for 
Goradze 
established by the UN as a safe area. It has nothing to do with 
maps. It has to do with the safety of the town; it has to do 
with the demand of the UN established over a year ago as to how 
that safe area would be defined in terms of what kind of 
positions the Serbians could maintain outside of that area. 
  [Badawi] But as General Rose has said, we have to have a 
cease- fire before the political process can begin. 
  [Sacirbey] Well we agree, except there is no cease-fire in 
Goradze and it's he himself that has called for the cease-fire 
and we request that he go to Goradze to ensure in fact that the 
cease- fire is maintained. Obviously, he is being prevented by 
Serbian forces from doing so and until there is a cease-fire in 
Goradze, we don't see any use to talk about any broader 
cease-fire in the rest of Bosnia. 
  [Badawi] Mr Sacirbey, the cynical mind could say that since 
the Bosnian Government forces are doing rather well in the north 
of Bosnia, that it is not in the Bosnian Government's interest 
to talk peace now. 
  [Sacirbey] We have opened the doors for peace; we have 
reached an agreement with the Croatians and obviously we look 
for the Serbs to come in and speak of peace with us of a 
federation, of a sharing of power. On the other hand, they 
continue to insist not only on the partitioning of our country, 
but the continued ethnic cleansing of our population in places 
like Prijedor and Banja Luka. I'm afraid the cynical mind that 
you're speaking about has been far behind the times. The 
process in Bosnia the Serbs have started, the ethnic cleansing, 
the genocide, continues and I'm afraid that any further talk of 
cease-fires is not going to accomplish much until the Serbians 
in fact show their goodwill in places like Goradze, in places 
like Prijedor, in places like Banja Luka. 
  [Badawi] There was talk earlier today that the truce talks 
could resume in Sarajevo tomorrow, is that not now the case? 
  [Sacirbey] They certainly can, but the question is will in 
fact they stop their attack on Goradze. I spoke to the people 
in Goradze only an hour ago and I was told that, in fact, 
Serbians had continued their assault and had broken into some of 
the suburbs, including the suburb of (Visca Vicha). From our 
perspective obviously we're very far away from any substantive 
talks, from any good faith talks on a cease-fire. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8004 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Izetbegovic, Rose Discuss Situation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Izetbegovic, Rose Discuss Situation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704221194 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704221194 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, today received General Michael Rose, the 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] commander for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Haris Silajdzic, the prime minister of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and General Rasim Delic, the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina army commander, were present at the talks. 
  The difficult situation in Gorazde, the town which has been 
under a strong offensive by the Serb aggressor for over a week, 
was discussed. Gen. Rose was asked to do everything within his 
powers to bring an end to the offensive and to have the 
aggressor's army return to its pre-31 March positions. 
  It is expected that Gen. Rose will again hold talks with 
President Izetbegovic tomorrow after his talks with 
representatives of the aggressor's side. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8005 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   UNPROFOR Reports Cease-Fire Failed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    UNPROFOR Reports Cease-Fire Failed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804125594 Paris AFP in English 1226 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804125594 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, April 8 (AFP) -- Fierce fighting kept up 
Friday [8 April] in the besieged Moslem enclave of Gorazde as a 
24-hour ceasefire failed to take hold in Bosnia-Herzegovina, UN 
spokesman and Serb reports said. 
  Charles Redman, the special US envoy for ex-Yugoslavia, 
arrived in Sarajevo Friday to try to help efforts to reach an 
overall ceasefire agreement, a UN spokesman said. 
  The 24-hour truce was to have started Thursday evening and 
cover all remaining battlefronts in Bosnia. 
  But "there has been no real ceasefire in Gorazde, the 
shelling has continued," said UN spoksman Major Rob Annink 
Friday, as both Sarajevo radio and the TANJUG news agency in 
Belgrade reported new fighting there Friday. 
  Redman immediately held talks with General Michael Rose, who 
was to meet again Friday with Bosnian and Serb military leaders 
to present them with a new ceasefire proposal, according to a UN 
spokesman who would not give any details on its contents. 
  Rose spent Thursday trying to get the Bosnian and Serb 
generals, Rasim Delic and Ratko Mladic, to the negotiating 
table, notably to stop the Serb offensive around Gorazde in 
eastern Bosnia that has left 67 dead and 325 injured among the 
population in nine days. 
  After shuttling back and forth between Sarajevo and 
Serb-controlled Lukavica, Rose had announced the two sides 
agreed in principle to a 24-hour cooling-off period that was to 
have started at 6:00 p.m. Thursday. 
  But the truce was immediately violated and the sitaution in 
Gorazde "remains tense," according to the UN Protection Force 
which since Thursday has 13 military observers and liaison 
officers in Gorazde. 
  Redman meanwhile was due to meet Bosnian President Alija 
Izetbegovic later Friday, a Bosnian Government source said. The 
U.S. envoy would then head on to the Serb stronghold of Pale 
just west [as received] of Sarajevo before returning to Belgrade. 
  Annink, the UN spokesman, said Friday that Serb forces were 
about five or six kilometers (three to four miles) from the 
center of Gorazde and were using smokescreens to camouflage 
their movements. [passage omitted] 
  Annink, meanwhile, said that Serb forces had captures "less 
territory than we thought" around Gorazde and now controlled 
about five percent of the enclave, in its southeastern sector. 
  He said they had penetrated an area about three kilometers 
(1.8 miles) deep and about 10 kilometers (six miles) wide into 
the enclave. 
  This differed with a report, seen by journalists, by 
military 
observers in Gorazde dated last Tuesday saying the mainly Moslem 
Bosnian Army had lost 10 percent of the enclave and that the 
front line was only three kilometers from the center of Gorazde. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8006 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sarajevo, Gorazde Attacked </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sarajevo, Gorazde Attacked </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804095394 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804095394 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 0800 GMT on 8 April carries in its 
regular 8-minute newscast several reports on the continued 
fighting in the republic. 
  Correspondent Sead Custovic from the 1st Corps Information 
Service, says that "by [word indistinct] shelling the urban 
areas of Sarajevo the Chetniks have only added to the long list 
of violations of the cease-fire agreed upon in this area some 
(?50) days ago. The population of Kosevo, Kosevsko Brdo, Breka, 
Pionirska Dolina, and Blekin Potok had a sleepless night as 
Tromblon grenades and rockets from portable launchers showered 
these districts. It was a return to the grimmest days of the 
war and confirmed that Karadzic's rabble -- who have violated 
every single peace agreement -- do indeed belong in the hall of 
fame of criminals. The everyday provocations from all types of 
weaponry, which often result in the wounding of citizens, 
clearly indicates what the aims and desires of the (?aggressor) 
are. The anemic reactions of the UN Protection Force in the 
face of civilian casualties and the shelling of residential 
areas encourages the aggressor to increase and intensify his 
activities and expand his arsenal. The cease-fire agreement 
reached yesterday has not deterred the criminals' artillery and 
snipers, who are doggedly beating a path straight to the 
international Court of Justice in The Hague. The morning is 
deceptively calm, and that is why caution should be exercised 
when moving around the city." 
  Gorazde correspondent Enes Musovic reports that "in the 
course of the alleged cease-fire between us and the aggressor 
side, the Chetniks have continued their bloody march toward the 
encircled Gorazde. They have never before perpetrated such 
fierce and deadly attacks on the innocent population and 
refugees. The result of this rampage is five killed and nine 
gravely wounded people. Therefore, Gorazde is paying an 
extremely high price for its number one spot on the 
international media listings. In addition to the chemical 
agents used yesterday in the village of Vitkovici, the Chetniks 
also attempted to break through the defense lines in several 
places with combined artillery and infantry attacks. The 
situation was also extremely grave overnight on the right bank 
of the Drina River. From Nisan to Uhodici [words indistinct] 
heavy Chetnik artillery. The aggressor also attempted to 
infiltrate a terrorist group [passage indistinct], taking out 
their fury on (?local) women and old people. This was 
particularly pronounced in Ogleceva and in the villages of 
Zamedjedi, Gojcevici, and Surovik situated in the wider region 
of Ustipraca. The population of these villages is fleeing in 
panic toward the town." 
  Reporting from Bihac, correspondent Mirza Sadikovic says 
that 
"[words indistinct] in the Bihac commune, where the victims 
continue to be mostly civilians. In the past 24 hours, six 
people have been killed, while 33 were slightly or severely 
wounded. Karadzic's terrorists continued to destroy buildings 
and communication links in Bihac and the Cazin outskirts. The 
intensity of the [Serb] attacks abated somewhat overnight, but 
the paramilitary forces of the so-called Kladusa autonomy 
intensified their attacks on all the demarcation lines. 
Artillery and infantry attacks were carried out in and around 
Krivaja and Gajici in the Cazin commune, and [name indistinct] 
in the Velika Kladusa commune. After midnight, the areas of 
(?Kosovo) and (?Pecingrad) were relentlessly shelled." 
  An unidentified correspondent from the 4th Corps Press 
Center 
reports that "the main characteristic of the day [7 April] in 
the 4th Corps' theater of operations [in the Mostar area] was 
the mutual observance of the cease-fire between the Croatian 
Defense Council [HVO] and the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army on all 
fronts. However, the forces of the Serbian aggressor were active 
in Sector North. The past 24 hours on the defense lines of the 
Bosnia- Herzegovina Army and in residential areas in regions in 
and around (?Zdjelinic) and Glavaticevo were marked by Chetnik 
small arms' and antiaircraft machine gun provocations. The 
evacuation of bodies of the HVO and Bosnia-Herzegovina Army did 
not go ahead as planned, but was postponed for today [8 April] 
at 1500. The announced visit of General Rose to the 4th Corps 
has also been postponed, most probably owing to the critical 
situation and the continuing Serb aggression on Gorazde." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8007 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs Gain South of Gorazde </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs Gain South of Gorazde </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704132394 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1204 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704132394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Cajnice, 7 Apr (TANJUG) -- After the seven-day 
Muslim offensive on the Gorazde battlefield was completely 
crushed, units of the Herzegovina Corps [of the Srpska army] 
launched a counterattack which began on Tuesday afternoon and 
penetrated deep into Muslim territory. Last night they reached 
the river Drina near Vitkovici, 4 kilometers south of Gorazde. 
  According to a statement of the command of the united Serb 
forces, the last Muslim units are being driven out of the 
Oglecevo area, which consists of a dozen villages, and it is 
only a question of time before the area is completely liberated. 
  "The continuing operation in the Cajnice-Foca-Gorazde 
triangle is of immense importance for the people in that area 
because it creates conditions for the Serbs to achieve their 
centuries-old right to live on the river Drina," Colonel Nikola 
Segrt, member of the command of the united Serb forces, said 
this morning. 
  Following a brief lull last night, fierce infantry and 
artillery battles resumed today in almost all sections of the 
Gorazde front. In the fighting yesterday, one Herzegovina corps 
fighter, Miodrag Budjen from Trebinje, was killed and four 
members of the Serb forces were wounded. 
  According to the command of the joint Serb units, over 50 
members of the forces loyal to Alija Izetbegovic were killed in 
the battles yesterday; 12 bodies were found in the vicinity of 
Uhotica Brdo alone. 
  According to Serb fighters, cries of women and children were 
heard overnight from Vitkovici. It is believed that the Muslims 
are in the process of liquidating the remaining Serbs from 
Gorzade or are forcing them to serve as a shield in their 
onslaughts on the Herzegovina corps positions. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8008 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   TANJUG Reports Muslim Attack </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    TANJUG Reports Muslim Attack </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804100994 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0859 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804100994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Cajnice, 8 Apr (TANJUG) -- The command of the 
Srpska republic army's Herzegovina corps this morning said in a 
statement that heavy fighting had continued over the last 24 
hours in the area of Oglecevo, Vitkovici [near Gorazde] and 
Donja Potkozara. 
  The same source says that a strong attack by the Muslim army 
was repelled last night in the area of Krizevci, in the 
immediate vicinity of Gorazde. [passage omitted] 
  Over the last 24 hours the frequency of NATO flights at very 
low altitude over the area of Gorazde, Cajnice, and Foca, where 
the fighting has been under way for 11 days, has increased, the 
statement says. 
  Reinforcements in groups of 30 or 40 soldiers, specially 
trained in sabotage and terrorist activities, are being sent to 
the Muslim army in Gorazde from central Bosnia, Serb military 
sources say. 
  The fate of some 700 Serbs trapped in Gorazde is 
increasingly 
uncertain, in the light of the fact that they are being used by 
the Muslims as a shield for Muslim soldiers who are being 
forcibly sent to the front line, the statement says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8009 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karadzic Threatens Counteroffensive </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karadzic Threatens Counteroffensive </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0704144894 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1401 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0704144894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Trebinje, 7 April (TANJUG) -- Srpska republic 
President Radovan Karadzic said in Trebinje today that he was 
increasingly optimistic and hopeful of a speedy and peaceful 
solution to the crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Karadzic bases his modest optimism on the fact that, as he 
said, the orientation toward peace has prevailed in the world 
and also because of the superiority of the Srpska army. 
  Karadzic added that the Muslim side would eventually have to 
sit at the negotiating table because it cannot achieve anything 
on the battlefield. 
  The international community is tired of the war and is 
afraid 
of a Balkan war, Karadzic said addressing journalists. 
  In connection with the situation in Gorazde, Karadzic said 
that the Serb side had earlier warned of the planned Muslim 
spring offensive, saying that it would respond with all 
available forces. 
  If the Muslims do not stop attacking, we will launch a 
counteroffensive and then let the Security Council save them, 
Karadzic said in Trebinje where he inaugurated the festival of 
Ducic's Evenings of Poetry. He was presented the festival's 
award. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8010 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Lasic Defends Croatian Policy in Bosnia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Lasic Defends Croatian Policy in Bosnia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0224A Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 13 Mar 94 pp 12-13 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0224A </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Miro Lasic, member of the Presidency of </F>
Bosnia and Herzegovina, by Ivan Sabic; place and date not given: 
"`If We Do Not Want an Agreement, We Will Have War'"] 
  [Text] Miro Lasic never submitted his resignation as 
a member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and 
therefore legally he can still be considered a member of that 
body, although another person has been named to that position. 
In addition, Lasic is one of those who revived Napredak 
(Progress), the Croatian cultural society, he is president of 
the Croatian Intellectual Forum, cochairman of the Croatian 
Section of the International Society for Human Rights (IGFM), 
and before the war he was director of the Sarajevo theater 
festival MES for a number of years. So it is not difficult to 
find a topic for conversation with him. Nevertheless, we 
restricted ourselves to the political present and future of the 
Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
  [Sabic] "Well-informed sources" have been talking for a long 
time now about world (U.S.) pressure on the Croatian and Muslim 
side to revive the alliance between these two peoples who are 
victims of the aggression of Serbian expansionism. It can now 
be said that the pressure has borne fruit. Did the Muslims and 
Croats have to get in a situation of being subjected to 
pressure? 
  [Lasic] We are in a historical situation in which the 
international community has an interest in a Croato-Muslim 
alliance. We are well aware that the armed conflict between the 
Muslims and Croats was artificially stimulated and provoked in 
a dirty way. Without going into all the reasons on this 
occasion, both sides were involved in bringing about the 
conflict: The Muslim fault, 70 percent of the total, came from 
the central government, and the Croatian fault, representing 30 
percent, was manifested at the peripheral level. Almost the 
same proportions, but in reverse, occurred during the lengthy 
period of the peace initiative. "Offers" of peace were issued 
from the Croatian Supreme Command and from the Muslim 
peripheral level. 
  So, the sporadic and local conflicts occurred through the 
Croatian fault, but the all-out war, such as was waged in the 
Lasva Valley, occurred because of the strategic moves and 
decisions of the Muslim leadership. It now seems that even in 
the Muslim General Staff they have finally committed themselves 
to accepting the Croatian peace initiative, and we should 
expect the disagreements to be resolved around a green baize 
table instead of on the battlefield. Now, just as in the past, 
the key is in the hands of the Muslim leadership. 
<H5>  The Option of Contact Did Not Die </H5>
  [Sabic] Did the United States necessarily have to become 
involved for the Croats and Muslims to agree? 
  [Lasic] U.S. policy did not need to use any pressure at all 
on the Croatian side. All we needed was for our position to be 
understood, and when that finally occurred, there was the first 
constructive result, the preliminary agreement with the Bosnian 
Muslims. What is more, the Americans did not put anything 
together by force, but they precisely noted the most favorable 
realistic opportunities, and they could be recognized and read 
in Croatian policy. 
  Let us not forget, even in the worst moments of the conflict 
with the Muslims there were always flickering options of 
contact and possible agreement, a process was taking place in 
the background with attempts to resolve the crisis and revive 
the alliance, which Franjo Boras was persistently initiating in 
the Presidency, but without a real response. The Americans were 
certainly well aware of that, and I would not say it was a 
question of their dictate, but of their understanding and 
correct orientation--to which their skillful ambassador, Victor 
Jackovich, I believe, also contributed. That is essential for 
us, because this is the most powerful force in the world, and 
it opened up for Croatian efforts and Croatian policy an 
immediate occasion for application and realization. 
  [Sabic] Many people are inclined to say that a change of 
direction occurred in Croatian policy toward Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Do you agree with that assessment, and to what 
extent? 
  [Lasic] Croatian state policy is conducted in an unbroken 
continuity, and those "many people" are just "some people," 
specifically those who talk about this and judge it either from 
a lack of understanding and misconception or out of some petty 
political interest of their own. The Croatian national 
objective has always been peace. Aggression and war were 
imposed on the Croats, both in Croatia and also in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Defense, which was a grave necessity, implies both 
counteroffensives and various tactical moves. One cannot always 
go in a straight line. Even back in Lisbon in February of 1992 
during Muslim, Serb, and Croat talks, I set forth views which 
were verified in the center and supported by President Tudjman, 
and mostly they have been taken over in the present preliminary 
agreement between the Croats and Bosnian Muslims. The effective 
instructions of President Tudjman were never directed at any 
point toward the breakup of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I can 
personally testify to that. Of course, on every occasion he 
explicitly called for the protection of all the Croats and the 
Croatian interest. 
<H5>  The Croatian Defense Council Was a Lightning Rod </H5>
  In March 1992, the Serbs established authority by hook or by 
crook over a large part of the territory, and the Muslims 
imposed their hegemony more and more wherever they could. Some 
of our political leaders hesitated and gave in to foreign 
domination out of opportunism. In April 1992, Mate Boban, with 
the help of the center, organized the Croatian Defense Council 
[HVO] as a defensive energy, as a lightning rod for the Croats 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The creation of Herceg-Bosna as a 
part of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina occurred when the 
HVO, in a period of grave crisis, in a balance of armament and 
strength of the armed forces that can be said to have been 
disastrous for the Croats, was defending undefined territory and 
organizing life under wartime conditions. The Muslims, the worst 
victims of aggression, were getting extensive and unselfish 
humanitarian, logistical, and armed aid from the Croatian 
people, which was itself threatened. Herceg-Bosna thus became a 
provisional historical fact, a symbol and reality of Croatian 
defense, and that is beyond dispute. There is something wrong 
with the Croatism of anyone who does not see and recognize that. 
  What kind of policy and whose (Croatian) policy deserves the 
credit for the Croats finally having become an important 
principal with an internationally recognized decisive role? 
Everyone knows the answer, and perhaps that is precisely what 
has caused the frustration and paranoic reactions of those "many 
people" who have seen the lines of the battlefields only on the 
map. As the popular saying goes: Where were they during the 
thunder and lightning? 
  [Sabic] When Bosnia and Herzegovina is discussed, people 
inevitably talk about the peoples who live in it living 
together. One often hears that these nationalities have been 
condemned to live together, but also that life together is no 
longer possible after all that has happened. Which of these 
assertions is closer to the truth? 
  [Lasic] When you talk about life together today--that is a 
great dilemma. The impression that life together could still be 
revived and preserved comes from historical inertia, because 
everyone is in trouble, all the nationalities want peace, the 
world wants peace, and it is almost certain that the invective 
of war and the fateful tensions could cease in Bosnia if they 
could all finally understand one another. If we do not want an 
agreement, we will have war. Regardless of the injustices during 
the period of communism, when every nationality was neglected 
and frustrated--but the Croats constantly and most of all -- 
this bloody war certainly would not have occurred had it not 
been for Serbian expansionism and intervention from outside for 
conquest. 
  The principle of living together in Bosnia has had various 
manifestations and arrangements of human relations. That would 
have prevented this dirty war, and that is beyond any doubt, but 
war was imported into Bosnia. Indeed even the drastically 
altered conditions that resulted in two nationalities being 
crammed together in a tight space -- 65 percent of the 
population on 30 percent of the territory of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina--could not have caused major armed conflicts, 
although that fact did create tensions. In other words, even 
under the impossible conditions coexistence among the 
nationalities, in particular between the Croats and Muslims, 
victims of the same aggression, could have been maintained 
through goodwill and mutual respect for each other's interests. 
  [Sabic] Can it be said that you are an optimist concerning 
the final Croato-Muslim agreement that is to follow after the 
preliminary agreement? 
  [Lasic] I cannot speak for the Muslim side. The Croats, one 
can confidently say, accept the agreement generally as the 
result of the Croatian peace initiative. 
<H5>  An Open Appeal to the Third Nationality </H5>
  [Sabic] If all the documents from the negotiations in 
Washington and Vienna are adopted, what has to be done? 
  [Lasic] I think that a temporary transitional government 
must 
immediately be set up to conduct the affairs of state on the 
basis of the agreement until the next democratic election, which 
would be in a period of one or two years, i.e., until the safe 
return of the displaced persons and refugees. Officials should 
be appointed by the legal political parties in the proportions 
in which they obtained ethnic legitimacy in the last election: 
For the Croats, this is the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Union], 
which took 94 percent of the Croatian seats in the Assembly of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and all 100 percent in the Presidency. 
  [Sabic] You mention elections, but still they are far away. 
But that is a question of democratic procedure, and this must be 
put on the "agenda" sooner or later. 
  [Lasic] Electoral procedure is one of the decisive issues. 
Each nationality should elect its own representatives. 
Otherwise, because the balance between the Bosnian Muslims and 
Croats in the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina is 72:28, the 
Croats would get "representatives" who in both practice and 
theory would in every respect be determined by someone else and 
not they themselves. That is the case in Sarajevo today. Which 
means ethnic voter lists must be drawn up. Incidentally, that is 
one of the virtues of the Vienna negotiations, which, according 
to the reports, are going favorably, which means in the interest 
of both nationalities. 
  [Sabic] Many people familiar with Bosnia and Herzegovina are 
ready to say that the prospects are not good when two of the 
three nationalities in it reach agreement independently of the 
third. Can that rule also be applied to the Croato-Muslim 
preliminary agreement? Are there prospects for the Serbs to join 
the agreement as well? 
  [Lasic] The opportunities of joining are open to them, 
because the preliminary agreement has been drafted in such a way 
that an open appeal to the Serbs is implied in its context. If 
we are to judge by the public signals of Serbian policy, at 
least for now there are no prospects of the Serbs, as an ethnic 
entity, entering the federal arrangements and confederal 
relations with the Bosnian Muslims and Croats in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. We should not forget that the Serbs carried out 
aggression and they are still behaving aggressively. But we 
should be mindful that the agreement between the Croats and the 
Bosnian Muslims alters the political reality of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, toward which the Serbs, like it or not, must take a 
position and define their policy. 
  In other words, they will not be able to behave as though 
nothing had happened, and things do not happen in a vacuum, but 
in a world context, so that it is logical to expect the consent 
of the world, of the United States and Russia first of all, to 
a solution that would not be the temporary situation of a 
temporary truce, but the firm foundation of a lasting peace. 
  [Sabic] This crucial time is being marked by meetings of the 
Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been particularly 
significant meetings in Sarajevo on 6 February and in Livno on 8 
February. These and other meetings indicate that the Croatian 
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina should rally around a policy 
which will be viewed as their joint program. But the approaches 
and points of departure differ. Who is right? 
  [Lasic] In the present reality in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
viewed in isolation, it is absolutely certain that all the 
Croats, that is, the representatives of the Croatian people, 
from all the areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina, are right. There 
are causes and reasons which brought the Croats to a historical 
impasse precisely now when they are waging a decisive struggle 
for the natural right of Croats in their native country of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But we must not omit from our thinking 
that a right can result in harm to the person seeking it if the 
scope of that right does not offer a future. And the future of 
Croats and of their right in Bosnia and Herzegovina can only be 
the entire Croatian interest, and here that entirety for us 
Croats is based on the outlook, security, and strength of the 
state of Croatia. 
<H5>  Was It a Case of "Petty Folklore"? </H5>
  [Sabic] Is the expected reconciliation with the Muslims a 
reflection of our inability--either because we were not strong 
enough or because of the inhibiting force of the world 
community--to resolve the situation "in the field"? 
  [Lasic] There is no real historical chance of reviving 
concord between the Croats and Muslims, nor of finding a modus 
vivendi with the Muslims, but also with the Serbs, and achieving 
an authentic agreement, if we are disunited and weak. Every 
Croat must keep that in mind. The alliance with the Bosnian 
Muslims does not assume that we are weak and would therefore 
enter into an alliance and back off from legitimate Croatian 
policy. In that case, we would not be equal, but we would be in 
a subordinate position. Our strength is great, but the more 
united we are, the greater that strength. 
  [Sabic] If that is so, that means that the alliance with the 
Bosnian Muslims is a thrust that comes from our increased 
strength. 
  [Lasic] Right. We can enter into an alliance with the 
Bosnian 
Muslims, under the final agreement, in two ways: forced because 
we are weak or oriented because we are strong and united. This 
is one of the historical moments which every Croat must 
recognize. This is, after all, everyone's personal destiny as 
well. For example, if all the Croats in Sarajevo were put ad hoc 
into positions of power in the government of the Bosnian 
Muslims, there would be no guarantee of their fate. It would be 
up to someone else, just as is the case today of the Croats who 
out of the kindness of the Muslim leaders are part of the 
administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo or are 
organizing "rallies" there. 
  Without a guarantee of the Croatian entity, the Croats as 
individuals, and also as groups, have no future whatsoever. This 
does not mean that we should not understand the vital necessity 
and human attempt to do something to make that position easier. 
That is why that meeting in Sarajevo should be seen as a real 
reflex on the part of those 300, or more precisely 306, people 
who attended out of the 35,000 Sarajevo Croats. In principle, if 
procedure is respected, and that means legitimacy, support 
should be given to the effort for the Croats to meet, to become 
stronger, to enter into association, to study and inquire into 
their possibilities. 
  [Sabic] You and the writer Andjelko Vuletic were unable to 
take part in the meeting in Sarajevo. Ivan Lovrenovic, one of 
the organizers of the Sarajevo meeting, recently declared in an 
interview that preventing your coming to Sarajevo was "petty 
folklore." What actually happened? 
  [Lasic] That is well-known to the organizers of the Sarajevo 
meeting; in the end, they stood behind that. Only one of them, 
Ivan Lovrenovic, used the phrase "petty folklore over 
everything" to describe the effort to keep away those political 
Croats who by all parameters which they themselves have 
proclaimed should have been on the list, present and active. The 
only thing Lovrenovic, as is evident from his statement, was 
afraid of was that no one from the Muslim government would come 
to the meeting--and he knew, in "consultation" with Ivo Komsic, 
back in Zagreb, not only who would come, but also where they 
would sit and what they would say. The news about the 
unprecedented incident, in which even the Croatian ambassador, 
Dr. Zdravko Sancevic, was also held back, which Lovrenovic 
refers to as a mystification, traveled around the world. 
  Our ignoramus does not mention that this provoked negative 
comments and marked the entire Sarajevo meeting as a 
totalitarian ruse of proven advocates of their own exclusive 
doctrine. The people on the program for that meeting did not 
include any new names, new people, those who authentically 
suffered, but mainly those who in the democratic election did 
not win the confidence of the people for their policy, and so 
they are attempting to "fish in muddy waters," using real 
troubles in their manipulation. That is nothing new. This is 
familiar ground. The sad thing is that a Croatian intellectual, 
a writer, should pretend not to know what the suspension of 
democratic procedure means and where it leads. The real issue 
was not whether particular people could take part, but the 
procedure itself, and Western civilization is based on 
procedure, at least that is well-known. 
  [Sabic] And in the end, how close are we to peace or far 
from 
it? 
  [Lasic] Peace must be closer and closer to us. If we are to 
favorably regulate our relations with the other two 
nationalities, the Bosnian Muslims and Serbs, in a truly 
civilized way, in a possible reconciliation of interests, 
because only this can be lasting, we must be strong, and that 
means united. That is the sense in which one should understand 
the gist of President Tudjman's policy and his vision of the 
entirety of the Croatian interest. Croatian state policy, which 
is legally and legitimately, by the political will of the 
Croatian people, conducted by President Tudjman, must under 
wartime conditions be valid for every Croatian patriot and 
conducted in a unified fashion. 
  Our point of departure must be the historical imperative, 
which is that we do everything we can so that we Croats, in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in general, are unified so that each 
individual, with his pledge to that unity, has his own prospects 
for resolving his own crucial issues in the entirety of the 
general interest of the Croatian people. 
<H5>  The Traps in the Washington Agreement </H5>
  [Sabic] What is your view of the preliminary agreement? Is 
there a trap concealed in it? 
  [Lasic] The preliminary agreement is a superbly drafted 
legal 
document. From the standpoint of constitutional theory and 
practice, in particular there are two critical points for me. 
The legislative body with two chambers--the House of 
Representatives and the Chamber of Nationalities--copies the 
model of the SFRY [Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia]. In 
the House of Representatives, which might be superfluous in the 
federal interethnic state community at the highest level, where 
there are only two principals representing two nationalities, 
the membership is made up on the formula "one man one vote." 
The Bosnian Muslims will always have a more than two-thirds 
majority--72 percent--so that by the nature of things the Croats 
would always be in a minority if there should be a difference of 
views. It is good that a correction has been envisaged in the 
Chamber of Nationalities. 
  But the function of the latter chamber must be defined 
precisely. If at the highest level of the state we are to 
achieve ethnic reciprocity of rights in all institutions with 
government prerogatives, the constituent nationalities, 
regardless of numbers, must have equal rights. Unless absolute 
parity is pursued in the legislative, judicial, or executive 
branches, I see a danger in that one ethnic majority could be 
set against the other ethnic minority. That could become a 
generator of tension and conflict. 
  The longevity and stability of the federation are guaranteed 
only by parity, consensus, and every office open to change. 
Another critical point might be the provision on the central 
government, where parity is also essential. This is an 
institution familiar from the Belgian Constitution (the Council 
of Ministers consists of an equal number of ministers 
representing the French and Flemish languages). But, as Dr. Mate 
Granic, who headed the Croatian delegation in Washington, has 
stated, every agreement presupposes reconciliation of views, 
i.e., compromises. In the interest of the federation and its 
future, I believe that it would be worthwhile for our side and 
the side of the Bosnian Muslims to envisage certain institutions 
that would eliminate the possibility of ethnic confrontation in 
both practice and theory. 
  [Sabic] Negotiations are being conducted in Vienna 
concerning 
the constitution of the federation. What might arise as a 
problem in the wording of the constitution? 
  [Lasic] A big job was done with the signing of the 
preliminary agreement in Washington. Nevertheless, the 
constitution is the fundamental document of the state, and one 
must show maximum caution. Dr. Ivo Sanader, who heads the 
Croatian delegation at the negotiations in Vienna, said that the 
territorial arrangement is perhaps the most difficult problem. 
Every Croat who lives on "problematical" territory will agree 
with Dr. Sanader. The duty to undo the knots which have been 
tied for almost an entire century has fallen to our generation. 
Let us start with the first level of government--the opstina. In 
territorial terms, the opstina arrangement of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina was done to suit the holders of power at the time, 
in the sixties, so perfidiously as to make the Croats a minority 
wherever possible. The borders of the opstinas and kotars that 
came down from Austro-Hungary were altered in minute detail and 
with the same objective back in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. 
  For instance, Mostar is frequently referred to as a 
community 
in which the Muslims have the majority--about 44,000 Muslims, it 
is said, as against 42,500 Croats--that is a difference of 1 
percent on behalf of the Muslims. That is a striking half-truth, 
because those figures apply to opstina territory. In the actual 
city of Mostar, according to the official 1991 Census, which is 
the most unfavorable to the Croats, there are about 27,000 
Muslims and 31,000 Croats. But on one side a locality inhabited 
by Muslims was added to Mostar Opstina, while another with 
100-percent Croatian population was taken away. 
  The example of Dobretici, where there are 4,500 Croats, 
today 
driven from their century-old homes, is also significant. By 
administrative decision, Dobretici was annexed to Skender Vakuf 
Opstina, with which it does not even have direct highway links. 
If Dobretici had been in Travnik or Jajce Opstinas, the Croats 
would have an absolute majority, as they did before. There are 
several such examples: Derventa, for instance. If new/old 
opstina boundaries that are fair should be established, we would 
have a territorial situation much more favorable to us. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8011 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mostar Opens Checkpoint for Civilian Crossings </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mostar Opens Checkpoint for Civilian Crossings </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704192894 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704192894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] There is some good news in Mostar today. A 
checkpoint has finally been opened for civilians to pass from 
one part of town to another and the work on normalizing the town 
infrastructure has begun. Here is a report by our Mostar 
correspondent Omer Vatric: 
  [Begin Vatric recording] This day will be remembered in 
Mostar by the first meetings of family members and friends at 
the town line of separation, at which only bullets and shells 
were meeting for a full 11 months. On two occasions, 50 Mostar 
people from the eastern and 50 from the western part of the town 
met at the crossroads in front of the burnt-down Hit department 
store. They were coming in groups of 25 and had two hours to 
tell about their pain, fear, and hope. [passage omitted] New 
groups of citizens should meet tomorrow as well as the next day. 
  The citizens of Donja Mahala, Semovac, and Sermica will 
remember this day because the water came back. Water 
authorities say that, in conformity with agreements reached with 
the Croatian Defense Council, these districts will get drinking 
water after more than nine months. Unfortunately, the entire 
left bank [of the Neretva] will remain without water in the 
coming days, and the entire eastern part of Mostar will remain 
without electricity. Constant talks about the implementation of 
the Washington agreement and implementing the agreed federation 
bring hope that all of Mostar will have water and electricity 
soon and that the building of bridges and a general 
normalization of life will begin. [passage omitted] [end 
recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8012 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Health Minister on Undernourishment, Epidemics </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Health Minister on Undernourishment, Epidemics </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704201394 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704201394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Professor Mustafa Beganovic, health minister </F>
of Bosnia-Herzegovina, by Senada Cumurovic; place and date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Cumurovic] World Health Day and the 70th 
anniversary of the Health Protection Institute of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina are being marked this year under grave living 
conditions. Professor Beganovic, can you tell us about the 
health situation of the citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Beganovic] This situation is rather grave. There is 
undernourishment. There are epidemics of infectious diseases, 
although they have not been widely spread, they have not grown 
into pandemics. For that, we can, above all, thank our people, 
who know how to maintain hygiene even under such conditions and 
also thank our medical staff who are making efforts and [words 
indistinct] to help people as much as possible. [passage 
omitted] 
  In this free part of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, we 
have about 70,000 seriously wounded people, a large number of 
disabled, a large number of paraplegics, a large number of cases 
of chronic diseases, a large number of cases of psychological 
disorders, and, generally speaking, we were very rarely able to 
help and do something for the improvement of health. We were 
trying to save lives, we were saving elementary health so a 
person would not die, would survive, and then, with time, we 
shall try to return him to full health. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8013 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Albania </F>
<H3> <TI>   Berisha on Possible Greek-FYROM Compromise </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Berisha on Possible Greek-FYROM Compromise </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804105694 Tirana ATA in English 1014 GMT 8 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804105694 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, April 8 (ATA) -- In his interview with the 
Greek agency ANA, President Berisha expressed the belief that 
the Albanian-Greek relations will be further promoted in the 
future. 
  "Albania and Greece have overcome crisis and are improving 
relations following the visit of the Foreign Minister Karolos 
Papoulias to Albania.... I believe that the strengthening of 
the identity of the minority and their integration are very 
important issues and should be carried forward. The Albanians 
do not hate the minority people. They respect them. For this 
reason, I believe that the Albanian-Greek relations will be 
further promoted in the future. 
  The great number of the Albanian emigrants in Greece and the 
existence of a Greek minority in Albania should serve as a 
strong link between the two countries, he added. 
  The situation regarding the rights of the Greek minority has 
been improved considerably after the days of communist regime, 
President Berisha said and vowed to respect them fully, 
including education, as envisaged in the charter of Copenhagen. 
  Regarding the status of the Orthodox Church in Albania, he 
appreciated the performance of Archbishop Anastas, but 
considered unfair the previous insistence of the Greek 
Government on appointing the clergies in his own country. 
  In Albania, he added, the church is independent of the state 
and any ethnic Greek can be elected to any post in the church. 
  Commenting on the relations between Greece and The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), President Berisha said 
he does not support the Greek severe actions against FYROM and 
considered the achievement of a compromise as possible. The 
countries in the region "must understand that peace is very 
important not only for the two countries but for all the others 
in the region." 
  He denied that Albania seeks either to (?destabilize or) to 
recompile the Balkan map through violence. He favours 
discussion for a solution to the problem of the ethnic Albanian 
in Kosova as well Albania's membership to the European Union. 
  The presence of the Americans, Berisha said, is an important 
factor for the European stability. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8014 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Albania </F>
<H3> <TI>   CE Delegation Arrives, Meets With Arbnori </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    CE Delegation Arrives, Meets With Arbnori </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0604172394 Tirana ATA in English 1018 GMT 6 Apr 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0604172394 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana ATA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, April 6 (ATA) -- Speaker of the Albanian 
Parliament Pjeter Arbnori met with the delegation of the Ad Hoc 
Committee of the Council of Europe [CE] led by Lord Finsberg, 
deputy president of the Parliamentary Assembly. "We want that 
foreigners see with their eyes the good and the bad points, what 
has been made and what not during the two years under 
democracy," Mr. Arbnori said during the meeting. "We may say 
that the maturity of the Albanian people has made the Albanians 
choose a non-violent way both in Albania and in Kosova, a way 
without bloodshed. To this aspect a good contribution has been 
the attitude of the formerly politically prisoners who have not 
asked for revenge, but for justice and the rule of law." 
  Then Mr. Arbnori briefed on the social and economic 
transformations in all the fields and on the structure and 
functioning of the parliament. He said that the parliament has 
played and is playing an important role in the creation of a 
legislation according to international levels. 
  In his address, Mr. Finsberg stressed that the aim of the 
visit of his delegation is the creation of a clear view on the 
changes and development of the democratic processes in Albania. 
"We are confident that the meetings will shall have will give 
us the possibility to get a real and broad information. We want 
that Albania go ahead surely on the road of democracy and take 
its place in the Council of Europe." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8015 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068__a94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068-A </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Hungary </F>
<H3> <TI>   Boross Speech Highlighted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Boross Speech Highlighted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804081994 Budapest MTI in English 1543 GMT 7 Apr 94 -- 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> AU0804081994 </F>
<F P=104>  Budapest MTI </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 7 April (MTI) -- Following the speech of 
Hungarian President Arpad Goncz, Prime Minister Peter Boross 
took the floor in Hungarian Parliament on Thursday [7 April]. 
  On behalf of the government, he made a brief farewell 
speech, 
and stressed that, although it is debated today, the past four 
years will go down in history as an epoch-making era. 
  "These four years characterize the change in era, the change 
in approach, in other words, the change in political system. 
  "Although law-making work will cease for now, the country 
must be governed. The government considers it its fundamental 
task to create the conditions needed for an honest election and 
the creation of a parliament that accords to the will of the 
public. 
  "The government also considers it its obligation to give an 
account of its work over the past four years to the nation, for 
the first time in decades," the Prime Minister said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8016 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_b_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Berov Comments on Zhelev Criticism of Cabinet </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Berov Comments on Zhelev Criticism of Cabinet </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704134694 Sofia 168 CHASA in Bulgarian No. 13 4 Apr 94 pp 
1, 22 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704134694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia 168 CHASA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Prime Minister Lyuben Berov by </F>
Zoya Dimitrova in Sofia on 1 April: "Even the President Has a 
Right to His Personal Opinion"] 
  [Text] The prime minister gave 168 CHASA his first 
interview following his operation, speaking over the telephone 
from the government hospital in Sofia. He said he was not 
surprised by the leap in the dollar's exchange rate because a 
state cannot support negative balances of payments and trade 
indefinitely, and this is bound to have an effect on its 
national currency. 
  Professor Berov gave us this interview on Friday evening [1 
April]. The next day, following Zhelev's self-serving 
performance on the Panorama television program, we telephoned 
the prime minister again. He said he does not intend to resign, 
and confirmed that he would be at work on Thursday [7 April]. 
He did not comment on the president's assessment of the 
government. 
  [Dimitrova] Professor Berov, this interview is being 
recorded. Do you have any objection? 
  [Berov] Naturally not. Go ahead with your questions. 
  [Dimitrova] How do you feel, Professor? 
  [Berov] Normal. I intend to return to work soon. 
  [Dimitrova] How soon is that? 
  [Berov] I cannot say because it depends on the doctors. I 
assume I will be at my desk on Thursday. 
  [Dimitrova] Your wife says you are walking 700 meters a day. 
Is that true? 
  [Berov] Yes, sometimes even further, but I have not yet 
reached Cherni Vrukh [peak of Mount Vitosha on outskirts of 
Sofia]. 
  [Dimitrova] Did the leap in the dollar's exchange rate 
surprise you? 
  [Berov] What should I say? It was not a great surprise for 
me because we had negative balances of trade and payments, 
especially during the second half of last year. In the first 
quarter of 1994, we again had a negative balance, which as yet 
has not been taken into account, but there are some secondary 
figures that indicate, I would say, that the sickness is 
continuing. This is a sickness of the deficits in the balances 
of payments and trade, and one of the causes is the embargo. 
  Can a state maintain negative balances of payments and trade 
indefinitely without this affecting its national currency? 
  [Dimitrova] How do you react to the president's statement 
that this government is sick and to the possible soundings on 
forming a new government? 
  [Berov] How can I react? You know that initially the 
government in Bulgaria is appointed by parliament. In any case, 
anyone is entitled to express any viewpoint, and this is 
naturally a matter of his own personal opinion. The president 
has a right to a personal opinion. 
  [Dimitrova] Do you intend to make structural changes in the 
cabinet? 
  [Berov] Yes. 
  [Dimitrova] It is said that you will close down certain 
committees and replace them by ministries. Who will head the 
Ministry of Privatization? 
  [Berov] Yes, there will be such a ministry. Rumen Gechev 
will be the minister. I do not know if you have heard his name, 
but he is well known among economic circles. You know that the 
Constitution does not provide for any committees. So far, the 
committees have continued to exist by force of inertia. 
However, it is high time to dissolve them and allocate their 
functions to different ministries or elevate some of them to the 
level of ministries. 
  [Dimitrova] Which ministers will you let go, Prof. Berov? 
  [Berov] Oh, it is too early to say. First, I have no 
conclusive data showing that anyone is not doing his job 
properly. 
  [Dimitrova] I would like to ask you this -- of course, you 
need not answer: Are you not sorry that you named as your 
deputy one of the deputy prime ministers and not the other, who 
is a more up-to-date politician -- I am referring to Valentin 
Karabashev. Might he not have coped much better with the 
situation facing the country? 
  [Berov] Valentin Karabashev had some long trips abroad 
planned, and he is continuing these at the moment. I cannot 
appoint as my substitute a person who would be absent at least 
half the time. 
  [Dimitrova] Was this formal reason the only motive for your 
decision? 
  [Berov] It is an important, substantial reason. The person 
who stands in for me must be in the country. He cannot exercise 
his right to rule -- it is not a right but a duty -- from a 
distance of thousands of kilometers. You cannot play the game 
like this. 
  [Dimitrova] The 168 CHASA weekly forecasted that a possible 
caretaker government would develop into a "velvet dictatorship" 
cabinet. What is your view on the ambitions and statements of 
Dimitur Ludzhev, who has been using fascist phraseology in 
recent months? 
  [Berov] This is evidently a matter of personal ambitions. 
Regarding the fascist phraseology, the answer is clear. I 
believe that dictatorship is impossible in Bulgaria, I will tell 
you that straight. Even the most ambitious individual will not 
be able to pull it off. Next, I assume you are familiar with 
our Constitution and realize that it is not necessarily the 
caretaker government that has to hold the elections. Look how 
Mitsotakis fell from power in neighboring Greece. Yet he was 
the very one who organized the elections in which he was 
defeated. 
  [Dimitrova] We have before our very eyes the histories of 
your neighbors Greece and Turkey. They passed through a form of 
military dictatorship that introduced law and order in these 
countries and stimulated their economies. 
  [Berov] Do you mean to say there is no law and order in our 
country now? If we have to introduce a military dictatorship to 
restore elementary order and legality, where are we going? I 
believe that we have to be optimists. 
  [Dimitrova] One last question: Can you go over to the 
window so we can take a photograph? 
  [Berov] I think you will have an opportunity for this on 
Thursday when I return to work at the session of the Council of 
Ministers. I do not think it is proper for someone to show 
themselves at the window. 
  [Dimitrova] Then I will not insist. Thank you for the 
interview. 
  [Berov] Have a nice evening. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8017 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_b_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Minister Views Army Restructuring </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Minister Views Army Restructuring </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704200094 Sofia 24 CHASA in Bulgarian 1 Apr 94 p 14 </F>
<F P=103> AU0704200094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia 24 CHASA </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Valentin Aleksandrov by </F>
Lyubomir Denov; place and date not given: "Valentin 
Aleksandrov: There Is One Officer or Sergeant to Each Soldier"] 
  [Excerpts] [Denov] Mr. Aleksandrov, for a long time now 
people have been talking about upcoming cuts in the Army. The 
new budget implies that this is inevitable. When will it take 
place? 
  [Aleksandrov] No one could doubt any longer the fact that 
with this budget we cannot have a 100,000-strong Army. 
Something must be done, although I by no means agree to the 
concept "cuts." What will actually happen is, first of all, 
retirements, and second, structural changes in the Army. 
  Since there is no more space in which to retreat, and since 
the new draft bill on defense has no chance of being adopted at 
second reading, I decided to apply the existing law. I do not 
want to leave a grave heritage to my successor. 
  According to the military service regulations colonels 
should 
retire at the age of 50, and lieutenant colonels at 45. These 
regulations are based on the 1958 Law on Universal Military 
Service, which was amended for the 11th time in 1979. 
  [Denov] What does it mean in numbers? 
  [Aleksandrov] According to the list a bit more than 3,000 
officers will retire. 
  [Denov] Would the combat ability of the Army not suffer? 
  [Aleksandrov] This is a reasonable question. Since I had 
reports about a certain tension among the officers, I decided to 
investigate thoroughly the cadre issue in the Army. These are 
some of the generalized assessments of the officers who were 
polled: To reduce the inflated payrolls of the General Staff, 
the Ministry of Defense, the armies, and the divisions; to 
eliminate the unnecessary Ground Troops Command; to dismiss all 
officers with a service of more than 20 years. 
  What do the figures show? There is one officer or sergeant 
to each soldier in our Army! This is an incredible luxury, 
which only countries like the United States or the UK could 
afford. The ratio between soldiers and commanders in Turkey is 
12:1; in Greece it is 8:1. Their combat ability has not 
suffered because of this; the opposite is true. 
  If the Air Force and the Navy require a larger number of 
officers and sergeants because of the higher degree of 
professionalism, a ratio like the existing one is inadmissible 
in the Ground Troops, which are the backbone of the Army. 
  A great part of the officers actually do not implement 
commanding functions. Some 24 percent of the officers serve in 
structures which do not deal with the management of the Army or 
in other departments. 
  Our Army is becoming dangerously old. The young officers are 
only 45 percent of the officer corps. 
  Our Army is full of clerks. The number of combat officers is 
five times smaller than the number of their colleagues in the 
staffs and officers. Those figures are shocking! [passage 
omitted] 
  [Denov] When will a final decision on the new personnel 
figures be adopted? 
  [Aleksandrov] As a minister I already adopted my decision. 
The government fully supports me. The supreme commander in 
chief has no remarks in principle. I have the impression that 
the political forces also approve. At the beginning of April my 
decision will be discussed by the Supreme Military Council. I 
also have the support of Army General Lyuben Petrov, chief of 
the General Staff. [passage omitted] 
  [Denov] Is it true that after the changes the Army personnel 
will be cut from 100,000 to 55,000? 
  [Aleksandrov] There is an opinion according to which with 
the budget the parliament adopted we can maintain only a 
55,000-strong Army. This conclusion is based on the methodology 
of a UK institute. I issued an order to the General Staff 
according to which an analysis is made at present regarding 
precisely what Army could we maintain. However, in this case it 
is more important to decide whether we should have a smaller but 
combat-ready Army, or to leave a fantastic big number of people 
with questionable qualifications. Personally, I prefer the 
quality to the quantity. [passage omitted) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8018 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_y_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kontic, Russian Delegation Assail UN Sanctions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kontic, Russian Delegation Assail UN Sanctions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0504194194 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1904 GMT 5 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0504194194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 5 (TANJUG) -- Yugoslav Prime 
Minister Radoje Kontic and a delegation of Russian academicians 
on Tuesday agreed that U.N. sanctions against Yugoslavia are 
unjust and counterproductive both for Yugoslavia and for 
stability in the Balkans. 
  Kontic praised the Russian Federation for its increasingly 
active role in the efforts aimed at finding a just solution to 
the crisis in former Yugoslavia, said a statement released by 
the Yugoslav Information Ministry. 
  In May 1992, the U.N. Security Council imposed comprehensive 
and mandatory sanctions against Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro) 
for its alleged involvement in civil war raging in neighbouring 
Bosnia-Herzegovina among the local Moslems, Serbs and Croats. 
  Kontic briefed the Russian delegation -- which is headed by 
Vice President of the Russian Academy of Sciences Nikolay 
Laverev and which also includes former Soviet premier Nikolay 
Ryzhkov -- about the current political and economic situation in 
Yugoslavia, especially the results of the economic recovery 
programme launched earlier this year. 
  Ryzhkov is president of the Moscow School of Business 
Management and Administration founded by the Yugoslav company 
Braca Karic. 
  The Russian academicians communicated to Kontic the 
unanimous 
stand of Russia's leading scientists that the impermissible 
blockade of Yugoslavia should be ended, and expressed 
satisfaction at Moscow's more active role in resolving the 
problems in former Yugoslavia. 
  The Russian delegation was also received by Serbian 
Parliament Speaker Dragan Tomic, who expressed appreciation for 
their support. 
  Although support from some quarters has come late in the 
day, 
it has nevertheless come in time to sober the international 
community and make it realize that the cruel sanctions against 
the Yugoslav people should be lifted as soon as possible and 
never used again against any other nation, said Tomic. 
  Laverev said this type of contacts helped the world realize 
the truth about Yugoslavia. "Your plight teaches us caution," he 
underlined, and added that the Russian Academy of Sciences, the 
Russian people, and other factors in Russia were supporting 
Yugoslavia in its just struggle for independence. 
  The Russian delegation also had a meeting with the dean of 
Belgrade University, Professor Dragutin Velickovic, and explored 
possibilities of cooperation between Belgrade University and 
Russian scientific institutions. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8019 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Walesa's Conditions To Meet Coalition Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Walesa's Conditions To Meet Coalition Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0804100894 Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 8 Apr 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> WS0804100894 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Luiza Kowalska and Robert Krasowski: </F>
"President's Conditions; Walesa Wants National Security 
Council"] 
  [Text] The president is ready to meet Pawlak and 
Kwasniewski, but, in return, he wants the coalition to withdraw 
Rosati's candidacy, and he also wants a speedy establishment of 
a National Security Council [RBN]. The coalition fears that the 
RBN will strengthen the president's powers to an undesirable 
extent. 
  "The president is open to proposals for a meeting with the 
coalition's leaders," stated Andrzej Drzycimski, the Belweder's 
spokesman, after a Walesa-Oleksy meeting during which the Sejm 
speaker tried to persuade the president to meet Prime Minister 
Pawlak and Aleksander Kwasniewski, a leader of the Democratic 
Left Alliance [SLD]. 
  But Drzycimski also suggested that such a meeting may take 
place only after the coalition meets two conditions. 
  The first would be the coalition's official decision to give 
up trying to force Dariusz Rosati's candidacy for the post of 
finance minister and deputy prime minister. The president 
assured Oleksy yesterday that his decision to reject Rosati's 
candidacy is irreversible. 
  Second, the Belweder is demanding an acceleration of work on 
the establishment of the RBN. 
  "It does not make sense to establish spur-of-the-moment and 
extraconstitutional agencies" is the way Drzycimski commented on 
the idea of a Walesa-Kwasniewski-Pawlak meeting. "But the RBN 
and, until it is established, the National Defense Committee 
[KOK] could be such a constitutional forum." 
  "I want to believe that what Minister Drzycimski says has 
nothing to do with what Mr. President thinks," Jerzy 
Szmajdzinski of the SLD told ZYCIE WARSZAWY. "After all, 
completely different issues are discussed during KOK's sessions." 
  The purpose of the trilateral meeting suggested by the SLD 
is 
to resolve the political stalemate caused by the rejection of 
Rosati's candidacy. The SLD fears that a withdrawal of Rosati 
and the submission of a new candidate will not solve the problem 
because there are no guarantees that the president will not 
apply a veto a second time. 
  Drzycimski said yesterday that, before an official 
announcement of a new candidate, the coalition should present it 
to the Belweder. The president's spokesman admits that there is 
no constitutional requirement for the government to consult the 
president over candidates for governmental posts. "But, if one 
wants the candidate to be approved...," Drzycimski said. 
  Both parties to the meeting denied that the name of a new 
SLD 
candidate was mentioned during the talks. 
  It is still not known when the Walesa-Pawlak-Kwasniewski 
meeting could take place. Drzycimski stated that it was not 
possible up to now because Kwasniewski has been abroad. But 
Oleksy stated that the SLD leader is returning on Friday, and it 
is possible that the meeting will take place that day. 
  Oleksy said after the meeting that he was trying to persuade 
the president to sign the budget law and the electoral law to 
gmina [small administrative units] councils soon. But the 
president said he has not yet made a final decision on these 
issues. 
  --A decision to establish the RBN was made on the initiative 
of the Belweder during the most recent KOK session, in November 
1993. The RBN was supposed to be the supreme state agency in the 
area of the country's defense system and security. The 
government would have to execute the RBN's decisions, whereas 
the RBN's composition would be the same as that of KOK--among 
other things, it would include the president; the prime 
minister; Sejm and Senate speakers; chiefs of the Defense 
Ministry, the Internal Affairs Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, 
and the Finance Ministry; and the chief of the President's 
Office. The coalition has initially agreed to the establishment 
of the RBN, and Sejm Speaker Oleksy even promised speedy 
legislative proceedings. But once specific items relative to 
the RBN were presented, the coalition refused to support the 
idea any longer. According to the coalition's representatives, 
the RBN's composition would cause an imbalance in the legal 
status guaranteed by the Constitution because a majority of the 
RBN's members would be associated with the Belweder camp. The 
Belweder in turn thinks that the RBN idea limits presidential 
powers, and that is why the coalition leaders, who are already 
making plans to assume the presidency, want to prevent its 
establishment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8020 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further on Possible Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further on Possible Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0804114894 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 8-10 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0804114894 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "E.W.:" "If Government Gives Rosati Up; </F>
President-Coalition Talks Possible Next Week"] 
  [Text] "The president is open to a meeting with the 
governing coalition. But, before the meeting takes place, the 
coalition's representatives should take an unambiguous stand on 
Lech Walesa's rejection of the candidacy of Dariusz Rosati," 
said Andrzej Drzycimski, the president's spokesman, after 
Thursday's [7 April] meeting between Lech Walesa and Sejm 
Speaker Jozef Oleksy. According to the Sejm speaker, a meeting 
between President Lech Walesa and the governing coalition will 
take place next week at the latest. "I am hoping for that, and 
I want to be convinced of that," the Sejm speaker said. 
  A. Drzycimski stated that the president wants to talk with 
serious politicians, who take the country's problems seriously. 
The spokesman explained to journalists that there is a 
precondition for L. Walesa's meeting with the coalition--namely, 
it is that common themes exist, and one of those is a unanimous 
stand by the coalition regarding Dariusz Rosati, who was a 
candidate for finance minister and deputy prime minister but who 
was later rejected by L. Walesa. The conversation should take 
place within constitutional provisions. "According to the 
president, a National Security Council would be an appropriate, 
constitutionally allowed place for such consultations," 
Drzycimski stated. The council would include the president, the 
prime minister, Sejm and Senate speakers, and the chiefs of key 
ministries. The spokesman stated that Oleksy failed to present 
the president with a new candidate for the post of deputy prime 
minister and finance minister [preceding sentence published in 
boldface]. 
  As the Sejm speaker said, the meeting at the Belweder was an 
opportunity to talk about all things that concern the country 
and raise public concern. Among the topics discussed were the 
issue of L. Walesa's nonsigning of the budget law, and doubts 
concerning the president's signing the electoral law to gmina 
[small administrative units] councils. "I was trying to 
persuade the president to sign the budget," J. Oleksy admitted. 
Conditions for effective functioning by the government and the 
coalition in different areas were also discussed. The Sejm 
speaker stressed that he is in favor of the president talking to 
the coalition without the media playing the role of an 
intermediary, but, instead, in a direct way, with the 
participation of people occupying some posts at the central 
level. Such a meeting, which, as J. Oleksy stressed, would not 
have to be in the form of negotiations, would serve the goal of 
better communication and also of defining methods for a better 
functioning of the state. "I presented my views. I think they 
were the average of the views circulating in parliament; such is 
my role there," the Sejm speaker said. 
  The conversation at the Belweder was also an opportunity to 
evaluate the results of a Sejm delegation's visit to Russia, and 
also to define the goals of a new, breakthrough strategy with 
regard to relations with Japan. A delegation of our parliament 
headed by J. Oleksy is going to Japan on Friday. According to a 
communique by the Belweder's press office, the Sejm speaker 
agreed with the president's suggestion that Walesa should be 
consulted over international visits by politicians on the 
highest level. This would serve to assure a uniform image of 
Polish foreign policy. 
  NOWA EUROPA asked Jerzy Szmajdzinski (Democratic Left 
Alliance), chairman of the Sejm National Defense Commission and 
a secretary general of Social Democracy of the Polish Republic, 
to comment on the president's proposal: 
  "I cannot answer the question before the meeting of the 
coalition. Personally, I do not share the president's arguments 
by which he disqualified Professor Dariusz Rosati. That is why 
I cannot be sure whether the next candidate would agree to be 
`dissected' over several weeks in all possible ways, only to be 
informed three minutes into the prime minister's visit to the 
president that, either he has been in Poland too long or he is 
not involved in any affair, and these reasons disqualify him 
from being deputy prime minister and finance minister. I am 
sure the coalition will hold a session before the meeting with 
the president, and, during the session, appropriate decisions 
will be made." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8021 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVAKIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhirinovskiy To Visit Bratislava 16-19 May </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhirinovskiy To Visit Bratislava 16-19 May </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804123094 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804123094 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak on 6 April 
on pages 1 and 2 carries a 700-word Vladimir Jancura article 
entitled "Zhirinovskiy Will Visit Bratislava." According to the 
article, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, chairman of the Liberal 
Democratic Party [LDP] of Russia, "will pay a private visit to 
Bratislava from 16 to 19 May this year," at the invitation of 
Bratislava businessman Ladislav Mojzis, 37, owner of the West 
Club, a discotheque, cafe, and restaurant in the Koliba district 
of Bratislava. Mojzis, who claims to be "Zhirinovskiy's friend 
of long standing," tells the PRAVDA reporter that the visit 
"will have an exclusively private character" and that "our guest 
does not wish any contacts with political parties and mass 
media." The date of the visit was reportedly arranged by Dr. 
Jozef Lauko, another Bratislava resident and "friend of 
Zhirinovskiy," during the recent LDP congress in Moscow, where 
Lauko had been invited as "guest of honor." Mojzis claims that 
he had known Zhirinovskiy "long before he became involved on the 
political scene of the former USSR." 
  According to the PRAVDA reporter, Mojzis denies that he is a 
member of the Slovak National Party "or any other party." He 
also rejects the reporter's suspicion that the visit's main 
objective is to promote his business. Although Mojzis concedes 
that Zhirinovskiy will be staying in the West Club, he asserts 
that "we do not need any advertising." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8022 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_m_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   PDP Leader Criticizes Census Preparations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PDP Leader Criticizes Census Preparations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804095994 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804095994 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Aware that the number of Albanians in 
this former Yugoslav republic is probably greater than suggested 
by official statistics and now that the government is preparing 
for new elections, the Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia -- FYROM] authorities are dragging their feet over 
the census, which should be carried out under international 
supervision. Ibadete Hajrullahu has more details: 
  [Hajrullahu] To settle the controversy about the number of 
Albanians in Macedonia -- which according to Macedonian 
officials is approximately 21 percent, while according to 
Albanian politicians is 40 percent, Macedonia agreed under 
international pressure to carry out a new census because the 
exact number of Albanians is needed to determine their status in 
this republic. The date of the census has already been 
postponed more than once because disputed issues have not yet 
been resolved. Council of Europe experts have asked that some 
articles of the Census Law be amended since the Macedonian side 
did not take into consideration remarks made by the Council of 
Europe when drafting this bill. On this and other problems, we 
interviewed the chairman of the Party of Democratic Prosperity, 
Arber Xhaferri: 
  The census is about to be carried out. Have the necessary 
preparations for a real and objective census been concluded, and 
how is the situation regarding the procurement of personal 
documents of Albanians for the census? 
  [Xhaferri] This problem is real and objective. The 
Macedonian Government is attempting to have the census carried 
out according to their standards and needs. We, however, are 
not satisfied with these preparations, which is why we are 
trying to organize the census ourselves. We have already 
contacted some experts on statistics and demographic censuses 
from Kosova and the United States. We intend to maintain our 
stance. We have our demands and we will not give up. 
  We are also having a number of difficulties helping people 
obtain personal documentation. In my opinion, this strategy is 
aimed against the Albanians or against peoples who should be 
marginalized in the system. No matter where they are, 
particularly in the postcommunist states, these peoples are 
having problems obtaining personal documents and with property. 
  These difficulties have been fabricated so that a majority 
of 
the population will not be able to register. 
  [Hajrullahu] The coalition government prepared the election 
laws some time ago. What is your view on this? 
  [Xhaferri] Even under these election laws, a political 
result will emerge on the Albanians' political strength. It is 
anticipated that Albanians should in no way obtain one-third of 
the deputies in the parliament. If they were able to reach this 
number, they would become a relevant political factor because 
they could then oppose any law or constitution that could be 
introduced in Macedonia. Thus, the weight of their vote would 
have some political significance. 
  Meanwhile, with the percentage they occupy in parliament, 
they cannot influence the polls and the election process. This 
election law that is approved or proposed has this in mind -- 
the Albanians should in no way obtain one-third of the 
parliament members. 
  [Hajrullahu] Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
  [Xhaferri] You are welcome. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8023 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   One-Day Cease-Fire Agreed Throughout Republic </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    One-Day Cease-Fire Agreed Throughout Republic </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704172594 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704172594 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Before a more in-depth look at the news of the day, 
let us listen to the information that we have just obtained from 
our fax machine, which says: 
  As the B-H PRESS news agency has learned, an agreement on a 
one-day cease-fire has been reached with the enemy side this 
afternoon. [Words indistinct] cease-fire comes in force at 1800 
today and refers to the entire territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
The aim of this cease-fire is to create, with the mediation of 
UN Protection Force, the conditions for talks and 
intensification of the peace [word indistinct]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8024 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu068_i_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-068 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Gorazde, Bihac Included </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Gorazde, Bihac Included </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704183694 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1800 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704183694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] We have received the following announcement by the 
Press Center of the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina: 
  On 7 April 1994, beginning at 1800, Army General Rasim Delic 
issued the order to units of the Army of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina on a general cease-fire with the Serbian 
aggressor's side to last 24 hours. This order ensued as a result 
of the insistence of the Security Council and Mr. Akashi in 
order to create necessary conditions for military-political 
talks with the representatives of the Serbian aggressor. The 
order issued to the units of the Army of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina fully implies meeting the demands presented 
by representatives of the Army of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This above all applies to stopping the 
offensive of the Serbian aggressor's forces on Gorazde and 
Bihac, which was presented to General Rose and the public during 
the day. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8025 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_a_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ALBANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Greek Terrorist Commando' Attacks Army Center </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Greek Terrorist Commando' Attacks Army Center </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   NC1104073694 Paris AFP in English 2314 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> NC1104073694 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, April 11 (AFP)--Two soldiers were killed and 
several wounded in an attack early Sunday by a "Greek terrorist 
commando" on an Albanian army centre near the border, Albanian 
television reported citing an official communique. It said six 
or seven people "armed with automatic rifles" and wearing Greek 
military uniforms had crossed the border near Peshkepia in the 
southern district of Gjirokastra. 
  Quoting a law and order ministry communique, it said that at 
02:30 a.m. the Greeks had entered an army recruit training 
centre four kilometers (2.5 miles) from the border. Two of the 
attackers killed soldier Arben Gjini, 20, while the others went 
into a dormitory and opened fire on the sleeping soldiers. An 
officer, Fatmi Shehu, was killed and three other soldiers were 
badly wounded. Several other men sustained minor wounded. 
  One of the attackers spoke Albanian but with the accent of 
the Greek minority concentrated in the south of the country, the 
communique said. 
  The commando escaped and fled back to Greece. All the 
evidence pointed to they having come from Greece, the communique 
said. 
  The Albanian foreign ministry protested at what it called a 
"criminal act premeditated by Greek special forces". It said 
the Greek government "must bear responsibility" for the attack. 
Sunday's incident was the most serious in recent years between 
Albania and Greece whose disagreement centres on the fate of the 
Greek Orthodox Christian minority in Albania. 
  In July, Greece expelled around 20,000 Albanian workers 
following the expulsion by Tirana of an Orthodox priest alleged 
to have advocated unification of ethnic Greeksin southern 
Albania with Greece. About 200,000 Albanians are believed to be 
living illegally in Greece. 
  Meanwhile in Athens the Northern Epirus Liberation Front 
(Malvi) claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement to 
the ELEVTHEROTIPIA newspaper published Monday. The group said 
it had been forced into the attack by the "criminal indifference 
of the Greek state" towards the plight of the Greek minority in 
Albania. 
  Northern Epirus is the Greek nationalist name for the 
southern region where most of Albania's Greek minority is 
concentrated. 
  The statement condemned the "conspiracy of silence which had 
condemned to fatalism our nationality question and our brothers 
in Northern Epirus." The attack was an attempt to transform the 
"catastrophic situation" of the Greek minority that had led to 
Malvi's creation, the statement said. 
  According to Athens some 400,000 ethnic Greeks live in 
Albania, but Tirana puts the figure at 60,000. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8026 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_a_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ALBANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   NATO Delegation Arrives on Official Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    NATO Delegation Arrives on Official Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704204294 Tirana Radio Tirana Network in Albanian 1430 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704204294 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana Radio Tirana Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A high-level NATO delegation led by General George 
Joulwan, supreme commander of the Allied Forces in Europe, 
arrived in Tirana today on an official visit. The high-level 
NATO official was received at Rinas airport, according to NATO 
protocol, by Defense Minister Safet Zhulali, the chief of the 
Army General Staff, and other top Defense Ministry officials. 
The ambassadors of NATO countries and military attaches of NATO 
missions in Tirana were also present at the welcoming ceremony 
at the airport. 
  The arrival in Tirana of the supreme commander of the Allied 
Forces in Europe was assessed by foreign and domestic observers 
as a meaningful gesture toward our country. According to them, 
General Joulwan's visit to Tirana will strengthen the foundation 
of the close military cooperation between Albania and the 
Atlantic alliance. This cooperation is believed to be improving 
with this visit. 
  Meanwhile, official talks between the two delegations 
presided over by Zhulali and Joulwan have started at the Defense 
Ministry. The supreme commander and our defense minister plan to 
hold a meeting after the open talks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8027 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_a_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ALBANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhulali on Membership, Integration </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhulali on Membership, Integration </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704204394 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704204394 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Official talks between Defense Minister Safet 
Zhulali and General George Joulwan have taken place at the 
Defense Ministry. Greeting the high-ranking NATO guest, 
Minister Zhulali said that his visit to Albania is an historic 
moment that will give new impetus to Albania's cooperation with 
NATO and will have its own effects in the region, discouraging 
all those who attempt to destabilize it. 
  Zhulali noted that since the beginning of the democratic 
processes, Albania has requested membership in NATO. After the 
establishment of the democratic government, such a demand was 
presented officially, because Albania morally feels itself to be 
a NATO member and is ready to undertake concrete steps in this 
direction. 
  We are aware that our standards do not correspond to those 
of 
NATO, but we have the same democratic values. We are sure that 
your assistance will not be absent. Thus, we will achieve what 
we want, Minister Zhulali told his interlocutor. 
  Within this framework President Berisha has signed the 
Partnership For Peace [PFP] plan, considering it to be an active 
process that will lead toward Albania's integration into NATO. 
  One of the reasons I chose Albania for my first trip abroad, 
General Joulwan pointed out, is precisely related to your speedy 
commitment to the PFP plan. As a commander, I am interested in 
the documents of the presentation into this partnership, which 
will determine the course that you will follow, which will be an 
Albanian program and for Albania, respecting its sovereignty. 
  He assessed the support that Albania has given to UN 
Security 
Council resolutions on former Yugoslavia and NATO operations and 
expressed his support for the democratization process that 
Albania is following. 
  The exchange of symbolic presents from both parties was 
assessed as a sign of friendship between NATO and Albania. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8028 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_a_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ALBANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Joulwan Offers `Gradual Integration' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Joulwan Offers `Gradual Integration' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704204594 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704204594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] President Berisha received General George Joulwan, 
supreme commander of the Allied Forces in Europe and chief 
commander of the U.S. Forces in Europe. 
  Your visit is a very important event for Albania's 
cooperation with NATO. First, I want to greet you and Admiral 
Boorda personally for the successful operation in the skies of 
Bosnia, which will remain historic, as it marked the beginning 
of the functioning of NATO in a new role, President Berisha said 
to General Joulwan. 
  I want to show you, President Berisha continued, that the 
Albanian Army feels deep admiration for NATO as a defender of 
democratic values, security, and peace. The Albanian military 
are persistently working to adopt the standards of this 
alliance. We were the first to request NATO membership and 
today we powerfully support the Partnership for Peace as a 
dynamic and natural process for achieving membership of this 
Alliance. 
  Albania is determined to take part in all NATO structures 
defined by the Partnership for Peace and is ready to conduct 
joint maneuvers with countries or groups of countries which are 
members of NATO. Albania seeks NATO assistance to prepare 
peacekeeping troops or forces participants in humanitarian 
operations and it also reconfirms its readiness to ensure NATO 
access to all air and port facilities on the Albanian territory 
to accomplish the mission of the alliance. 
  General Joulwan stressed that he admires Albania's great 
changes in these two years and considers that the work done for 
the deep transformation of Albania from a dictatorial into a 
democratic state was a patriotic deed. He pointed out that 
Albania has a broad and key strategic position for NATO, and in 
this framework, the alliance is open for cooperation with 
Albania. 
  Regarding the situation in Bosnia, President Berisha said 
that we have supported the federation as a road that leads to 
peace, but we are worried because Serbia is refusing this 
solution. We think that it would help the peace if Russia could 
manage to convince the Bosnian Serbs to sign the Washington 
agreement, which presents a real option for the establishment of 
peace in Bosnia. This will complete the political solution to 
the crisis in the region. 
  Regarding the situation in Kosova, it remains tense and on 
the eve of conflict. In this direction, the presence of U.S. 
forces in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
-- FYROM] and the increase of this presence in the region is 
very welcome. Albania, the president continued, is engaged to 
avoid the conflict, but every violent cleansing of Albanians 
implies regional conflict. 
  On his part, General Joulwan offered the Alliance's support 
for Albania's active engagement in the Partnership for Peace 
framework and its gradual integration into all NATO structures 
and levels. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8029 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_b_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cooperation Talks With FYROM Delegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Cooperation Talks With FYROM Delegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804171294 Sofia Khorizont Radio Network in Bulgarian 1300 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804171294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sofia Khorizont Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Bulgarian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] On 8 April, at the Council of Ministers, a working 
meeting took place between governmental delegations of the 
Republic of Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
-- FYROM] and the Republic of Bulgaria, led by Deputy Prime 
Ministers Jovan Andonov and Valentin Karabashev, the Government 
Press Center reports. 
  Implementing the 1993 agreements between the two countries 
and the updated protocol signed on 15 March in Sofia was 
discussed. The delegations also discussed certain problems 
regarding the transit of goods through our country, improving 
the handling capacity of the border checkpoints, constructing a 
railroad between Gyueshevo and Kumanovo, and improving 
cooperation between the oil refineries of the two republics. 
  A readiness exists to sign soon in Skopje agreements on 
avoiding double taxation and mutual protection and encouragement 
of investments. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8030 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prime Minister, Talbott Talk </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Prime Minister, Talbott Talk </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1104105094 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1000 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1104105094 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 11 Apr--A meeting between Prime Minister 
Waldemar Pawlak and U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe 
Talbott lasted nearly one and a half hours. Talbott is paying a 
two-day official visit to Poland. 
  After the meeting, Pawlak told journalists that talks 
focused, among other things, on Polish-U.S. cooperation in 
international financial and economic organizations such as the 
World Bank, the IMF, and the OECD. Views were also exchanged on 
the "Partnership for Peace" [PFP] program. Pawlak announced 
that Polish-U.S. talks at the experts' level would be held soon. 
They should lead to joint undertakings this year within the 
framework of Poland's cooperation with NATO. 
  According to Pawlak, development of the whole 
Central-Eastern 
region of Europe was also discussed, as well as the possibility 
of U.S. support for the process. 
  Talbott said that the United States was of the opinion that 
Polish reforms were yielding good results. He stressed that the 
United States was the largest investor in Poland and that 
economic relations between both states might still be expanded. 
Talbott pointed out that economic issues would probably be the 
main subject of talks by President Bill Clinton during his visit 
to Poland in July. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8031 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pawlak, Klaus Hold Cooperation Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pawlak, Klaus Hold Cooperation Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004133394 Warsaw PAP in Polish 1144 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1004133394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw PAP </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Jelenia Gora, 10 Apr--The prime ministers of 
Poland and the Czech Republic, Waldemar Pawlak and Vaclav Klaus, 
met today at Czocha Castle, near Lesna in the Jelenia Gora 
Voivodship to discuss cooperation between the two countries. 
  Ewa Wachowicz, press assistant to Prime Minister Pawlak, 
told 
a PAP journalist that this is a continuation of the talks 
commenced in Prague during the course of the visit there by U.S. 
President Bill Clinton. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8032 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   News Conference Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    News Conference Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004181494 Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network in Polish 1700 
GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004181494 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The prime ministers of Poland and the Czech Republic 
have met in Czocha Castle in the Jelenia Gora province near the 
frontier. 
  At a news conference following their informal meeting, 
Waldemar Pawlak and Vaclav Klaus described their talks as very 
concrete. They concerned, above all, economic cooperation, but 
not exclusively, because they also talked about European 
integration and the Polish minority in the Czech Republic. 
  It is not true that Polish-Czech relations are not good, 
declared Vaclav Klaus, and added that there was no other country 
whose politicians he was meeting as often. He recalled his 
talks with Waldemar Pawlak at the Visegrad-U.S. summit, with 
Aleksandr Kwasniewski in Davos, Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy's 
visit to Prague, and announced a meeting with President Lech 
Walesa next week. 
  Prime Ministers Pawlak and Klaus agreed, among other things, 
that the Polish debts would also be paid off through ecological 
investment projects. We would be most willing to provide coal, 
but the Czechs also have problems in this branch of the 
industry, and that is why the agreement finally was for ecology 
and a border infrastructure. 
  For Waldemar Pawlak, the most important matters in relations 
with the Czechs are agreements concerning the Central European 
Free Trade zone and border cooperation. 
  Vaclav Klaus appealed to Polish journalists not to put a 
political slant on the matter of reduced subsidies for Polish 
organizations active in the Czech Republic. The prime minister 
explained that his government had given up lump-sum subsidies in 
favor of supporting specific undertakings. Vaclav Klaus 
announced a financial shot in the arm for Polish minority 
organizations in the second half of the year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8033 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further on Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further on Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004194194 Warsaw TV Polonia Network in Polish 1730 GMT 10 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004194194 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw TV Polonia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Correspondent] The prime ministers of Poland and 
the Czech Republic, Waldemar Pawlak and Vaclav Klaus, have had a 
meeting in the Czocha castle, near Lesna, Jelenia Gora province. 
They discussed, among other things, our efforts to join the 
European Union and Polish-Czech economic relations. The venue 
and the date of the meeting were agreed upon by the heads of 
both governments in Prague in January at the Visegrad Group 
summit in which President Bill Clinton took part. Pawlak and 
Klaus decided then that they would hold meetings at least once a 
year. 
  [Begin Pawlak recording] The number of direct meetings 
between representatives of the Polish and the Czech side 
manifests clearly that we attach great significance to our 
mutual relations. [end recording] 
  [Correspondent] The talks concerned, among other things, 
efforts that are being made by both states to enter the European 
Union. Poland has already submitted its application for 
membership in the union. The Czech Republic has so far 
refrained from making this decision. 
  [Begin Klaus recording, in Czech with superimposed Polish 
translation] I wish Poland to be ready as soon as possible to 
become a full member of the European Union. We have no 
intention of competing with you in this respect. The Czech 
Republic has also been doing everything to enter the union. [end 
recording] 
  [Correspondent] The prime ministers have also talked about 
large investment projects for the power and fuel industries. 
The Czech Republic is interested in using Polish ports and 
pipelines leading through our country. The prime ministers also 
discussed the situation of the Polish minority in the Czech 
Republic and the Czech minority in Poland. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8034 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pawlak Meets Slovak Foreign Minister Kukan </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pawlak Meets Slovak Foreign Minister Kukan </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0904121294 Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network in Polish 1005 
GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0904121294 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw Radio Warszawa Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] In Warsaw, Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak held a 
half-hour meeting with Slovak Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan, who 
is on a working visit to our country. 
  [Correspondent K. Koziol] This is the first Polish-Slovak 
contact at government level following the changes in the Slovak 
Government. It is also the first trip of the new foreign 
minister of Slovakia. 
  After the meeting, Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak told 
journalists that he had discussed with the head of Slovak 
diplomacy all matters linked to our cooperation, mainly the 
agreements that have been prepared and are ready to be signed. 
  These are, said the prime minister, agreements regarding 
economic cooperation, the safeguarding and support of 
investments, and an agreement on double taxation. 
  The foreign minister of the Slovak Republic conveyed to 
Prime 
Minister Pawlak an invitation from Slovak Prime Minister 
Moravcik to pay a visit to Slovakia. I am certain, said Kukan, 
that my visit to Warsaw will speed up the legal regulation upon 
which our relations are based. 
  From the Council of Ministers Office, Kukan made his way to 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a face-to-face meeting with 
Minister Andrzej Olechowski. 
  At the same time, the two delegations are holding plenary 
talks. This is Krystyna Koziol for the First Program. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8035 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   European Integration Discussed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    European Integration Discussed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0904195794 Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network in 
Polish 1730 GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0904195794 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw TVP Television First Program Network </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Relayed by Warsaw TV Polonia Network] </F>
  [Text] Slovak Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan has said that 
Poland's and Hungary's application for membership in the 
European Union will also facilitate Slovakia's integration with 
West Europe. The Slovak minister's talks in Warsaw focused 
primarily on economic cooperation. This is the first foreign 
visit by the Slovak foreign minister after the recent change of 
government in Bratislava. 
  After talks with Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski, the 
Slovak foreign minister said that Bratislava would submit a 
formal application for membership in the European Union next 
year. 
  [Begin Kukan recording, in Slovak with superimposed Polish 
translation] The division of Czechoslovakia has delayed 
negotiations on our membership in the European Union. Last 
year, we had to negotiate from the beginning and sign an 
association agreement. Now the 12 countries should ratify it. 
Denmark and Great Britain have done it so far. We would like 
the other union members to ratify the agreement by the end of 
the year. [end recording] 
  The Slovak minister arrived in Warsaw with an invitation for 
Waldemar Pawlak to pay a visit to Bratislava. Most probably the 
visit will take place before the summer holidays. Economic 
agreements, including an agreement on investment protection and 
one on avoiding double taxation, are to be signed during the 
visit. 
  [Begin Olechowski recording] The talks went smoothly and 
easily and we now have a great many plans for the future. I am 
not sure--we may have too many plans, and we will probably not 
be able to implement them all. [end recording] 
  Our trade turnover last year amounted to only $300 million. 
Poland is eighth on the list of Slovakia's economic partners. 
The situation could be improved by the abolition of customs 
duties, as part of the Central European Free Trade Association, 
and by constructing more border-crossing points. Although 
Poland's joint border with Slovakia is the longest--700 
kilometers--only eight border-crossing points are in operation. 
The construction of a further 11 points is planned. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8036 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Formal EU Application `Positively' Received </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Formal EU Application `Positively' Received </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1104132394 Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish 11 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS1104132394 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw NOWA EUROPA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by E.W.: "Six Years for Adaptation of Standards; </F>
Poland Submitted Application for EU Membership"] 
  [Text] The official application for Poland's 
membership in the European Union [EU], which was submitted in 
Athens on Friday [8 April], was accepted positively by EU 
Council Chairman Theodoros Pangalos. This is what Foreign 
Minister Andrzej Olechowski told journalists upon his return 
from Greece. According to Olechowski, the year 2000 is a 
possible date for our country's acceptance into EU. 
  "The Government of the Polish Republic hereby has the honor 
of submitting an application for the Polish Republic's 
membership in the EU, based on Article 0 [as published] of the 
EU Treaty, and also to inform that Poland is ready to begin 
negotiations at an appropriate time, concerning its joining EU." 
Such is the wording of the document signed by [Prime Minister] 
Waldemar Pawlak. The application was submitted in the presence 
of Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, the government's plenipotentiary for 
European Integration, and Jan Borkowski, chairman of the Sejm 
Commission for the European Treaty. "Either a big storm and a 
big legacy will come out of this little application or nothing 
will come out," said the chief diplomat. 
  The Polish application will be debated along with Hungary's 
at the next session of the EU Council of Ministers on 18 April, 
after which it will be submitted to the European Commission, 
which will render its opinion. According to A. Olechowski, the 
process of rendering an opinion on the document may take as long 
as three years. This means that formal negotiations concerning 
membership will begin in about the year 2000, while the process 
of adapting Polish realities to meet EU legal and economic 
requirements will take between five and 10 years. 
  "Russia should be a member of the G-7 group and should have 
its own strategic agreement with NATO, but it should not be 
linked to the `Partnership for Peace' program." This is how 
Olechowski commented on a statement made Friday by Vyacheslav 
Kostikov, Boris Yeltsin's press secretary, when Kostikov stated 
that Russia would like to combine its joining the "Partnership" 
program with its joining the group of the seven most 
industrialized countries of the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8037 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rosati on Decision To Withdraw as Candidate </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rosati on Decision To Withdraw as Candidate </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004192894 </F>
<F P=103> LD1004192894 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Warsaw TV Polonia Network in Polish at 
1650 GMT on 10 April carries on its 30-minute "100 Questions 
to..." program a report about Professor Dariusz Rosati, the 
government coalition candidate for the posts of finance minister 
and deputy prime minister. The program, presented by Ewa 
Michalska, opened with a video report showing people in the 
streets being asked whether they know who Rosati is. Many do. 
The video is followed by a profile on Rosati. 
  Afterwards Rosati answers journalists' questions concerning 
his decision to withdraw as the candidate for the 
above-mentioned posts. The first question is whether Rosati has 
definitely made up his mind. Rosati replies: "Today the 
situation is clear. I am not a candidate for the post of 
finance minister because of well-known circumstances." 
  Rosati says he could not accept the post in a situation when 
President Walesa was opposed to his appointment. Rosati now 
intends to return to Geneva and resume his work for the UN 
European Economic Commission. However, he does not completely 
rule out the possibility that he may accept the job of finance 
minister in the future. He says he does regret having gotten 
involved in the controversy concerning his appointment. Rosati 
explains that he never met President Walesa and did not have a 
chance to discuss his proposals with him. 
  During the course of the discussion, the issue of Rosati's 
work for the foreign-debt-servicing fund, FOZZ, is mentioned. 
He says the FOZZ supervisory board, of which he is a member, 
does not have much influence on the day-to-day running of the 
fund, so he cannot be personally responsible for the FOZZ 
shortcomings. 
  When asked to name his own possible recommendations for the 
job of finance minister, he avoids mentioning any names. 
Another question concerns the nature of his work in Geneva. 
Rosati says that it was a research and analysis job. 
  Rosati also comments on a number of economic issues. He says 
he is against state control over wages. He also thinks 
President Walesa should not delay the signing of the budget. 
  One of the journalists asks him about the state of Rosati's 
financial affairs. He does not hesitate to disclose that he 
owns a house in Warsaw and two cars, and that he has $30,000 to 
$40,000 in his bank account. 
  Rosati is asked about his possible priorities had he been 
appointed finance minister. He says the most important things 
are a proper medium-term economic policy, speeding up the 
privatization process, restructuring the economy, and getting 
rid of inflationary pressures. 
  At the end of the program, Rosati is traditionally invited 
to 
leave his signature on the program board, among many other 
signatures left there previously by well-known personalities. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8038 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Situation After Rejection of Popiwek Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Situation After Rejection of Popiwek Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS1104133994 Warsaw TRYBUNA in Polish 11 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> WS1104133994 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw TRYBUNA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Stanislaw Cwik under the rubric "One Hundred </F>
Words"] 
  [Text] The Sejm and the president have prepared an 
unexpected experiment for the Polish economy. They decided that 
decisions concerning wages would be made by company directors, 
employees' councils, and trade unions. Thus, we partially 
returned to socialism. The prime minister must again appeal to 
work forces and to the responsibility of managers. 
  I believe that there are two solutions to this problem: 
first, returning to a new popiwek [tax on excessive wage 
increases] as soon as possible, and second, changing the system 
of most state-run enterprises, establishing a one-person 
Treasury partnership, and privatization. 
  The first method has proved itself. However, the fear of a 
new popiwek law may result in wage panic today, not to mention 
high inflation. The other method calls for some time. It may 
also encounter political resistance because not everyone in 
Poland supports privatization and modernization of oversized 
economic companies. 
  Each of these scenarios is to a certain extent risky. It 
seems, however, that safer is the "escape forward"--that is, 
acceleration of the pace of economic reforms. This calls for 
specific decisions already today. Also, the work forces of 
state-owned companies should be told what they will go through 
soon--for example, that there will be no popiwek, but there will 
be bankruptcies. Or that not only the rights of various sectors 
of our economy will be equalized, but also their duties toward 
the Treasury. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8039 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_p_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> POLAND </F>
<H3> <TI>   Poll: Kwasniewski Best Presidential Candidate </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Poll: Kwasniewski Best Presidential Candidate </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   WS0804144694 Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 8 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> WS0804144694 </F>
<F P=104>  Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA </F>
<F P=105>  Polish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by R.W.: "According to CBOS Respondents: </F>
Kwasniewski for President"] 
  [Text] A year and a half before presidential elections, 
Aleksander Kwasniewski [chairman of the Social Democracy of the 
Polish Republic] is the best candidate for next president of 
Poland. The Public Opinion Research Center [CBOS] conducted a 
survey at the end of March using a list of politicians, and 
Kwasniewski gained the highest support (17 percent). His 
"presidential popularity" has not changed since January. But 
there are clearly far fewer people (compared with the beginning 
of the year) who would be willing to support Lech Walesa or 
Krzysztof Skubiszewski in the race for the Belweder (or, as the 
case may be, to Namiestnikowski Palace). Apart from Kwasniewski, 
only [Prime Minister] Waldemar Pawlak managed to gain the 
"votes" of at least one in 10 prospective voters, during the 
March poll. Support for Zbigniew Religa, chief of the Non-Party 
Bloc in Support of Reforms, increased slightly since January; 
Religa now occupies third place on the list of presidential 
candidates. Respondents' views continue to be very diversified. 
Therefore, no one from among the personalities named by CBOS can 
regard himself as a definite favorite on the basis of the poll 
only. It is worth stressing that just 2 percent of respondents 
say Jacek Kuron, who leads in popularity polls, would make a 
good future president. No politician of the center right enjoys 
significant support. Respondents do not have anyone "in 
reserve," either. Just 7 percent of respondents said they would 
vote for somebody who is not on the CBOS list. The CBOS poll 
was conducted on 25-28 March (1,230-person representative random 
sample of the country's adult population) and 27-31 January 
(1,172-person sample). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8040 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Churkin: `New Situation Created' by Attack </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Churkin: `New Situation Created' by Attack </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004213694 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 2110 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004213694 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Belgrade, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- Vitaliy Churkin, 
Russian President Yeltsin's special envoy for Yugoslavia and 
Russian deputy foreign minister, arrived in Belgrade this 
evening. 
  Upon his arrival, Churkin said that a new situation has been 
created after the attack launched by NATO planes on Serb 
positions near Gorazde. 
  The Russian president's special envoy stressed that he would 
be in contact with Moscow during the night. Churkin is expected 
to meet Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic tomorrow. [passage 
omitted] 
  It has been learned that Churkin is planning to visit Zagreb 
and Sarajevo where he is expected to meet Croatian and Muslim 
officials. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8041 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russia To Urge UN To Lift FRY Sanctions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Russia To Urge UN To Lift FRY Sanctions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804132394 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1145 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804132394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Jagodina, 8 Apr (TANJUG) -- Democratic Party 
Chairman Zoran Djindjic told Jagodina Radio today that Russia 
will raise the issue of lifting the sanctions against the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at the UN Security Council within 
a month. 
  "During our visit to Russia we drafted a request, which 
expresses joint views of all leading Russian parties as regards 
Yugoslavia, demanding that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
the Russian Federation raise the issue of lifting the sanctions 
at the UN Security Council," Djindjic said, adding that he had 
received assurances that a majority in the parliament would vote 
for this document, about which the Yugoslav public will be 
informed either today or tomorrow. 
  "Russians have a clear interest to show their teeth to the 
West on the example of Yugoslavia, and to show that Russia has 
not lost the position of a superpower. They will do it not 
because of the Serbs, but because of Russia," Djindjic said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8042 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jovanovic Views Bosnian Conflict, Sanctions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jovanovic Views Bosnian Conflict, Sanctions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904200094 Bucharest Radio Romania Network in Romanian 
1925 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0904200094 </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest Radio Romania Network </F>
<F P=105>  Romanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladislav Jovanovic, Federal Republic of </F>
Yugoslavia minister of foreign affairs, by Bucharest Radio 
correspondent Dana Popescu in Belgrade on 8 April -- recorded, 
in Serbo-Croatian with superimposed Romanian translation] 
  [Text] [Popescu] Let us talk about the efforts made to 
settle the Yugoslav crisis. Russian Foreign Affairs Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev stated a few weeks ago that there exist 
privileged relations, such as the one between the Germans and 
the Croats, the Americans and the Muslims, and the Russians and 
the Serbs. Do you think Kozyrev is right, and if so, in which 
way do such relations influence the peace negotiations? 
  [Jovanovic] That is a simplified assessment of the facts, 
because there are no such things as privileged relations, but 
rather merely interests. Privileged relations exist only in the 
sense that relations are based on common interests. In our 
case, we believe that as a consequence of the outbreak of the 
Yugoslav crisis, the interests of foreign powers suddenly 
increased in the Balkans. Above all, this is most displayed by 
Germany, which unfortunately bears the greatest part of the 
responsibility for the tragedy that is happening to us. Besides 
that, one can now also witness the massive penetration of the 
United States and Turkey. Russia is a country that is 
traditionally interested in the Balkans and it will always 
maintain that interest, because the Balkan region is close to 
their political and geographic consciousness and important for 
their own security. As far as we, as a country and a people, 
are concerned, we are the major victims of the Yugoslav crisis, 
because from the very beginning we have done everything possible 
to maintain the former Yugoslavia and to prevent secession as an 
action directed against people who decided to stay in 
Yugoslavia. Unfortunately, we did not succeed and that is why 
difficulties emerged that are now unfolding before our very 
eyes, especially in Bosnia or Krajina. 
  As far as privileged relations are concerned, above all we 
are believers in the idea that the international community 
should adopt a fully unbiased, objective, and non-selective 
stance with respect to the Yugoslav crisis. That would be the 
best way of taking into consideration the equal rights of all 
the parties in the Yugoslav crisis and respecting the legitimate 
interests and rights of all the peoples who once made up 
Yugoslavia. We do not expect anyone to be on our side and 
against others. What we ask for and expect from all countries 
is that they be on the side of justice, facts, and the truth, 
and that, by adopting an unbiased stance, they contribute to 
finding, through the parties involved in the Yugoslav crisis, 
the proper path leading to rapid settlement [of the conflict]. 
  [Popescu] The normalization of relations between the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia is, in the opinion of many 
people, the key issue of the crisis. That process has already 
begun with the opening of liaison offices in Belgrade and 
Zagreb. How do you assess the future evolution of that process? 
  [Jovanovic] Our problems with Croatia began when Croatia 
seceded from Yugoslavia; Croatia's problems began as a 
consequence of its unilateral secession by means of force. What 
we have to do now is find ways to regulate relations between the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the loyal part of Yugoslavia, 
and the other secessionist republics that are now independent 
states. We made the first step in that direction and we are 
interested in achieving full normalization. This can be 
achieved parallel to successful steps taken to eliminate the 
negative effects of their secession. First of all I mean 
Krajina, which now is under the protection of the UN forces, and 
the political status of which will eventually have to be 
established by direct negotiations between Knin and Zagreb. 
  Normalization is also related to the great problem of 
sanctions, because it is in the nature of sanctions that they 
prevent other countries from establishing political relations 
and achieving political objectives because of the sanctions. 
The establishment of diplomatic relations with Croatia, which 
also presupposes the establishment of normal economic relations, 
is theoretically and practically impossible as long as the 
sanctions stay in force. Therefore the sanctions, respectively 
the decision of the UN Security Council, actually represent an 
enormous obstacle for the normalization of relations in the 
Yugoslav region. 
  [Popescu] The sanctions were adopted in view of the 
situation in Bosnia. Yugoslavia has complied with the 
preconditions established for their lifting. Have any new 
preconditions been imposed lately? 
  [Jovanovic] The war in Bosnia-Herzegovina was merely 
formally the cause of the sanctions. Actually, the principal 
goal is a political one, as they are intended to make the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia capitulate. This means that it 
is denied the right to dominion over its own country and that it 
is expected to accept the mercy of foreign power centers. Apart 
from all this, we are making our own policy, which is directed 
at achieving peace and the peaceful solution of existing 
problems. We have complied with all preconditions, that is, the 
ones stipulated by UN Security Council Resolution 757. However, 
meanwhile the situation in Bosnia contradicted their initial 
presuppositions on the basis of which they established the 
sanctions. The war in Bosnia-Herzegovina proved to be a classic 
civil war, and this has been officially admitted by everyone, 
including the Security Council. Yugoslavia has never had and 
does not have a single soldier on the territory of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and could not perpetrate any aggression 
against that country. Furthermore, the Serbs of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina could not possibly act as aggressors against 
their own villages or towns. Civil wars are called civil 
precisely because they are not wars of aggression. However, 
certain countries, certain centers of power are trying to 
complicate and further prolong that crisis and are inventing new 
preconditions. This proves how little some desire the 
reestablishment of peace and how much they hope to exploit the 
situation in Yugoslavia in order to more deeply infiltrate with 
their interests in this area and achieve their geostrategic 
goals. There are no grounds, neither official nor political, to 
link the sanctions to any other issue except the situation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Any attempt to do otherwise would sabotage 
the peace efforts to halt the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Popescu] Still, in the last few days Bosnian Serb President 
Radovan Karadzic declared he was very optimistic. Would you 
comment on that? 
  [Jovanovic] Despite all the complications and hardships we 
are all experiencing as a consequence of the crisis in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, we have to be optimistic. First because there is 
no such thing as a crisis or a problem that cannot be solved. 
And second, because the current situation is more favorable to 
achieving peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina than, let us say, the 
situation six months or a year ago. The number of countries and 
international entities involved in the solution of the crisis in 
Bosnia- Herzegovina -- and that are interested in the 
reestablishment of peace, stability, and prosperity in this part 
of Europe -- has increased significantly, whereas the number of 
countries interested in sabotaging peace is decreasing. The 
latter are now making their interests known and finding it 
increasingly difficult to achieve their goals. This is why they 
are now resorting to camouflaged means, presenting themselves as 
protectors of rights not related in any way to the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. However, the peoples of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
all three of them, are fed up with war, they do not want war 
anymore. War is Now only desired by the fundamentalist 
leadership of the Muslim people, and that is in contradiction of 
the will and interests of their own Muslim people. They want 
this war because they are not free to make their own decisions 
and depend directly on the financial and political support they 
receive from abroad. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8043 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   Parliamentary Head Assesses Moscow Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Parliamentary Head Assesses Moscow Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1004205994 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1004205994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Radoman Bozovic, chairman of the Chamber of </F>
Citizens of the Federal Assembly of Yugoslavia and "head of the 
Yugoslav delegation visiting Moscow," by Dusan Cukic in Moscow; 
date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Cukic] Mr. Chairman, we are talking here in Moscow 
at the conclusion of the Yugoslav assembly delegation's visit to 
Russia. This is the first time since the introduction of 
sanctions that such a high-level parliamentary delegation is 
visiting a foreign country, paying an official visit to such a 
big country as Russia. 
  [Bozovic] This is correct. I would like to believe that 
this is not an accident but a result of the knowledge acquired 
by the deputies of various political factions in the Russian 
Supreme Soviet, where there is complete unanimity among 
political factions in understanding our crisis. This 
understanding especially came to prominence with the demand for 
the lifting of the sanctions against our country. We indeed 
encountered complete understanding and full support. This 
climate in the Russian Supreme Soviet is of enormous importance 
and influence on changes in certain practical moves in Russian 
diplomacy. We also learned that from our talks with Mr. Kozyrev 
and his deputy Churkin. There is a new quality, I would say, 
in the understanding of our situation when it comes to the 
Russian legislature and the Russian Government. 
  Prior to this visit, this understanding had primarily been 
expressed by Russian parliamentarians. This time both of them 
told us that things are now moving, that events are simply 
moving, that these events are being moved by logic, because it 
is difficult to find someone here who understands why 
Yugoslavia, its citizens, and its economy, should be punished by 
sanctions and political isolation, and who could possibly 
benefit from this. 
  Therefore, the visit as a whole, and the talks with Chairman 
Ribkin and Minister Kozyrev, as well as a large number of 
political factions, have left us with the belief that the 
Russian public and Russian politicians have taken a more 
objective stand. This is in fact the point of our policy. Our 
policy is not to seek the support of Russia in order to punish 
others, to punish those who are against Serbian interests in 
this chaotic civil war, but to secure the same position in the 
peace process for the Serbian side that is being secured for the 
other sides. 
  [Cukic] Mr. Bozovic, you indeed had a very prudent, very 
specific, and if I may say, apparently productive program. In 
all these talks with all parties, ranging from the Communists to 
the Democrats, the parties on the extreme left and the parties 
on the extreme right, in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and in 
contacts with the representatives of the government -- you and 
your delegation raised, I think, a new question, not only of the 
sanctions being lifted, but also of the return of Yugoslavia to 
international politics. 
  [Bozovic] Yes, this question, these questions are dependent 
on one another. The return of Yugoslavia and its reintegration 
into the politics of international institutions is of enormous 
importance, especially in the further course of the peace 
process, so that we are not in the situation of constantly being 
put on trial without having a chance to present facts, to 
present the truth, or in a way, defend ourselves with the facts. 
Therefore, it is important that the peace process brings about 
not only the lifting of the economic sanctions, but also the 
return of Yugoslavia in international institutions, which was 
fully accepted in talks in the Russian Parliament. We raised 
this issue in talks with Mr. Minister [not further specified] 
and other representatives of the government. It is indeed 
difficult to understand that it is necessary to maintain the 
blockade on the (?dialogue), the participation of Yugoslavia and 
Yugoslav representatives in international institutions. 
  [Cukic] All in all, if a reporter is allowed to conclude, 
the impression is that you are returning from this exceptionally 
important political parliamentary visit as an optimist. 
  [Bozovic] Optimism in politics, especially in the conditions 
under which we exist today, is something that is perhaps not 
good if there is no reason for it. However, I am an optimist in 
the sense that I am returning with the belief that people who 
until recently did not have a good enough understanding of the 
essence of our crisis understand it better today. Time has also 
done its part, and so has, I would say, a principled policy on 
the part of the Yugoslav and Serbian sides. The facts are 
gradually starting to be important in making political decisions. 
  Therefore I think that this parliamentary visit is 
important. 
As you said yourself, this is the first official visit by a 
Yugoslav parliamentary delegation since the introduction of the 
sanctions against Yugoslavia. 
  [Cukic] Thank you Mr. Bozovic for this interview for Dnevnik 
2 program of the Serbian Television. 
  [Bozovic] Thank you. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8044 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Federal </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Stern Measures' Taken To Stabilize Dinar </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Stern Measures' Taken To Stabilize Dinar </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804130394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1218 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD0804130394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 8 (TANJUG) -- The Yugoslav 
Government is taking stern measures against illegal foreign 
currency transactions in an effort to maintain stability of the 
national currency -- dinar. 
  By the end of next week, the federal parliament is under 
summary procedure to adopt amendments to the law on foreign 
exchange operations. The amendments stipulate that buying and 
selling foreign currency at the rate higher than the official 
one is a criminal offense. 
  Under the government proposal, the law is to ensure a 
uniform 
rate of the dinar be applied in all financial transactions. The 
dinar is currently pegged to the German mark, one dinar to 1 
German mark. 
  The issuing of the dinar is under strict control as of 
January 24, when the Federal Government launched a programme 
aimed at restructuring the monetary system and effecting 
economic recovery. 
  The new dinar, 100 percent covered with gold and foreign 
currency, was introduced at the time when the monthly inflation 
recording 313 million percent threatened to invite a total 
monetary collapse. 
  The emergence of an unofficial, so-called 'Staeetzung' 
exchange rate, in inter-company financial dealings was assessed 
by experts as a phenomenon jeopardizing the programme, although 
it has not become rampant. 
  Early in the week seven persons were arrested in Belgrade on 
grounded suspicion that they were involved in illegal 
trafficking of one million German marks at blackmarket exchange 
rate. 
  The Serbian Government, too, has announced a number of new 
measures aimed at stabilizing the dinar and the economy. Thus, 
Prime Minister Mirko Marjanovic said Thursday the 30-percent cut 
in public expenditure would be put on the Serbian parliament 
agenda. 
  He also said there would be a sizeable cut in the planned 
budget deficit. Many taxes are also to be lowered. 
  The biggest obstacle in the way of stabilization of economic 
and monetary flows is a total blockade imposed by the U.N. 
Security Council on May 30, 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8045 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Serbia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbian Party Denounces NATO Air Strike </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbian Party Denounces NATO Air Strike </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004201494 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1949 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004201494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- The Democratic Party of 
Serbia said this evening that "the bombing of the Serb positions 
around Gorazde shows yet again that the international community, 
whose position is almost always voiced by its most powerful 
members, resorts to the worst possible course of action to reach 
peace in the former Bosnia-Herzgovina." 
  The statement says that daily UN Protection Force reports 
from the ground, as well as media reports, showed that the 
fighting around Gorazde was provoked by the Muslim forces and 
also that it was on a limited scale. 
  "In spite of this NATO, or rather those who irresponsibly 
pull its strings, showed with this attack against the Serb 
positions that they have war and not peace on their mind, and 
that they are not impartial but support one side in the 
conflict." 
  "The Democratic Party of Serbia regrets that the 
international community, having betrayed the role of a mediator, 
has through this action become a participant in the civil war in 
the former Bosnia-Herzegovina," the statement says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8046 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Army Deploys `Large Forces' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb Army Deploys `Large Forces' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804171194 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1635 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804171194 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Large Serbian Army forces, supplied with armored 
cars, tanks, and other military equipment, have been stationed 
in Hani i Elezit. These Serbian Army forces have also been 
deployed in Paldenice village near the Ramuka quarter. 
Transporters and other accompanying armaments have been placed 
in the trenches and are supplied with antiaircraft machine guns. 
  The Kosova Information Center reports that the Serbian 
soldiers and officers are performing military training and 
provoking the citizens of the area by raiding them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8047 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Police Raids Escalating, Albanians Harassed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb Police Raids Escalating, Albanians Harassed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904201294 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0904201294 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Serbian repression and violence is 
escalating in Kosova. Recent reports confirm new raids and 
harassments of Albanians in many centers in Kosova. From 
Prishtina, Ramadan Mucolli: 
  [Mucolli] Reports of raiding many Albanian families under 
the pretext of searching for arms, apprehending family members 
and taking them to police stations, beatings, and harassments 
continue to arrive at the Kosova Information Center. There are 
also reports of Albanian youths being pursued with the intention 
of impressing them into the Serbian Army. 
  In the last two days, under the pretext of searching for 
weapons, many families have been raided in Paralluk, Terpeze e 
Ulet, and Shkarashnik villages in Malisheve; in Dumnice, 
Podujeve; Strespe, Vushtrri; Petrove, Shtime; Skenderaj, and 
Obilisht. After the raids, several family members were summoned 
to the police stations, violently detained, brutally beaten and 
mistreated. 
  After the raids, 70-year-old man Ismail Shaqiri, his son 
Sadri, and his nephew Bashkim from Dumnice were taken to the 
police station in Podujeve, where they were brutally beaten. 
Many were beaten and maltreated in Shtroce, Vushtrri; Taralluk; 
Shkarashnik, Malisheve; and Mitrovice. 
  Reports from Suharake inform that Ilir Vullaku's son was 
summoned in Ishor village with the intention of recruiting him 
into the Serbian Army. It is known that the police have also 
searched for the youngsters Rakip and Safet Bytyqi. 
  Reports from Rahovec confirm that Ymer Ahmetaj, counsel for 
education and chairman of the sub-branch of the Albanian 
Teachers' League for this commune, was taken to the police 
station and interrogated for four hours about the activity of 
the Pedagogical Institution in Gjakove and the work of Ramiz 
Sadiku High School in Rahovec. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8048 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Bukoshi Seeks `International Protectorate' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Bukoshi Seeks `International Protectorate' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804203594 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804203594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Taking the floor at the international conference on 
the Balkans [in Istanbul], Prime Minister of the Republic of 
Kosova Dr. Bujar Bukoshi called on the United Nations, the 
Security Council, the CSCE, the United States, Russia, and all 
the governments of democratic countries to help Kosova to avoid 
the conflict and simultaneously asked from them to recognize the 
willpower of the people of Kosova for a free and 
self-determining existence. 
  Dr. Bukoshi told the participants at Istanbul conference 
that 
the Albanians of Kosova seek to realize their aspirations in a 
peaceful way, i.e., to be allowed to exert their political will 
in government. Such a peaceful movement is a new thing for the 
Balkans and, if it brings results, it can but increase the hope 
of the Balkan peoples for a glorious future. 
  Prime Minister Bukoshi stressed that this would be a clear 
and fair signal that all the conflicts in the Balkans could be 
solved in a civilized way and not through the use of force. 
  Commenting on suggestions of some people that the Albanians 
of Kosova accept a similar autonomy to the one that has existed 
in 1974, Dr. Bukoshi said that this is the same as if we ask the 
Albanians of Kosova to remain under the Greater Serbia and the 
Serbian dictatorship -- always subjugated, pursued, and agitated 
in every possible way and a colonial regime. Those who suggest 
this kind of autonomy simply give indications that they are not 
ready to deal with the regime of a dictator. The question of 
the people of Kosova is not simply a case of secessionism. The 
state of which it was a part has been dismantled and no country 
deriving from it can incorporate others within its own borders 
without their own will. 
  Further on, Dr. Bukoshi said that the international 
community 
should strengthen sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, while 
their eventual lifting should be conditioned with the 
achievement of an acceptable solution for all the problems of 
the Yugoslav crisis, including Kosova as well. 
  Kosova should be demilitarized and the democratic 
institutions be turned back to it. A kind of international 
protectorate should be installed in Kosova, Dr. Bukoshi 
underlined, stressing that Kosova should be considered by the 
Balkan neighboring countries as a regional problem, and not as 
an internal affair of Serbia, so that these countries play a 
more constructive role, because even their peace can be 
endangered. 
  Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosova Dr. Bujar Bukoshi 
said that only in this way will the necessary conditions be 
created to participate in the negotiations on Kosova equally and 
without preconditions. On the contrary, the future will be 
uncertain and unpredictable. 
  Closing, Dr. Bukoshi said that in the name of the Government 
of Kosova, we have the mandate to give life to the people's 
will, and we will continue to do this. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8049 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rugova: Repression, Persecution Continues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rugova: Repression, Persecution Continues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904182694 Pristina KOSOVA DAILY REPORT Nr 331 in English 
8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0904182694 </F>
<F P=104>  Pristina KOSOVA DAILY REPORT Nr 331 </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "From the Press Conference of </F>
President Rugova in Prishtina" -- issued by the Democratic 
League of Kosovo] 
  [Text] Repression throughout Kosova has been continuing 
unabated during the past week, too, President Rugova said 
speaking to journalists today in Prishtina. New political 
trials against nine Albanians have been announced, he said, 
adding that persecution against political activists was 
increasing. 
  "Serbian authorities have been doing everything possible in 
order to recolonize Kosova. Refugees from Slovenia, Croatia, 
and Bosnia have been brought in Kosova to be settled 
permanently," President Rugova said. As to this, President 
Rugova called on the UN Commissioner for Refugees that these 
people be treated as what they really are, war refugees, and not 
be used for colonization of Kosova. "If this is [words 
indistinct] stands otherwise we will consider that there is 
[words indistinct] Kosova, which would be very tragic," 
President Rugova said. 
  In spite of continued violence, Kosova is present on the 
international level. In this respect, President Rugova 
mentioned the statement of the U.S. General Staff Chief, 
Shalikashvili, who said during his visit to Macedonia [The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] that the 
international military presence in Macedonia is a preventive for 
Kosova, President Rugova said, speaking on international aspects 
of the Kosova issue. 
  "We continuously stress that an independent and neutral 
Kosova would be the best solution for both Albanians and the 
others, a Kosova which would be open to both Albania and Serbia. 
Having in mind the situation prevailing in Kosova, and with the 
wish to prevent an escalation of violence, we demand 
international protection," President Rugova concluded his 
comments. 
  Replying to a comment on possible prospects for dialogue, 
President Rugova said: "Naturally, we stand for a genuine 
dialogue with a third party presence. We have made attempts to 
negotiate the educational issue within the Geneva Conference, 
but unfortunately negotiations failed." 
  The correspondent of the Belgrade-based BORBA asked for 
President Rugova's comments on the rumors that Prime Minister 
Bukoshi has allegedly offered resignation, to which President 
Rugova replied: 
  "There is no conflict. The government was established three 
years ago. It is normal to discuss the activity of the 
government in a democratic system. We never asked for Prime 
Minister Bukoshi's resignation." 
  [Words indistinct] from the Istanbul conference on the 
Balkans, Dr. Rugova said that it was an important conference and 
hoped that the final document would include real attitudes 
toward Kosova. 
  The correspondent of the BBC asked whether there were any 
plans of completing the Government of Kosova, and if so, did it 
mean a replacement of those making the government presently. 
President Rugova said that under the given circumstances "we 
have set up a combined system, by utilizing also party 
organization, such as LDK [Democratic League of Kosovo], 
peasants, and parliamentary parties. We have established 
medical institutions, educational, and solidarity institutions. 
It is natural that the wish of the people is to have all the 
institutions, but the situation has made us use combined systems 
which is proving to function." 
  President Rugova replied to many other questions put forward 
by a large number of journalists covering today's press 
conference. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8050 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   `No Conflict' Between Government, LDK </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `No Conflict' Between Government, LDK </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804194594 Tirana TVSH Television Network in Albanian 1800 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804194594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tirana TVSH Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Albanian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] There is no conflict at all among the 
Government of the Republic of Kosova, the Kosova Democratic 
Alliance [LDK], and the president of the republic, President of 
the Republic of Kosova Dr. Ibrahim Rugova said to reporters in 
Prishtina today. A report by our reporter Sherif Konjufca: 
  [Konjufca] Kosova, an independent and neutral state, 
simultaneously open to Albania and Serbia, is the most lucky 
solution for both Albanians and Serbs. However, to avoid armed 
conflicts in this area, the president of the Republic of Kosova 
said at a meeting with reporters, we once again reiterate our 
demands that Kosova be placed under international protection. 
  Asked whether there exists a conflict between the prime 
minister, the LDK, and the president, Mr. Rugova answered that 
such a conflict does not exist. The government has worked in 
very difficult conditions, partly abroad and partly in the 
country, but it has acted in cooperation with us. Under the 
present situation, it is very normal and reasonable to complete 
the government with the most creative people. For this, there 
exists a disposition by the majority of the Albanian political 
parties in Kosova, whose willpower will be outlined in their 
coordinating council, but cannot assume the government 
prerogatives. 
  Mr. Rugova said that as chairman of the republic, I have 
prerogatives as well as an obligation to think about the 
completion of the government and other bodies that will assist 
it. The best work in this situation is that regarding national 
political capital questions, we have reached a consensus with 
all political parties, and this makes us stronger. 
  Asked about the importance of the international conference 
on 
the Balkans, which is being held in Istanbul, President Rugova 
said that this is the first time such a meeting is being held, 
in which the Balkan problems are being examined in a complex way 
and in a historic, actual, and future aspect. 
  The delegation of Kosova led by Mr. Bukoshi is attending 
this 
conference, among experts from 26 countries. Meanwhile, we are 
expecting much from the conference's final statement. 
  Talking about the forms of the Serb violence against 
Albanians, Mr. Rugova particularly pointed out the eviction of 
Albanians from their homes and other forms of the colonization 
of Kosova with Serbs and Montenegrins. He mentioned cases of 
the division of 150 hectares of social land in Kline for Serbian 
refugees from Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
decision to erect 220 houses for them in the Istog commune. For 
the Serb refugees from Albania, whom the Serbian installed power 
is placing in Junik village and in several Gjakove villages, 
President Rugova said that we will ask the UN High Commission 
for Refugees to treat them only as temporary refugees, and not 
as elements for the colonization of Kosova. Otherwise, Mr. 
Rugova said, we will consider the Commission to be responsible 
for violently changing the ethnic structure of Kosova. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8051 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_y_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Kosovo </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rift Among Kosovo Albanians Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rift Among Kosovo Albanians Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1104085294 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104085294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Zeljko Avramovic] </F>
  [Text] Politics is primarily an ability to accomplish what 
is possible to accomplish, and every political activity relying 
on imaginary strongholds inevitably leads away from reality, 
toward nothing. Returning to reality usually means (?returning 
to the essence of the matter), which, like every other nucleus, 
is covered in darkness. 
  This should have been borne in mind by those who, entering 
political waters, assumed the responsibility of leading the 
Albanian people in Kosovo toward the aim that, as everyone 
knows, is outside the domain of serious political thinking. The 
intoxicating seductiveness of the idea of Kosovo as an 
independent state, which would be represented by these very 
people in the capital cities of Europe and the world with the 
accompanying sounds of an anthem and a guard of honor, is 
returning to Rugova's supporters as a bitter pill that they do 
not want to swallow but cannot spit out either. 
  The painful sobering up has divided the Kosmet [Kosovo- 
Metohija] political elite. The rift in Rugova's Democratic 
League of Kosovo and clashes between the party and the 
government of the so-called Republic of Kosovo that has been 
concealed for a long time have escalated in the past few weeks. 
  The party was left by Jusuf Budzovi, Ismet Salihu, Ibrahim 
Berisa, and Dr. Rexhep Islami. Rugova, Agani, and Hiseni have 
stayed in the Presidency of the so-called Republic of Kosova. 
The clash between the government and the party leadership must 
have reached the upper limit considering that Bujar Bukoshi, 
prime minister of the self-declared Kosovo state, is being asked 
to resign. 
  Shkelzen Malici is publicly saying that the government is 
playing more the role of an improvised ministry for relations 
with other countries than is making vital decisions. The 
problem also arose as the consequences of the undefined 
hierarchy and control within the secessionist leadership. 
  Ibrahim Rugova has so far been the untouchable boss. The 
illegally elected parliament now formally no longer exists. The 
so- called government has been reduced to the prime minister and 
one minister, even though 17 ministries had been planned. So, 
everyone is accountable to Rugova, and he is accountable to no 
one. 
  Perhaps the motives for these clashes, whose cause is a lot 
more deeper and is encroaching the most sensitive sphere, the 
sphere of finances, should be sought in this backdrop. This is 
supported by a statement by Fehmi Agani, who is still loyal to 
Rugova. He said that the distribution of financial resources 
and the collection of the compulsory 3-percent tax from the 
workers of Albanian nationality in the country and outside it 
are beyond control. 
  Rexhep Cosia, who split with Rugova earlier, holds the same 
view. The proximity of money is directly proportionate to the 
proximity of authority and every separation from it leads to 
resistance and proofs that something is wrong with the present 
authorities. 
  The former self-proclaimed prime minister Jusuf Zeinulahu 
also spoke up recently. He admitted what he had been aware of 
right from the beginning. According to him, the Assembly and 
the Government of the so-called Republic of Kosovo were formed 
ad hoc with directives from the political parties of Albanians, 
and are not legitimate. Zeinulahu's public statement about 
something that many people were aware of has stirred the spirits 
in the leadership of the so-called Albania alternative and 
opened the road to the struggle to preserve the present 
positions, while creating covers in retreat. In this light one 
should view the participation in the debate in KOHA by the 
former high official of the Central Committee of the League of 
Communists and the spectacular return of Veton Suroi, who left a 
long time ago. 
  That something strange is happening is also confirmed by 
separate visits to the United States, first by Bukoshi, and then 
Rugova, and the statement by the former, which was not approved 
of by the Democratic League of Kosovo. In an interview for the 
Voice of America, Bukoshi said that the status of an autonomous 
region for Kosovo can be accepted as the first step toward the 
ultimate solution of the Kosovo issue. This statement 
represents a major turnabout in relation to the sacred stand 
hitherto on Kosovo as an independent state. This raises the 
question as to why a section of the Albanian political 
leadership has redefined its position and accepted the existence 
of Yugoslavia and a dialogue with its legal organs. 
  It is difficult to believe that this a result of regret or 
bad conscience before one's own nation whom they pushed into an 
abyss. One could say that this is more a result of the unwilling 
acceptance of the fact that, on the one hand, no country in the 
world recognized Kosovo as an independent state, and on the 
other, that the state of Yugoslavia is sufficiently strongly 
standing on its legs, and that it is capable of thwarting the 
political exhibitionism of forced secession without difficulties. 
  In these circumstances an increasing number of Kosmet 
Albanian politicians and intellectuals are trying to extend 
their political activities with conciliatory stands. 
Belligerent statements and the policy of extreme demands have 
not yielded any results, and the advocates of the idea that the 
page should be turned over, or even begin writing a new book of 
political activities by Albanians in Kosovo, are becoming 
increasingly vociferous. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8052 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Ganic: Many Killed in `Gas Attack' </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004124494 Paris AFP in English 0100 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004124494 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- The Moslem-led 
Bosnian presidency Saturday [9 April] evening accused Serbs of 
killing "many people" in a gas attack on the eastern Moslem-held 
enclave of Gorazde. 
  A spokesman for the presidency here was unable to give 
casualty figures, saying reports varied widely with some 
mentioning thousands of dead. 
  In Istanbul, Bosnian Vice-President Eyup Ganic told AFP that 
"hundreds" of people had been killed during the course of three 
chemical attacks on Gorazde on Saturday. "This is genocide 
under UN supervision," he said. 
  Ganic added that he would be flying to New York on Sunday, 
at 
the demand of President Alija Izetbegovic, to demand an 
emergency meeting of the UN Security Council. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8053 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    UNPROFOR Denies Chemicals Used </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004144394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1407 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1004144394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 10 (TANJUG) -- A representative of 
the U.N. Protection Force for former Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR) on 
Sunday denied claims by the Moslem leadership in Sarajevo that 
Serb forces had used poison gases and killed thousands of 
civilians in an attack on Gorazde, a Moslem enclave in eastern 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Spokesman Rob Annink told reporters in Sarajevo that Serb 
forces had possibly only used smoke mortars in the region of 
Gorazde, the French news agency AFP said. 
  The Moslem presidency in Sarajevo said on Saturday evening 
that thousands of people had been killed in the Serb attack on 
Gorazde when poison gases were used. The statement was 
immediately carried by leading news agencies from all over the 
world. 
  Moslem Radio Sarajevo even said that the Gorazde suburbs of 
Bace and Mlinarice were pounded with chemical shells, with 
1,000-10,000 casualties as a result. 
  Moslem Presidency Vice-President Ejup Ganic said that he 
would leave for New York already on Sunday to ask for an 
emergency session of the Security Council because of this 
incident. 
  Deputy commander of the general staff of the Bosnian Serb 
army, General Milan Gvero on Sunday told TANJUG that the Serb 
side had never used chemical weapons in the war in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Serb side does not manufacture, possess 
or use such weapons, he was adamant. 
  Gen. Gvero said that the Moslem side was using poison gases 
in order to accuse the Serbs and provoke a military intervention 
against them. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8054 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Gorazde Being `Destroyed' </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004111294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1000 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004111294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fahrudin Becic from Gorazde] </F>
  [Text] Gorazde increasingly resembles a mass grave. Over 
100 dead and about 500 wounded are the consequence of the 
frenzied attacks by Karadzic's followers. Nothing is known 
about the fate of many people from the right bank of the Drina 
River. Many are believed to have been massacred and left among 
the charred remains of villages in the southern section of the 
battlefield. The battle hospital is caring for the wounded with 
superhuman efforts. There are no medicines, no surgical 
equipment, no power. There is also no hope that Gorazde's 
hellish experience is nearing an end. On the contrary, the 
attacks are increasing. 
  Deadly tank shells are raining down from Ustipraca on both 
banks of the Drina. Infantry attacks against the defense lines 
of Kopaci are supported with fire from howitzers and all other 
artillery weapons. Chetniks are also attacking the defence 
lines of Gotunjak, [place name indistinct] Hill and Gradina. 
They are also launching attacks on the northern side of Gorazde 
from the direction of Metvici, toward the villages of Vrazalice 
and Tvitjak, and the Trovrh peak. 
  The situation, however, is most critical at the approaches 
to 
the town, on the right bank of the Drina. Serbian and 
Montenegrin volunteers are systematically firing at civilian 
facilities. The town is being systematically destroyed with all 
available weapons since 0900 -- street by street, house by 
house. Many houses have been destroyed, many are in flames. It 
is futile to expect anything to change here without an urgent 
intervention by the international community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8055 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serb Forces `Liberate' Villages </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004111894 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1001 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004111894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Cajnice, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- The command of the 
Herzegovina Corps today announced that Serb fighters liberated 
the villages of Cindici and Zupcici, south of Gorazde, in 
yesterday's actions. By liberating these two villages 
conditions have been created for units of the Herzegovina Corps 
to take control of these important Muslim strongholds in the 
area around Uhotic Hill and Bukovo plain, the last remaining 
Muslim strongholds on the right bank of the Drina, upstream from 
Gorazde. 
  In order to prevent the withdrawal of members of the 31st 
Brigade of the so-called army of Bosnia-Herzegovina, who 
suffered a major military defeat in the Cindici area, their 
command ordered that the bridge in this village be destroyed. 
  The command of the Herzegovina Corps claims that Serb army 
units engaged in a counteroffensive from the Visegrad direction 
are deployed just outside Kopaci, six km downstream from Gorazde. 
  Serb military sources say that the Muslim army is still 
concentrating its forces in the area around Gradina, Volujaca 
and Uhotic Hill and that its members -- according to an 
imprisoned Muslim soldier -- have been threatened with death if 
they lose these strategic points. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8056 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Muslim Army Stronghold Captured </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004131594 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1147 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004131594 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Cajnice, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- Serb fighters this 
morning liberated Uhotici Brdo, one of the last Muslim army 
strongholds south of Gorazde, the command of the Herzegovina 
Corps reported. 
  Units of the Serb Republic Army are reported to be in 
control 
of the right bank of the Drina from Vitkovici to Dzindici at a 
distance of about 700 meters from the river. 
  NATO planes are breaking the sound barrier while flying at 
low level above the area between Gorazde, Foca and Cajnice -- 
the scene of heavy fighting over the past 13 days. 
  The command of the Hercegovina Corps, denying Muslim media 
reports, said today that Serb fighters have not engaged in any 
military actions in the center of Gorazde. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8057 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Drina Bridge Destroyed </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004125594 Paris AFP in English 1215 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004125594 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serbs kept 
up heavy shelling of the beseiged Moslem enclave of Gorazde on 
Sunday after the breakdown of ceasefire talks, as a row 
developed over the use of chemical weapons there. 
  In Belgrade on Sunday, the agency SNRA said Bosnian Serb 
forces had seized two villages south of Gorazde and their 
commander was declaring himself ready to allow an evacuation of 
civilians from the Moslem enclave. [passage omitted] 
  UNPROFOR spokesman Rob Annink confirmed Sunday that Serb 
shelling had destroyed a strategic bridge over the river Drina 
at Sadba, in the south of Gorazde. This would help any possible 
Serb capture of the south-east part of the enclave still held by 
the mainly Moslem Bosnian army, he said. 
  Serb guns also targetted a bridge in the Gorazde suburb of 
Bacci which had been hit by Serb artillery fire, along with 
three other heavily populated suburbs, Annink said. [passage 
omitted] 
  A shell fell 1,000 metres (yards) from the headquarters of 
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in the centre of Gorazde 
Saturday, UNHCR spokesman Kris Janovski said in Sarajevo. 
  Local people protested in front of its offices Saturday, 
handing in a petition which demanded "more energetic action" to 
defend Gorazde by the international community, he said. 
  In Zagreb, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees told AFP 
that more than 1,500 people fled in panic from intense Serb 
shelling in the southern area of the enclave Saturday night, 
streaming into Gorazde. 
  "There is real panic south of Gorazde and in the town 
itself," spokesman Peter Kessler said, adding that shelling had 
intensified Sunday morning. 
  Annink poured cold water on accusations by Bosnian leaders 
that the enclave had been hit by chemical gas. "We think it was 
smoke grenades, probably M84s for 120mm mortar guns," he said. 
  The Bosnian presidency accused Serbs Saturday evening of 
killing "many people" in a gas attack. 
  Bosnian Serb military leaders denied the charges, accusing 
the Bosnian army of using tear gas in the Bokovo region earlier 
this month. [passage omitted] 
  Serb troops seized two villages in the south of the Gorazde 
enclave, according to a report by the agency SRNA. The troops 
took Djindici and Zupcici, which the agency described as "Moslem 
strongholds." Serb forces now hoped to repulse the mainly 
Moslem Bosnian government forces from heights around the 
Oglecevo region in the south of the enclave, it said. 
  The Serb commander said he was ready to allow the evacuation 
of civilians wishing to leave the enclave as far as the village 
of Osjecani, where they would be handed over to United Nations 
troops, the agency said. 
  The agency SRNA said fighting between the two sides was 
continuing Sunday along front lines on the Drina river, on which 
both the captured villages are situated. Bosnian Serb forces 
also routed Moslem troops in the north of the enclave at Kopac, 
SRNA said. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8058 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Izetbegovic News Conference </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004170094 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004170094 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference given by Bosnia-Herzegovina President Alija </F>
Izetbegovic, Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic, and Bosnian Army 
Commander Rasim Delic with unidentified reporters and an 
unidentified moderator in the Presidency building in Sarajevo -- 
live] 
  [Text] [Izetbegovic] The situation in Gorazde, in the area 
around Gorazde, is deteriorating further. Here are some facts: 
19 villages have been burned down so far [words indistinct]. 
There are many dead and wounded. The exact figure cannot be 
established. We have tried to establish an approximate figure 
regarding the shelling and the victims, especially those of last 
night's chemical attack. It has not been possible to do so 
until now. We can only say that the number of victims is very 
large. 
  I would like to draw your attention to one thing: Gorazde is 
in this situation first of all because of the general situation 
caused by the arms embargo against Bosnia-Herzegovina. We are 
now facing the situation in which the entire Podrinje area, 
where Muslims constituted a majority, has been reduced to three 
enclaves. Gorazde is just one of them. The international 
community's arms embargo has deprived us of the capacity to 
defend ourselves. Let's take a look at the specific actions of 
UN Protection Force [UNPROFOR]. With its reports over the past 
10 days in which it persistently repeated that nothing 
spectacular was happening there, the UNPROFOR has in a way 
lulled the international public and given false information to 
those people who are expected to decide what should happen next. 
It practically deceived [word indistinct]. 
  When I mention the specific situation in Gorazde I am 
referring to a peculiar mode of behavior by UNPROFOR, who have 
-- in the last 10 days or so, since the attack began -- been 
concealing the facts and giving incomplete information to the 
public and [words indistinct]. 
  You must have noticed total discrepancy between what we have 
said about the situation in Gorazde, between our warnings that 
the Serbs were launching all-out, well-prepared attacks for 
which weaponry -- a large number of tanks -- and a large number 
of people were being made available, and UNPROFOR's reports -- 
and we will see who is responsible for this -- to the world 
public saying that nothing special was happening there, that it 
was only a case of sporadic shelling, there were no new 
movements of troops, and no large numbers of casualties. 
  Of course, the right decisions could not be made in the 
centers of decision-making on the basis of such incorrect 
reports. 
  And, before I conclude, let me just say that General Rose 
reiterated yesterday that there were no new movements by the 
chetnik units, and this at the time when they were in fact 
advancing toward the Drina. 
  Let me just add that last night we sent an (?alarming) 
letter 
to the Security Council, demanding (?adequate measures). 
  [Moderator] Before this news conference Prime Minister 
Silajdzic was in contact with some people from Gorazde. I would 
like him to tell us about the situation there at the moment. 
  [Silajdzic] The radio contacts we had and this telegram 
which 
we received 20 minutes ago say more or less the same thing. 
  The situation in Gorazde is extremely dramatic, according to 
the telegram. The shelling of the town center has been the 
heaviest since the beginning of the war. Between 15,000 and 
20,000 people have had to leave their homes. This is what the 
telegram says. 
  I would like to add another point to what President 
Izetbegovic has already said. I think that we have been told by 
General Rose that he would call for air strikes if the 
aggressor's forces were to advance toward the town. That is all. 
  [Moderator] Since we have heard reports of chemical weapons 
being used in the attacks, I would like to ask General Delic to 
tell us what he knows about this. 
  [Delic] Chemical weapons have been used several times during 
the aggressor's offensive on Gorazde. I am speaking of the use 
of chemical gases fired from artillery weapons. These are 
mainly gases which cause short-term effects, gases such as 
irritants. The valley of the Drina has just the right terrain 
for the use of chemical gases. 
  I would like to remind you that international conventions 
ban 
the use of chemical gases. Chemical gases have been used 
indiscriminately, both against the units of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Army and against populated areas, in particular the village of 
Vitkovici. Yesterday alone 45 projectiles containing chemical 
gases were used. We have heard reports that they were used this 
morning as well. 
  According to some unconfirmed reports chemical gases which 
cause long-term effects have also been used, such as 
blister-causing gases. We do not know the number of casualties, 
either among the civilians or among the soldiers, since this 
number is large [as received]. All indications are that the 
aggressor has used all prohibited means at his disposal in order 
to destroy people in the area. 
  [Journalist] [passage indistinct] 
  [Izetbegovic] As you could hear from Silajdzic's statement, 
General Rose promised this yesterday. He said that if the 
Serbs continued advancing, he would use force to stop them. As 
you know, he has not done it yet. 
  [Journalist] I would like to ask President Izetbegovic why 
UNPROFOR is deliberately playing down the attacks on the 
protected zone of Gorazde. My second question is what the state 
of Bosnia- Herzegovina is doing internally and on the 
international scene to stop the Serb aggressor's attacks on 
Gorazde. My third question is for the prime minister. You said 
that the aggressor is again using the tactics of negotiating and 
attacking at the same time. What is the aggressor's aim now? 
  [Izetbegovic] Let me answer the first question (words 
indistinct]. I cannot say what UNPROFOR's aim in doing that is,. 
whether it is the worst option, to hand over Gorazde, or whether 
they are simply shirking from their duty. I believe that this 
is an attempt to avoid the use of force regardless of the price 
our people will pay. I would like to stress now that UNPROFOR 
had the mandate to use force, that is, to ask for (?air 
strikes). There is a clear provision in the resolution [words 
indistinct]. I would like you to ask General Rose the same 
thing as soon as you see him. 
  As for your second question, I can tell you that the 
government of Bosnia-Herzegovina has done everything in its 
powers to help Gorazde, including the army, of course. You know 
what we have done in the political field. Last night we sent an 
urgent letter to the Security Council. That was one of our 
latest actions. In the military field, we have taken resolute 
measures to ease the situation on the Gorazde front. After 
seven days of walking through snow and (?blizzard) the first 
group of people, doctors and people carrying aid for Gorazde 
arrived there last night. We are also taking military measures, 
but I cannot disclose the details here. [passage indistinct] 
  [Siljadzic] The aggressor aims to force the international 
community and us into having this situation, as it is, frozen 
for some period of time. This also includes taking the right 
bank of the Drina in order to secure a better negotiating 
position. At the same time the aggressor is testing the 
international community's resolve [passage indistinct]. In 
other words, instead of one massive attack lasting for several 
days which could possibly provoke a reaction on the part of the 
international community, the aggressor has decided to negotiate 
and attack at the same time so as to lull the international 
community into believing that peace will be achieved through 
negotiations. 
  I have to say that at the very beginning we cautioned 
General 
Rose about this tactics and we hope [passage indistinct]. 
  [Journalist] [passage indistinct] 
  [Delic] At this moment it is difficult to say, it is 
difficult to collect reports -- from the inferno which Gorazde 
is experiencing -- in order to analyze what chemical weapons 
were used. I stressed that [words indistinct] in one round of 
fire yesterday 45 shells filled with chemical agents were fired 
from artillery weapons. [passage indistinct] 
  Speaking about Serb paramilitary formations, the basic 
problem is that they can at any time bring in reinforcements. 
So if I say that 3,000 to 4,000 people are fighting, you can 
take as [word indistinct]. This is only an example. However, 
the problem is that they can replace and bring in fresh forces. 
That is how they manage to have fresh forces all the time. 
They can also bring in new equipment. On the other hand, the 
defenders cannot do that. The same people have held defense 
positions for 15 days. That is a difference in quality, rather 
than the number of people fighting on the opposing sides. 
[passage indistinct] 
  [Izetbegovic] In conclusion I would like to stress what 
Delic 
has just said. We believe that the international community -- 
with the Security Council as its head -- has the obligation to 
take immediate measures to save the town. It should have done 
that before. Tomorrow it could be too late. 
  I would like to stress one thing because we are often asked 
this: We base this obligation on the fact that they have 
deprived us of arms for self-defense. By imposing the arms 
embargo, you practically tied our hands when we were attacked. 
This is why they have no right to use any kind of pretext not 
to protect Gorazde now, and Srebrenica in the future and so on. 
If we had had weapons, we would not ask them to help us. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8059 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serb Troops Crossing Drina River </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004135394 Paris AFP in English 1345 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004135394 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serb troops on 
Sunday began crossing the Drina river just south of the besieged 
Moslem town of Gorazde following a massive artillery offensive, 
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees announced. 
  The soldiers began crossing the river shortly after 3:00 
p.m. 
(1300 GMT), the UNHCR spokesman in Zagreb, Peter Kessler said. 
  The river had marked the front line between the warring 
forces. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8060 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Villages in Flames </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004141494 Paris AFP in English 1413 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004141494 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Zagreb, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serb troops 
besieging the Moslem town of Gorazde on Sunday began crossing 
the Drina river just to the south following a massive artillery 
offensive, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees announced. 
  The soldiers began crossing the river, which had marked the 
front line between warring forces, shortly after 3:00 p.m. (1300 
GMT), the UNHCR spokesman in Zagreb, Peter Kessler said. 
  Half an hour later, shells continued to "pour down" on the 
villages of Bacci and Vinarici to the south of Gorazde, while 
three other villages to the east were in flames, he added. 
  General Michael Rose, commander of the UN Protection Force 
(UNPROFOR) in Bosnia, called off a flight to Brussels from the 
Croatian port of Split and returned rapidly to the Bosnian 
capital Sarajevo, UNPROFOR officials here said. 
  Rose's spokesman here was unable to say whether the sudden 
change in his plans was due to developments in Gorazde. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8061 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs Attack Gorazde Center </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004153094 Paris AFP in English 1521 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004153094 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Zagreb, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serb troops 
besieging Gorazde took control of a hill directly above the 
Moslem-held town Sunday and were shooting into its centre, UN 
officials said as thousands of refugees fled before the Serb 
advance. 
  Serb forces gained the strategic hill on the right bank of 
the river Drina which runs through the beseiged enclave, UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees spokesman Peter Kessler announced just 
after 4:00 pm (1400 GMT). 
  Some 15,000 refugees were fleeing the Moslem east of Gorazde 
in panic and the area, including the hospital, could be "under 
threat very quickly," UNHCR spokeswoman Lyndall Sachs said in 
Belgrade. 
  "The whole eastern part of the town has taken flight (...) 
towards the west of the town," she said. 
  People working for the UNHCR in the town "can see the 
fighting easily from their office, with bullets flying in their 
direction," she added. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8062 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serb Tanks Roll Into Town </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004164894 Paris AFP in English 1648 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004164894 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serb forces took 
control Sunday of the riverbank where the Moslem town of Gorazde 
is located, and Serb tanks rolled into the southern part of 
town, the United Nations said. 
  UN spokesman Dacre Halloway said the Serb forces took over 
the bank after crossing the Drina river, which had been the 
frontline between the two warring parties. He said there was 
sniper fire outside the office of the UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees. 
  Serb forces have been attacking the Gorazde enclave for the 
past two weeks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8063 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs Deny Entering Gorazde </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004172894 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1716 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004172894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Cajnice, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- Units of the [Bosnian] 
Serb army have not entered Gorazde, and they are not firing on 
the town, the command of the Herzegovina Corps announced this 
evening, denying the news broadcast by Muslim media and quoted 
by some world news agencies. 
  Officials in the Herzegovina Corps command claim that the 
reports that the Serb army is using poison gases are also 
untrue. The same command says that the truth is that Muslims 
have recently used poison gases -- made in the fertilizer 
factory in Vitkovici -- in the battles south of Gorazde. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8064 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Explosives Planted in Factory </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004173394 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004173394 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Is Gorazde going to be another Bhopal? After 13 
days of fighting [words indistinct] the defenders from the area 
of Vitkovici decided to plant explosives in a nitrogen factory. 
We have just learned from Mirsad Dragolj that explosives were 
planted in two tanks containing 25 metric tons of ammonia each 
and a tank with 20 tons of formalin. 
  If these tanks explode, the consequences would certainly be 
vast, not only for the area of Vitkovici and Gorazde, but also 
for the whole of the northern part of the Drina valley. Mr. 
Dragolj said this was not an act of desperation, but a move 
caused by futile actions of the representatives of the 
peacekeeping forces. It is a consequence of the lies about the 
latest offensive by some key people in the world organization 
and also of the reactions by our state and military organs, 
which came too late. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8065 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    NATO Warplanes Strike Serb Positions </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004174894 Paris AFP in English 1748 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004174894 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, April 10 (AFP) -- NATO warplanes Sunday 
carried out airstrikes over the Serb-besieged Moslem town of 
Gorazde in Bosnia-Herzegovina, a NATO spokesman said here. 
  The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation carried out the 
attacks at the request of UN forces, the spokesman said. 
  Serb forces were Sunday pressing home an attack on Gorazde 
after a massive artillery barrage following a two-week siege. 
  The ongoing attacks against Serb positions by two NATO F-16C 
aircraft were confirmed in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo by UN 
Protection Force spokesman Major Dacre Halloway. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8066 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs Cite `Open Agression' </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004184394 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1832 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004184394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Cajnice, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- The NATO combat air 
force carried out an attack in the area of Preljuc and Goli Vrh, 
some 12 km southwest of Gorazde, at about 1820 this evening, the 
command of the Herzegovina Corps said in a statement. 
  This was an act of open aggression against the people of 
eastern Herzegovina, an action against civilian targets far from 
the front line, it was stressed at the corps command. 
  The command did not confirm claims by western agencies that 
NATO planes (reportedly U.S. F-16's) had hit two Serb tanks. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8067 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    NATO Details Bombing </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004190194 Paris AFP in English 1851 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004190194 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- Two NATO warplanes 
on Sunday carried out air strikes against Bosnian Serb positions 
around the besieged Moslem town of Gorazde, following a major 
Serb offensive, a UN military spokesman said here. [passage 
omitted] 
  The warplanes dropped bombs using UNPROFOR air-to-ground 
guidance systems and "provided close air support to United 
Nations personnel in Gorazde," the NATO Southern Command 
announced in Naples, Italy. [passage omitted] 
  NATO officials in Naples said the air attack occurred around 
6:22 p.m. (1622 GMT). "Battle damage assessment is underway," 
NATO announced. [passage omitted] 
  The NATO spokesman in Brussels said further details would be 
made available after consultation with military authorities. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8068 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs Report Civilian Casualties </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004194294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1920 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004194294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- NATO planes fired four 
missiles against civilian targets in the southeastern part of 
the Srpska republic, General Milan Gvero, deputy chief of staff 
of the Srpska republic's army, has confirmed to SRNA. 
  He stressed that there are some civilian casualties and that 
the consequences of the air strikes are being investigated, but 
he did not give the precise locality where the NATO strike took 
place. 
  The information service of the Herzegovina Corps has 
confirmed that two U.S. NATO planes carried out an attack in the 
area of Srbinje, southeast of Gorazde, at about 1820. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8069 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    British Troops Direct Air Strike </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004202494 London PRESS ASSOCIATION in English 1939 GMT 10 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004202494 </F>
<F P=104>  London PRESS ASSOCIATION </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By John von Radowitz and Charles Miller, PRESS ASSOCIATION </F>
correspondents] 
  [Text] An elite squad of British SAS [Special Air Service] 
troops in Gorazde tonight directed U.S. war planes to bomb Serb 
forces threatening the besieged Muslim enclave of Gorazde. The 
seven-strong highly specialised unit gave precise locations of 
Serb forces surrounding the enclave. Two U.S. F-16s joined the 
NATO attack and destroyed at least two Serb tanks. 
Lieutenant-General Sir Michael Rose, the British commander of UN 
forces in Bosnia, called for the action after Serb forces 
reached the outskirts of the town where some 65,000 people have 
been holed up by the fighting. Several patrol groups from the 
Hereford-based SAS regiment were ordered into a number of Muslim 
enclaves following a specific request from Gen Rose, himself a 
former SAS officer and commander. Trained to operate in small 
self-sufficient patrol teams they are the ideal reconnaissance 
troops to feed back information on front line positions and 
weapons. 
  UN military sources in Zagreb said of the SAS soldiers: 
"They 
were providing information on the ground which would have a 
bearing on air support." The decision to mount the attack came 
after a crisis meeting in Sarajevo between Gen Rose and his 
superior, General Bernard de Lapresle, the commander in charge 
of all UN forces in the former Yugoslavia, an United Nations 
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) spokesman said. Gen Rose had earlier 
been en route to Brussels but turned back in Split because of 
the gravity of the situation. 
  U.S. planes have engaged Serb air forces over Bosnia in the 
past but this was the first premeditated strike of its kind. It 
was also the first time NATO had launched air strikes to deter 
Serb forces from attacking a UN-declared "safe area" in Bosnia. 
The threat of air strikes forced the Serbs to withdraw their 
guns from Sarajevo in February. 
  Major Dacre Holloway, the UNPROFOR spokesman in Sarajevo, 
said the airstrike operation was "still on-going" and damage 
assessment was under way. He said no British planes had been 
involved in the strike. "They are NATO aircraft involved -- we 
do not discriminate between them," he added. "Damage assessment 
is taking place. The whole operation is on-going at the 
moment," he added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8070 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Tremendous Relief' Following Strike </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004194994 Paris AFP in English 1940 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004194994 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- [passage omitted] 
Aid workers said that Serb shelling of Gorazde had ceased after 
the [NATO] air strikes, bringing relief after the assault on the 
town, while civilians had taken advantage of the lull to take 
the wounded to hospital. 
  In Brussels, NATO diplomats said the strikes occurred some 
45 
minutes after UNPROFOR forces were attacked from a position 
occupied by Bosnian Serbs. 
  The Serb military command for Herzegovina, carrying out the 
offensive on Gorazde, said NATO planes had struck Bosnian Serb 
positions in the Preljuca and Goli Vrh region, 12 kilometres 
(seven miles) southwest of the town. [passage omitted] 
  The private Italian television station TG5 said the planes 
left from Aviano in northeast Italy and reported that the attack 
had left casualties, but gave no sources. [passage omitted] 
  A UN High Commissioner for Refugees spokesman in Belgrade, 
Lyndall Sachs, said: "The town (Gorazde) is calm and there is a 
feeling of tremendous relief among the people" after a day of 
panicked fleeing before the Serb offensive. 
  "Now everyone is catching their breath," Eric Stobbaerts, 
Belgrade representative for Medecins sans Frontieres (MSF: 
Doctors Without Borders) said, "and waiting to see what will 
happen tonight." [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8071 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Shelling Continues Despite Air Strike </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004205494 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004205494 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fahrudin Becic from Gorazde] </F>
  [Excerpts] Several questions are being raised in Gorazde: 
Are the chetniks really going to enter the town, will Mirsad 
Dragolj [not further identified] blow up the nitrogen factory 
(?despite the fact) that the U.S. Phantoms [as received] have 
bombed the Chetnik positions. 
  It is impossible to give precise answers to any of these 
questions. Since 1700 two Phantoms have been flying over the 
Gorazde area. We do not have valid information about their 
actions, but according to some reports from the ground, strong 
explosions were heard 13 kilometers southwest of the town center. 
  Since the attacks against the territory on the right bank of 
the Drina River have been organized and carried out from there 
in the last 13 days, it seems possible that the report on the 
Phantoms' actions is true. 
  This, however, did not stop the Chetnik forces continuing 
[word indistinct] toward the center. Some eye-witnesses claim 
that the Chetniks even shot at the planes. 
  The part of the town on the right bank on the Drina River 
has 
been evacuated. The town was again heavily shelled this 
evening. There were fatalities and wounded in several suburbs. 
Chetnik snipers fired on the town center and around the UNHCR 
[UN High Commissioner for Refugees] offices. 
  Heavy small-arms fighting is under way on the approaches to 
the town. Some people have been killed and wounded. [passage 
omitted] 
  Around 2030 the howitzer-shelling of the town center 
intensified. Unfortunately, there were fatalities again. I am 
afraid that the casualty toll today is extremely high. Gorazde 
is entering the most uncertain night in its long history. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8072 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs: Muslims Using Chemical Agents </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004204294 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1004204294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Scepan Aleksic from Cajnice] </F>
  [Text] At about 1820 this evening, NATO forces bombed the 
forces of the Herzegovina Corps in the region of Preljuc and 
Goli Vrh, some 13 kilometers southwest of Gorazde. NATO air 
forces carried out one attack. 
  The Command of the Herzegovina Corps is still not presenting 
details as to whether the Serbian forces have suffered any 
losses in the bombing. There is no confirmation of reports 
carried in foreign media that two Serbian tanks have been 
destroyed. 
  With this act, as most responsible people in the Command of 
the Herzegovina Corps claim, NATO forces fell for Muslims lies, 
and without any warning carried out open aggression on the army 
and people of the Serbian Republic [of Bosnia-Herzegovina]. The 
Command of the Herzegovina Corps this evening stated that the 
units of the Herzegovina Corps did not enter Gorazde, thus 
denying reports by the Muslim radio that they had already taken 
half of the town. 
  Without checking the facts, this report was carried by many 
western agencies this afternoon. That these claims are 
groundless can be concluded by the statements of UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Forces] representatives. It is incorrect that 
artillery is shelling the city center of Gorazde, which is also 
an invention by the Muslim propaganda machinery. Chemical 
agents have not been used, as claimed by foreign agencies. The 
truth is that chemical agents were used by the Muslims yesterday 
and this morning, but without any major consequences for the 
Serbian fighters. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8073 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    UN Threatens More Air Strikes </H4>

<F P=102> AU1004201294 Paris AFP in English 2002 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1004201294 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, April 10 (AFP) -- The United Nations warned 
Sunday it would order more air strikes against Serb forces 
around the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde if necessary. 
  Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali "would like to make it 
very clear that he will not hesitate to use airpower again to 
protect UN-designated safe areas," said UN spokeswoman Therese 
Gastaut. Gorazde is one of six such areas in Bosnia. 
  Two U.S. F-16 fighter planes attacked Serb positions near 
Gorazde Sunday, officials in Washington and Brussels said. 
  The air raids were ordered by the top UN official in the 
former Yugoslavia, Yasushi Akashi, in consultation with 
Butrus-Ghali to protect eight UN observers in the Gorazde 
enclave, Gastaut said. 
  U.S. F-16 warplanes carried out two sorties, at 1625 GMT and 
1629 GMT, she said. She characterized the attacks as "close air 
support" rather than air strikes in the traditional sense 
because the objective was to protect the observers and other UN 
staff in Gorazde. 
  On Saturday Butrus-Ghali instructed the UN force in Bosnia 
to 
use all means necessary to force the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw 
to positions they held before their Gorazde offensive began in 
late March. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8074 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Permanent Squadron To Be Installed </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004204994 Rome RAI Televideo Teletext in Italian 2026 GMT 
10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004204994 </F>
<F P=104>  Rome RAI Televideo Teletext </F>
<F P=105>  Italian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The two American F-16 fighters, which this afternoon 
attacked Serb positions around the town of Gorazde, have 
returned safely to the U.S. Air Force base at Aviano in 
northeast Italy. 
  In the meantime it has been revealed that the two planes 
were 
flying a reconaissence mission over Bosnia when they received 
the order -- using a secret code -- to intervene in Gorazde. 
  Tomorrow a permanent intervention squadron will be installed 
at Aviano, the first of its type at an Italian airbase. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8075 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Izetbegovic Receives Redman </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004214594 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2100 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004214594 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] President of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency Alija 
Izetbegovic today received U.S. President Clinton's special 
envoy Charles Redman regarding the most dramatic situation in 
Gorazde. The talks were also attended by Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Premier Haris Silajdzic and U.S. Ambassador to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Victor Jakovich. 
  The situation in Gorazde is critical indeed. We are 
examining the problem very seriously, and I hope the necessary 
steps will be taken. This is all I can tell you, Redman said 
following the meeting. 
  Asked by reporters whether the ferocity of the fighting has 
subsided following the threat of air strikes unless an end is 
put to the offensive, Redman says: This was in the morning [as 
heard]. Since noon the situation has changed and become very 
serious due to Serb advances. 
  Turkish President Demirel talked over the phone with 
Izetbegovic late this afternoon. President Demirel called 
President Izetbegovic to tell him that Turkey would do its best 
to initiate actions that would provide protection for the 
citizens of Gorazde. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8076 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serb General Visits Front </H4>

<F P=102> LD1004220894 Zagreb HTV Television in Serbo-Croatian 2135 
GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004220894 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb HTV Television </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Rebroadcast of Pale Serb Television news item; from the HTV </F>
"Slikom Na Sliku" political magazine program] 
  [Excerpts] The army of so-called Bosnia-Herzegovina today 
again launched a desperate attack from Trebesko Brdo, Mount 
Bula, and the valleys of the Drina and Praca against the front 
lines of the Serb army's 2 Drina Brigade near Ustipraca. 
  The attack with mortars, recoilless guns, and anti-aircraft 
guns began early this morning. Then the artillery also joined 
in. Well prepared for this sort of surprise, the Serb soldiers 
responded with all available weapons. [passage omitted] 
  The enemy attack was halted and the green berets withdrew 
deep into their territory. One Serb soldier was killed and two 
were wounded. 
  General Ratko Mladic today visited the first combat lines of 
the Serb army at the Gorazde front. He had lenghty talks with 
the commanders and soldiers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8077 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serbs Suspend Contacts With UN </H4>

<F P=102> LD1104083494 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0106 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104083494 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- The supreme command of 
the Bosnian Srpska republic armed forces assessed late tonight 
[10 April] that by bombing Serb territory the United Nations 
sided against Serbs in the civil war in former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and announced that all contacts between the 
Srpska republic and UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] were 
suspended. 
  A statement from the command, forwarded to TANJUG from the 
Srpska republic president's office stresses that: The attacks 
on the Serbs were carried out in order to prevent the 
realization of the Serb proposal on a complete and lasting 
cessation of hostilities. 
  Noting that the Serb side was determined to persist in its 
commitment to an immediate and lasting peace, but also to the 
energetic defense of the Srpska republic and Serb national 
interests, the supreme command stresses that the Serbs will not 
be frightened and that they will keep the right to self-defense 
with all available weapons. 
  The text of the statement by the supreme command of the 
armed 
forces of the Bosnian Srpska republic reads: 
  1. The supreme command of the Srpska republic armed forces 
lodges a sharp protest with the United Nations over the bombing 
of Serb territory. It is not true that UNPROFOR personnel were 
in danger, and there is no justification for the use of NATO's 
air force. By doing this, the United Nations has sided against 
the Serbs in this civil war. Further cooperation of the Srpska 
republic with UNPROFOR has been brought into question, and all 
contacts between the Srpska republic and UNPROFOR are now 
suspended. 
  2. The supreme command of the Bosnian Srpska republic's 
armed forces is informing the international public about the 
Serb proposal for a complete and lasting cessation of 
hostilities. This proposal was not accepted by the Muslim side 
and was not supported by UNPROFOR. By protecting the Muslim 
offensive from defeat, the United Nations is prolonging the war 
and suffering. The attack on the Serbs was carried out in order 
to prevent the realization of the Serb proposal on a complete 
and lasting cessation of hostilities. 
  3. The peace process has been put in jeopardy and the UN 
bears the responsibility for it. The Serb side is determined to 
persist in its commitment to an immediate and lasting peace, and 
to the energetic defense of the Serb republic and Serb national 
interests. 
  4. The soldiers of the Srpska republic are forced to choose 
between being killed or responding to the offensive. 
Politically motivated elements in NATO and the United Nations 
are encouraging Muslim attacks against Serbs in order to take 
the Serb response as a cause for military intervention. The 
Serbs will not be frightened, and they will keep the right to 
self-defense with all available weapons. This is said in the 
statement by the supreme command of the armed forces of the 
Srpska republic. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8078 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Want Negotiations Only With Churkin </H4>

<F P=102> LD1104142094 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1349 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104142094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Novi Sad, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- Momcilo Krajisnik, 
president of the people's assembly of the Srpska republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, today told Novi Sad Radio that following the 
bombardment of the Serb forces around Gorazde negotiations with 
UN representatives would only be conducted through Russian 
special envoy Vitaliy Churkin. 
  Krajisnik added that the Srpska republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina no longer trusted other mediators since they 
had been abusing the trust of the top leadership of the Srpska 
republic. 
  Krajisnik also pointed out that it was a totally obvious 
fact 
that the Muslim forces had provoked the Serbs around Gorazde to 
shatter the cessation of hostilities and an agreement on peace. 
Instead of the Muslim forces bearing responsibility for the 
conflicts around Gorazde, the NATO aircraft bombed the positions 
of Serb units near Gorazde. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8079 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Bestial' Overnight Shelling </H4>

<F P=102> AU1104084194 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 0800 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104084194 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Fahrudin Becic report] </F>
  [Text] There was no peace in Gorazde overnight. The 
Chetniks attacked the southern access to the town (?with 
infantry) throughout the night. Until midnight, they were 
attacking individual parts of the town and the [word indistinct] 
itself with howitzer and tank grenades. Afterward, they 
attacked [words indistinct] defense lines with mortars and the 
town [word indistinct] with snipers. 
  This morning [words indistinct] somewhat intensified [words 
indistinct] that lasted here the entire night [words 
indistinct]. Shortly after 0800 [words indistinct], and infantry 
battles are under way in the area of the right bank access to 
the town. 
  According to preliminary reports, the consequences of the 
bestial overnight shelling are seven [words indistinct] and 
[word indistinct] injured. Some of them [passage indistinct] in 
areas from which it is not possible to reach the town, is not 
known yet. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8080 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Rose Warns of Fresh Strikes </H4>

<F P=102> LD1104094494 London PRESS ASSOCIATION in English 0821 GMT 11 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104094494 </F>
<F P=104>  London PRESS ASSOCIATION </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The British United Nations commander in Bosnia 
warned today that he was prepared to order fresh air strikes 
against Bosnian Serb forces beseiging the Muslim enclave of 
Gorazde if United Nations troops were put at risk. 
  But Lieutenant General Sir Michael Rose said he hoped 
yesterday's NATO air strike against Bosnian Serb positions round 
Gorazde, a designated "safe haven," would not interfere with 
efforts to bring peace to the war-torn country. 
  He said he did not want to over-dramatise the air strike. 
But he warned: "If we find ourselves in a similar condition we 
will have to take appropriate action." 
  The NATO air strikes were ordered under the authority of a 
United Nations Security Council resolution after Bosnian Serb 
forces ignored repeated warnings to halt an assault on Gorazde. 
  Sir Michael said: "I remain hopeful that what was a limited 
military tactical action yesterday will not interfere with 
something which is far more important -- bringing peace to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in toto." 
  But earlier on the same programme a spokesman for the 
Bosnian 
Serbs warned: "If the air strikes go on we are in a position of 
war with the United Nations." 
  Sir Michael said the UN was a peace-keeping organisation. 
Its troops were in Bosnia to help feed 2.7 million people in 
conditions of war, and remained neutral, impartial and 
non-combatant. 
  He went on: "But we have the right to self-defence if people 
fire on us. I would use the best means available to preserve 
the lives and limbs of my soldiers," he told the BBC Radio 4 
programme Today. "If the best means available is air, then I 
will use air, and that is what happened last night. But I do 
not want to over-dramatise what happened last night. We were 
acting in self-defence in support of UN Security Council 
resolution 836. 
  "I very much hope that shelling will not start again. If we 
find ourselves in a similar condition we will have to take 
appropriate action." 
  He went on: "We have a peace process developing here. I 
hope we can extend the peace process to the Bosnian Serb side. 
We were close to it. We remain, I hope, close to it. We 
should not allow a tactical situation of response by our troops 
to abrade this peace process, which will bring peace throughout 
Bosnia Herzogovina." 
  There were continuing discussions over the whole of last 
week 
on developing some peace process, and considerable progress was 
made. 
  "I remain hopeful that what was a limited, military tactical 
action yesterday will not interfere with something which is far 
more important, bringing peace to Bosnia Herzegovina in toto." 
  Sir Michael added: "There is no shelling going on in Gorazde 
at the moment according to my reports. Five minutes ago the 
town was quiet I am delighted to say." 
  Two isolated shells fell in Gorazde during the night, he 
said, but were not significant in terms of the overall situation 
in the town. 
  Sir Michael said last night that he called in a strike by 
two 
American F-16s after a Serb tank started firing directly into 
Gorazde. 
  Earlier, Bosnian Serb spokesman Jovan Zematica told the 
Today 
programme: "There was no shelling of the town of Gorazde before 
or at the time of the air attack on Serb positions." Military 
activity in the area was started by the Muslims, he claimed, 
adding: ``We have every right to defend ourselves and to take 
whatever military action we deem necessary to defend ourselves. 
  "If the United Nations acting from the air threaten Serbian 
lives, the behaviour of our troops on the ground towards 
UNPROFOR (UN peace-keeping) troops on the ground cannot any 
longer be guaranteed. And if the air strikes go on we are in a 
position of war with the United Nations." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8081 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Serb Attack Continues </H4>

<F P=102> AU1104115994 Paris AFP in English 1148 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1104115994 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, April 11 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serbs on Monday 
continued shelling the mainly Moslem town of Gorazde, reportedly 
injuring some 200 people, a UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) spokeswoman said here. 
  Shells hit a school that was being used as a refugee centre 
and some 200 people were said to be injured, Christiane 
Berthiaume said, citing reports from four UNHCR personnel in the 
Moslem enclave in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8082 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Muslim Attacks Follow Air Strikes </H4>

<F P=102> LD1104131594 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1251 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1104131594 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Banja Luka, April 11 (TANJUG) -- Following Sunday's 
bombing by the NATO aircraft of Bosnian Serb targets south of 
Gorazde, Bosnian Moslem forces attacked early on Monday Serb 
positions along several major directions, along which they have 
been undertaking offensive actions for days already. 
  Supported by their artillery, Moslems attacked from Bugojno 
in the direction of Srbobran, central Bosnia, while the corridor 
and Serb positions near Brcko and Doboj bore the brunt of Moslem 
attacks in northern Bosnia. 
  Early on Monday Moslem forces delivered a heavy 
mortar-infantry attack 7 km southwest of Brcko on Serb positions 
in the area of Ulice, Lukici and Lipovac, Bosnian Serb military 
sources said. 
  Members of the Bosnian Serb army defending access points to 
Brcko and the corridor linking eastern and western Bosnia and 
the republic of Serb Krajina, responded to the attack and a lull 
followed in that part of the front along the River Sava valley. 
  Moslem units are launching heavy attacks along nearly all 
directions around Doboj, the sources said. 
  Moslem forces on Monday resumed unabated artillery attacks 
on 
the western positions on the Doboj front and its suburbs and 
residential areas. 
  Except for a few observations by U.N. representatives that 
Moslems were undertaking offensive actions in the Doboj region 
and warnings to them not to provoke Serbs, there were no 
stronger reactions by the U.N. Protection Force (UNPROFOR) to a 
nearly two-week-long Moslem offensive on Doboj, Bosnian Serb 
sources said. The media attention was in that period focused on 
Gorazde, from which 10,000 Moslem troops mounted a fierce 
offensive and thus provoked the Serb counter-offensive. 
  Serb positions and localities on the right bank of the River 
Bosna, from Zavidovici to Maglaj (south of Doboj), were a target 
of heavy infantry and mortar fire. Serb forces did not have any 
casualties and repulsed a stronger artillery-infantry attack in 
the Trebava front, northeast of Doboj. 
  Moslem forces did not cease attacks on the Srbobran front 
either, from the direction of Bugojno in central Bosnia. 
Attacks were renewed along almost all sectors of the front in 
this area, Bosnian Serb military sources reported on Monday. 
  Since the outset of the all-out Moslem offensive on the 
Bosnian Serb Republic mounted late in March, forces of Bosnian 
Moslem leader Alija Izetbegovic have been trying to reopen the 
strategically important road to Jajce and western Bosnia, by 
breaking through Serb lines in the direction of Srbobran. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8083 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Second NATO Air Strike Reported </H4>

<F P=102> LD1104125394 Paris Radio France International in French 1200 
GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104125394 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris Radio France International </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Two NATO air raids in two days in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. NATO aircraft have just attacked Serb 
positions again around the Muslim enclave of Gorazde. This news 
has not been officially confirmed yet by the United Nations. 
  Some hours ago, the UN special representative for Bosnia was 
warning that new air strikes were possible in case of threats 
against the safe havens. Yasushi Akashi was speaking in Paris. 
Shortly after the Atlantic Alliance apparently carried out a 
second air strike against the surrounding Serb positions, 
shelling the Muslim enclave of Gorazde. More details with Denis 
Hourdan: 
  [Hourdan] It seems that NATO planes are carrying out new air 
strikes on Serb positions around Gorazde. For the time being UN 
official spokesmen in Sarajevo refuse to confirm the news given 
by a UNHCR [UN High Commissioner for Refugees] civilian who was 
in General Rose's command post in Sarajevo. This UN official 
told us that new raids were under way after this morning's heavy 
shelling of Gorazde. Serbs first targetted Gorazde hospital, 
and then the residence of UN military observers. This latest 
move apparently prompted NATO's latest raid. NATO dispatched 
planes that identified targets. The United Nations refuses to 
confirm that the planes fired, but apparently new air strikes 
took place. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8084 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94036" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fighting, Situation Around Gorazde Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    NATO Reports 5 Bombs Dropped </H4>

<F P=102> AU1104142094 Paris AFP in English 1401 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU1104142094 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, April 11 (AFP) -- Nato forces dropped five 
250-kilo (550-lb) bombs in their attack on Serb artillery 
positions around the embattled town of Gorazde in eastern Bosnia 
on Sunday [10 April], NATO officials said here Monday. 
  Two United States Air Force F-16 aircraft were involved in 
Sunday's strike. One dropped three Mark 82 bombs at 16.22 GMT 
Sunday and the other dropped two more four minutes later, the 
officials said. 
  Late Sunday, NATO forces attempted an air reconnaissance 
mission to evaluate damage done to the Serb positions, but bad 
weather prevented them carrying this out successfully, a 
diplomat said. 
  U.S. military officials at the Aviano base in Italy said 
Monday that three 250-kilo bombs had been dropped on Serb 
positions by the two F-16s. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8085 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94037" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Karadzic Cancels Meeting With Redman </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Karadzic Cancels Meeting With Redman </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1104080994 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0140 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104080994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- Radovan Karadzic, 
president of the Bosnian Serb Republic has cancelled his meeting 
with U.S. special envoy Charles Redman, scheduled for today, 
explaining the cancellation with the newly arisen situation. 
  Jovan Zametica, the Serb Republic president's adviser, 
tonight sent a letter to Viktor Andreyev, the UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Force] spokesman in Sarajevo, informing him about the 
cancellation. 
  I am informing you with regret that, in the light of the 
newly arisen situation and the analysis of the situation on the 
ground, President Karadzic is unable to meet Charles Redman 
today, a letter, a copy of which was forwarded to TANJUG, says. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8086 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94038" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Tanks Fire on Tuzla, Casualties Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb Tanks Fire on Tuzla, Casualties Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004174294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1700 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004174294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] The chetniks from Mount Majevica fired on the 
town of Tuzla from tanks in the area of Pali Hrast at 1615 and 
then again after an hour. A civilian was killed in the second 
attack. The state of general alert is still in force. [passage 
indistinct] 
  [Reporter] The aggressor's artillery is destroying 
everything 
in sight. [passage omitted] Over 1,000 shells fell on our 
territory, causing great damage. According to reports from the 
local hospital several people have been wounded. Two soldiers 
of the Hajrudin Mesic Brigade have been killed. [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8087 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94039" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs Direct `Most Intense' Attacks at Doboj </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs Direct `Most Intense' Attacks at Doboj </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1104111694 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1000 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104111694 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Mirudin Aldobasic report from 7 South Operative Group of </F>
the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army] 
  [Text] The enemy displayed the most intense activities from 
(?Sevarlije) and Potocani, with mortars, Bofors guns, 
antiaircraft machine guns, and antiaircraft guns at the defense 
lines on the Doboj battlefield and in the zone of responsibility 
of the Sije independent battalion, as well as at the civilian 
settlements Mravici, Martuzici, and Ularice. 
  The Chetniks engaged in attacks with antiaircraft machine 
guns and antiaircraft guns in the zone of responsibility of the 
110th Croatian Defense Council Brigade Usora and the Tesanjka 
independent battalion. 
  The enemy also opened [word indistinct] artillery fire 
[words 
indistinct] civilian settlements Mirjanovac and Kalosevci and at 
the defense positions of the 207th Famous Hill Brigade [word 
indistinct]. 
  There was no peace in other battlefields on this free 
territory of our country either. The enemy displayed constant 
provocations along the defense lines in the zone of 
responsibility of the 7 South Operative Group, which is 135 km 
long. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8088 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94040" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslims Intensify `Offensive' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslims Intensify `Offensive' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004190094 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1820 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004190094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Doboj, 10 Apr (TANJUG) -- Muslim units have 
intensified their offensive and provocative attacks against Serb 
defense positions and settlements on all parts of the front in 
the Doboj area, the Information Service of the first Bosnian 
Krajina corps of the Srpska republic army said this evening. 
  Reinforced by units from Zavidovici, the enemy launched two 
fierce combined artillery-infantry attacks in an attempt to 
break through Serb positions at the southwestern part of the 
Ozren defense line. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8089 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94041" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Fierce' Inter-Muslim Clashes Reported in West </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Fierce' Inter-Muslim Clashes Reported in West </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004172394 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1705 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1004172394 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Petrovac, April 10 (TANJUG) -- Inter-Moslem clashes 
on Sunday continued at unabated intensity along all demarcation 
lines in the Cazin Krajina, in western Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Moslem media in the Bihac region reported. 
  Forces of the Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia (APWB), 
proclaimed last September, are successfully repelling a fresh 
offensive by members of the 5th Corps of the Moslem Army, loyal 
to hardline leader Alija Izetbegovic, the Western Bosnian News 
Agency ZBIA said. 
  Moslem-controlled radio in Bihac said that both sides 
reported casualties and the missing during Sunday's fightings in 
the Cazin Krajina. This was also confirmed by the Moslem Radio 
Sarajevo. 
  The Moslem Army command, loyal to Izetbegovic, has admitted 
that 500 people were killed and over 2,000 wounded during eight 
months of fighting with the APWB forces, loyal to Izetbegovic's 
rival Fikret Abdic who opposes Izetbegovic policy of war. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8090 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94042" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslim-Croat Relations Tense in Kiseljak Area </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslim-Croat Relations Tense in Kiseljak Area </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004164094 Mostar Croatian Radio Herceg-Bosna in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004164094 </F>
<F P=104>  Mostar Croatian Radio Herceg-Bosna </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Armonko Grgic for Herceg-Bosna from Busovaca] </F>
  [Excerpt] The police station in Busovaca has informed us 
that a bus full of civilians that left Busovaca for Kiseljak at 
0930 was turned back from the joint checkpoint in the village of 
Brestovsko in the Kiseljak municipality because the Muslim side 
would not let it through to Croat-held territory. The Muslims 
said that the HVO [Croatian Defense Council] would not allow 
free movement of humanitarian aid convoys to the Muslim side. 
All this was caused by an incident in Kresevo where a Muslim 
sniper killed an HVO soldier. The road between Busovaca and 
Kiseljak was opened three days ago. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8091 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslim Forces Attack Serbs Near Brcko </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslim Forces Attack Serbs Near Brcko </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1104090294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0737 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104090294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Brcko, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- Early this morning, Muslim 
forces launched a heavy combined mortar and infantry attack from 
the direction of Pejici and Pejina, seven kilometers south of 
Brcko. They attacked Serb positions in the areas of Ulice, 
Lukici, and Lipovac, Serb military sources have announced. 
  More than 20 60-mm and 82-mm mortar shells were fired on the 
Serb defense lines, followed by fierce fire from infantry 
weapons. 
  Members of the Serb republic army responded to the attack, 
after which there has been a lull in this section of the 
Posavlje [River Sava valley] battlefield. 
  Last night and this morning was mainly quiet on the Gradacac 
and Orasje battlefronts [northern Bosnia]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8092 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94044" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs Attack Brcko </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs Attack Brcko </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1104111294 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 0800 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104111294 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] At 0615 this morning the enemy moved into a 
ferocious tank-infantry attack on Omerbegovaca-Vranovaca line, 
which was supported substantially by the artillery. Almost 
simultaneously, the aggressor struck at civilian targets on the 
free Brcko territory with tanks, howitzers, and 120-mm mortars. 
  All of last night the enemy shelled the entire defense line 
of the 108th Motorized Brigade. [passage omitted] 
  The enemy is concentrating great amounts of manpower and 
military hardware on the first lines of the front, especially on 
Omerbegovaca [word indistinct] line and in the central part of 
the Brcko battlefield. 
  In the area of [word indistinct], where two Gazela 
helicopters attacked our positions yesterday, we have observed 
the arrival of another enemy combat helicopter. 
  The arrival of enemy reinforcements continues. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8093 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94045" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Muslims Capture Serb Prisoners in Tarcin </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Muslims Capture Serb Prisoners in Tarcin </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004205994 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 2000 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004205994 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] The dramatic situation in Gorazde has been 
reflected on the events in Tarcin. Our correspondent from Tarcin 
has sent us this report: 
  All access roads to Tarcin are still blocked. According to 
reports we have received so far, the situation is becoming 
increasingly complex according to Bosnia-Hercegovina radio 
broadcasts about the dramatic situation at the Gorazde 
battlefield. At the first roadblock in Tarcin, we have learned 
that despite all measures carried out by police forces of the 
Hadzici public security station, soldiers of the Fifth Hill 
Brigade, and members of the antiterrorist squad, embittered 
citizens from eastern Bosnia [Muslim refugees] and the local 
people expressing solidarity with their demands have seized 
silos in which the arrested aggressor soldiers are being held. 
  Judging by the shots we heard fired from infantry weapons, 
the Tarcin drama culminated this evening. This was immediately 
followed by sirens of ambulance cars in Tarcin. However, we 
still have not received any details about casualties. We are 
unable to get details because Tarcin is completely blocked. 
[passage omitted] 
  As we are filing this report, we have just received a report 
that police forces and members of the antiterrorist squad have 
seized the control of the silo prison again. However, the 
protesters have taken three aggressor soldiers in an unknown 
direction. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8094 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94046" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Tense' Muslim-Serb Talks in Sarajevo Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Tense' Muslim-Serb Talks in Sarajevo Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0904155094 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1452 GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0904155094 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 9 Apr (TANJUG) -- A meeting between the 
commanders of the [Bosnian] Serb and Muslim armies, with 
UNPROFOR's [UN Protection Forces] mediation, which began around 
1300 at Sarajevo airport, is still under way this afternoon, and 
could go on for several hours. 
  As TANJUG's correspondent has learned, the talks are 
difficult and tense, and it is completely uncertain whether the 
standpoints of the two sides will come closer, and whether a 
cease-fire agreement will be signed. 
  The commander of the main headquarters of the Srpska 
republic 
army, Lt. Col. Gen. Ratko Mladic; the commander of the Muslim 
forces, Gen. Rasim Delic; and the UNPROFOR commander for former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Gen. Michael Rose, are holding talks behind 
closed doors. 
  Today's meeting is a result of efforts made yesterday by Gen 
Rose to get both commanders to the negotiating table. However, 
their different standpoints on the peace agreement have not been 
reconciled and it could be said that bridging this gap will be 
the central topic of the talks. 
  TANJUG has learned from reliable sources that the Muslim 
side 
arrived at the meeting with a 14-day cease-fire offer, insisting 
that Gorazde be the main topic. 
  However, as Gen. Mladic pointed out at the meeting, the Serb 
side does not want to discuss partial and short-term solutions, 
but it has offered talks on an overall and unconditional truce 
along all demarcation lines in former Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Thus the Serb side is not prepared to discuss any particular 
front outside the context of the overall situation; this is 
contrary to the standpoints of the Muslim forces' command, which 
is trying to give top priority, in achieving a truce, to those 
battlefields where which the situation is developing in a way 
completely out of keeping with its wishes and aims. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8095 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94047" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serbs Discover Aid Convoy Smuggling Ammunition </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serbs Discover Aid Convoy Smuggling Ammunition </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904191194 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0904191194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] In Kasindol Street in Sarajevo, the Serbian police 
stopped a convoy of a French nongovernment humanitarian 
organization Premiere Urgence because it found several boxes of 
ammunition in the convoy's vehicles. The headquarters of the 
army of the Srpska republic has stated that an investigation is 
underway and that a statement on this will be issued this 
evening. For the time being we only have pictures of this, 
which have already been sent to the world. Comments would be 
unnecessary anyway. [The studio announcer-read report is 
followed by a 2-minute video of Serbian policemen discovering 
ammunition in trucks with European Union and Premiere Urgence 
markings] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8096 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94048" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Expected Aid Convoys Fail To Arrive </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Expected Aid Convoys Fail To Arrive </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1104120994 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1115 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104120994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Zvornik, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- No humanitarian or 
logistical convoys have arrived on the left [western] bank of 
the River Drina today, and no convoys went in the other 
direction, toward the territory of the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia, TANJUG's correspondent has learned from the command 
of the Zvornik garrison of the Bosnian Serb republic army. 
  The same source says that several humanitarian and 
logistical 
convoys announced their arrival for today, and the Serb side 
granted them permission to cross the territory of the Serb 
republic. However, they have failed to arrive, and officials in 
Zvornik have not received any official explanation for this. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8097 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94049" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Izetbegovic, Delic Address Military Conference </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Izetbegovic, Delic Address Military Conference </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0704172894 Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0704172894 </F>
<F P=104>  Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] An expert conference for about 200 officers of the 
Military Security Service and Military Police of the Army of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina was held in Sarajevo today. The 
Security Administration of the Ministry of Defense and the 
Military Security Sector of the 1st Corps organized the 
conference. Participants in the conference were addressed by 
Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency, among others. 
Here is a report by Edin Muhic: 
  [Begin recording] [Muhic] The aim of today's conference is 
to examine the experience so far in the work of the Military 
Security Service and the Military Police and to define further 
tasks. Among others, Rasim Delic, commander of the Headquarters 
of the Supreme Command of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina; Defense Minister Hamdija Hadzihasanovic; and Bakir 
Alispahic, minister of internal affairs attended the conference 
and submitted reports. Jusuf Jasarevic, head of the Military 
Security Administration, submitted an introductory report. 
  Jasarevic pointed out that the present security situation is 
much better than it was some half a year ago, and the 
cooperation between the Military Security Service and the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs is at a satisfying level. In the 
future, the focus will be on preventing the enemy's subversive 
activity and at the same time on further clearing units from 
criminals and other forms of law violation, Jasarevic said. 
  Defense Minister Hamdija Hadzihasanovic spoke about the 
government's activity on organizing and strengthening the Army. 
As regards duties of the Military Security Service, Minister 
Hadzihasanovic said the following: 
  [Hadzihasanovic] The main aim of the Military Security 
Service is to prevent the enemy from obtaining information about 
our forces and intentions and to make it impossible for him to 
undermine the moral-political unity and combat readiness of the 
units and to carry out espionage, sabotage, and other subversive 
activities in our ranks. 
  Participants in the conference were then addressed by Alija 
Izetbegovic, president of the republic Presidency. From his 
speech, we shall single out a part dealing with the need to 
prevent deviant phenomena in the work of the Security Service. 
  [Izetbegovic] In your job, you should (?compound) [word 
indistinct] into another component that is very important, and 
that is respect for man, that is, a certain humanism. 
Sometimes, these services may turn into, well, (?only one sharp 
edge), a (?sharp edge) of a sort of struggle against the enemy 
and are sometimes forgetting the other (?thing), that is, that 
they should at the same time respect the law (?well), that they 
should be careful. As you know, it has happened, not in our 
country though, but has nevertheless happened that those 
services escape control and sometimes do some things that are 
not all right and that [word indistinct] struggle against the 
enemy, they sometimes forget that they may sometimes trample 
upon or crush or squash some innocent man and so on and to be 
(?too severe). 
  [words indistinct] to nourish these two things --- 
professionalism and humanism in your work, and the more 
professional you are, you shall probably be more humane as well. 
  [Muhic] After President Izetbegovic, Army General Rasim 
Delic took the floor. He said that one should continue this 
upward trend of strengthening the system of Military Security 
and Military Service and added the following: 
  [Delic] It is necessary to continue to ensure close links 
among organs and units that deal with security in all 
institutions of our society, as that is the only way to ensure 
unity of all factors on the protection of basic values of the 
system we are building and will continue building. 
  In this respect, it is [word indistinct] for the Military 
Security Service to enjoy support by all those people who desire 
a stable democratic state and the protection of the people from 
all forms of endangerment of its security and (?survival). 
  [Muhic] Let us add at the end that it was concluded at 
today's conference that with a view to ensuring an expert 
training of the cadres, such conferences should (?in future) be 
held at the seats of three corps of the Army of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Thereby the security actions that are 
already under way and those that are yet to be carried out will 
certainly be even more (?fearful) and deadly. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8098 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94050" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary Criticizes `Coalition,' U.S. Mediation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Commentary Criticizes `Coalition,' U.S. Mediation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1104102994 Belgrade VECERNJE NOVOSTI in Serbo-Croatian 4 
Apr 94 p 4 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104102994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VECERNJE NOVOSTI </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Tatjana Lenard: "A Plot Against the Serbs"] </F>
  [Text] The latest Muslim offensive against the Srpska 
republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina has shown the real character of 
the Muslim-Croatian marriage. Just as the Serbs predicted, the 
Muslim-Croatian coalition was not made for peace, but for a new 
war. 
  After the Muslims in Bosnia realized that they would not be 
able to reach their territorial aspirations -- which even the 
United States considers too lofty -- at the negotiating table, 
they turned to the gods of war. They think that they have more 
chances for success now. According to Serbian military sources, 
Muslim troops are getting weapons and equipment through various 
humanitarian operations. The NATO ultimatum and the loosening 
of the Serbian military ring around Sarajevo have enabled Alija 
Izetbegovic to transfer tens of thousands of soldiers from 
Sarajevo to other fronts, from where they are now attacking 
Serbian positions. 
  Apart from that, since the Washington agreement was signed, 
nobody asks what Croatian Army troops are doing in Bosnia 
anymore. Through the alliance with the Muslims under the SDA 
[Party of Democratic Action] patronage, Croatia -- against which 
sanctions should have been introduced on Muslim request because 
of the presence of over 50,000 soldiers in Bosnia -- has become 
a legal participant in the war since it is now defending the 
borders of the future confederation. 
  It is becoming clear now why Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian 
president, accepted this absurd union with the Bosnian Muslims, 
which will neither enable him to reestablish the Independent 
State of Croatia nor to prevent the creation of an Islamic state 
in the heart of Europe. On the contrary, owing to demography 
and to the huge capital Muslim countries have, it can be assumed 
that a strong Muslim state, in which Croatian children would 
have to learn the Koran, could reach the Adriatic Sea. It is 
obvious that the Croatian president was not only attracted by 
the promises about NATO and European Union membership for his 
country and by the return of Krajina to Croatian jurisdiction. 
He was far more attracted by the legal nature of 
Muslim-Croatian military actions that should bring new 
territories to both Muslims and Croats -- which they would share 
and then part. The Muslim-Croatian confederation is probably 
only a temporary marriage of convenience. This assumption is 
also supported by the meeting announced for the 5 April in 
Ankara between the Bosnian Muslims and Croats and the Turkish 
military leadership. 
  The leading peacemakers, the United States and the European 
Union, are passively observing all this, and it is not excluded 
that they might help their friends by a NATO action against the 
Serbs under the pretext that they are protecting the UN 
Protection Forces [UNPROFOR]. Judging by the UN Security 
Council resolution on the extension of the UNPROFOR mandate, 
such a recipe can also be applied to Krajina now. 
  It has been once again proven that the U.S. peacemaking 
efforts are nothing else but favoring of the Serbian enemies, or 
-- as Mrs. Albright, the U.S. ambassador to the UN, stated in 
Sarajevo -- it is yet another proof that the United States is a 
real friend of the Muslims. Under these conditions, it can 
hardly be expected that the Serbian side will accept the unequal 
treatment, the politics of accomplished facts in negotiations, 
and blackmail in connection with the removal of the sanctions. 
The United States should finally realize that its political 
and, as they are announcing, military presence is not enough to 
resolve the situation in Bosnia. 
  Without the real wish to achieve peace and an active 
participation of the Serbian side under equal conditions, 
without political, economic and military blackmail, the peace in 
the former Yugoslavia will not have a real chance. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8099 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_i_94051" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentator Assesses Threats Against Serbs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Commentator Assesses Threats Against Serbs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904162894 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0904162894 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Slavoljub Susic] </F>
  [Text] While the long-prepared offensive by the Bosnian 
Muslims on the Srpska republic gradually dies down, influential 
international players, especially the United States, are 
launching a new diplomatic-political-media offensive seasoned 
with sharp threats and pressure on Serbs. What is actually 
hiding behind this? Here is a military-political commentary by 
Slavoljub Susic: 
  [Susic] It took the hawks from the world's power centers and 
influential media more than 10 days to speak up for the 
umpteenth time in order to protect the interests of the Bosnian 
Muslims, who rushed into yet another offensive against the 
Srpska republic. Their initial silence is better understood if 
one takes into account the already well-known stand of U.S. 
officials that it would be wrong to deny Muslims the right to 
fight when they are stronger, when they have more weapons, and 
when they are scoring military successes. 
  Of course, whenever their proteges overestimate their own 
forces and get their fingers burned, the Serbs are accused of 
responding to the allegedly sporadic provocations with 
disproportionate ferocity. This recently happened near Gorazde. 
However, had the Security Council's Resolutions 824 and 836 on 
the setting up and protection of the safe havens been 
consistently implemented, the Muslim forces would have not had 
the opportunity to launch attacks on the Serbian positions from 
these zones before UN eyes. 
  Participants in the closed sessions of the Security Council 
concluded more than once that the protected zones, including 
that of Gorazde, were being abused: that they were being used 
for training, regrouping, and recruitment of troops, which are 
then used to attack Serbs. This is also confirmed by the report 
of the UN Secretariat presented at this week's marathon session 
of the Security Council, which states, among other things, that 
there is well-founded suspicion that the Serbian attack on 
Gorazde was provoked by Muslim military forces in Srebrenica. 
  Nevertheless, this did not sway the belligerent head of U.S. 
diplomacy, Christopher, from insisting on a swift dispatch of 
peace troops to Gorazde so that his country could have a good 
argument for launching an initiative on air strikes on Serbs if 
they, as he said, obstruct the deployment of the Blue Helmets. 
  Defense Minister William Perry had to thoroughly explain his 
statement that the United States will not wage a war in Bosnia 
because of Gorazde. Those who advocate the punishment of 
Bosnian Serbs with air strikes according to the already prepared 
Sarajevo recipe were not satisfied with the explanation of 
General Shalikashvili, head of the U.S. Armed Forces Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, either, namely that Gorazde is not Sarajevo. 
It is interesting, but not surprising, that French Defense 
Minister Leotard does not agree with Gen. Shalikashvili's 
cautious statement. He wants UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] to 
decide whether or not it needs NATO's support, and claims that 
air strikes on Serb positions would technically be feasible, if 
only the political will existed for it. 
  Of course, one should not be surprised by the fact that the 
United States is again generously offering its air force when 
one knows that the United States does not have troops on the 
hostile terrain of Bosnia-Herzegovina, in the combat regions. 
It plans to send them there only once a stable agreement on 
peace is reached. In the search for an answer as to the purpose 
of a new cannonade of accusations, threats, and pressure on only 
one side in the ethnic civil war, we find that this could be a 
kind of ground artillery preparation for U.S. envoy Redman's 
efforts in Sarajevo and Pale. As we have learned, the aim of his 
latest mission is to finally obtain the Muslims' minimum 
territorial demands and establish the maximum territorial 
concessions that the Serbs are prepared to make for the newly 
created Muslim-Croatian Federation, prior to a new stage in the 
realization of the coordinated U.S.-Russian initiative for 
settling the crisis in Bosnia. 
  If this is indeed the case, then what is the purpose of 
Clinton's National Security Adviser Anthony Lake's threats that 
the United States should let the Serbs know that the price of 
their intransigence is very high. We believe that he too will 
one day be able to conclude with regret that U.S. policy has 
failed because it proceeded from erroneous assumptions, as was 
concluded by Clarke Clifford, former adviser to several U.S. 
Presidents and Pentagon during the Vietnam war. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8100 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_c_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Havel on Sudeten Germans, von Weizsacker </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Havel on Sudeten Germans, von Weizsacker </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004162694 Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network in Czech 1215 
GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1004162694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Vaclav Havel by Czech Radio </F>
editor Robert Tamchyna at Havel's private residence at Hradecek; 
date not given: from the "Conversations at Lany" program -- 
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Tamchyna] Are you really remote from political 
activities here at Hradecek? I saw a helicopter with Rudolf 
Scharping, chairman of the German Social Democratic Party, land 
close to your cottage. It occurred to me that the subject of 
your talks was probably urgent when you received your guest at 
the time of your convalescence, and, on top of it, your meeting 
was longer than originally expected. 
  [Havel] I am very grateful to Mr. Scharping that, in spite 
of 
his very full program, he came all the way here. I admit that I 
quite like to talk about certain things with certain politicians 
in this type of total privacy. It contributes to the talks 
being more confidential, more open-minded, and also more 
sincere. The talks made a very good impression on me. Rudolf 
Scharping is a man belonging to a younger generation. He is 11 
years younger than I, and he seems to be a dynamic politician. 
Of course, we talked about general matters related to Europe, 
to the European security arrangements, Russia, the European 
Union, and so on. However, great attention was also paid to 
bilateral questions, especially to the two rather sensitive 
subjects--the Sudeten German question and the matter of 
compensation. 
  To inform him, I summarized all the developments around all 
the negotiations that have taken place up until now. I do not 
want to be specific. It would be premature. However, I can 
definitely say that I found in Rudolf Scharping a very sensitive 
partner in these matters, a very understanding partner, and we 
understood each other very well. [passage omitted] 
  [Tamchyna] A very interesting and important meeting of six 
European presidents is awaiting you at Litomysl next week [15-16 
April]. Among other things, you are expected unofficially to 
thank German President Richard von Weizsacker. Is it only my 
impression that you have been very close to each other also 
outside the scope of politics? 
  [Havel] I hold President Weizsacker in very high esteem. I 
think we are bound by good friendship. I had some contact with 
him long before I became president and before the fall of 
communism. It was understandably only written contact. We often 
talked about a great variety of things, and I am also thankful 
for his help because, in the early stages of my presidency, he 
managed to give me good advice in some difficult moments. I 
think he is a great politician who has substantially contributed 
to Germany's trustworthiness precisely in the crucial period of 
the fall of communism, of the beginnings of German unification, 
when fears started to appear about great Germany. We know well 
enough that many people and many politicians--secretly and even 
openly, by public statements--did not really wish for 
unification of Germany. They feared that Germany would be too 
great, too powerful, and too dominant on the European scene. 
Although as president, Weizsacker's power is limited, he has 
proved a lot by his words, by the stature of his pronouncements 
and deeds. He has really done a lot for Germany's credibility 
precisely in this crucial period. I think he really deserves a 
thank you from the presidents of the neighboring countries for 
everything he has done for the good relations between Germany 
and its neighbors. 
  [Tamchyna] What are you going to take to Litomysl? It was 
announced that substantial political talks were not expected. 
Is it possible to move on at a summit of this kind? 
  [Havel] It depends on our understanding of substantial 
political talks. None of us thinks that this meeting is going 
to be a founding meeting of some new international group, nor do 
we expect that some international initiative or declaration will 
be issued or treaties and pacts signed. Nothing of the sort. 
The intention is to discuss some matters of principle but to 
discuss them within the context of unofficial presidential 
debate. I said in Salzburg that it was the duty of governments 
and executives to debate all everyday, specific political 
matters related to interstate relations, but the duty of 
presidents, which stems also from their constitutional position, 
is something different. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8101 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_c_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Finance Minister on 1994 Budget Performance </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Finance Minister on 1994 Budget Performance </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804184194 Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network in Czech 1600 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804184194 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The Czech Republic's budget shows a surplus of 4.9 
billion Czech korunas at the end of the first three months of 
1994. This was announced by Ivan Kocarnik, deputy prime minister 
and minister of finance, today. Ales Hermanek has more details. 
  [Hermanek] According to Minister Kocarnik, the size of the 
surplus gives no cause for exaggerated optimism. 
  [Begin Kocarnik recording] The surplus is given by the fact 
that expenditures in the first three months of 1994 are lower 
than should be for the corresponding part of 1994 budget 
expenses. Let us say that three months represent roughly 25 
percent, even though this is not true in absolute figures. 
Still, taking this 25 percent as the basis, budget expenditures 
amounted to 22 percent of the envisaged annual expenditures, and 
the revenue represents 23.4 percent of the envisaged annual 
revenue. I am therefore very cautious when assessing these 
results because the revenue side of the budget remained below 
the one-quarter of annual revenue. [end recording] 
  [Hermanek] The lower-than-planned revenue was caused mainly 
by low VAT [value-added tax] collection. According to Minister 
Kocarnik, this was caused by higher business expenses at the end 
of last year and the subsequent application of a reduced tax in 
this year. [sentence as heard] 
  Another cause for the high budget surplus is the surplus in 
clearing payments with Slovakia amounting to 2.1 billion 
korunas. However, this figure keeps going down. It was still 
double the present figure some three months ago. 
  Kocarnik was, however, very optimistic in his assessment of 
the GDP development for last year and this year. 
  [Begin Kocarnik recording] I think that the key issue is 
that 
economic performance is stabilizing and that we have good reason 
to expect that economic growth has begun in the first three 
months. Of course, this can also be attributed to the fact that 
the first three months of last year were especially bad. We 
expect that, in comparison with the first three months of last 
year, the GDP for the first three months of 1994 will be higher 
by 5-6 percent. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8102 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_c_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CZECH REPUBLIC </F>
<H3> <TI>   Klaus Addresses Trade Union Congress </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Klaus Addresses Trade Union Congress </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804160694 Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network in Czech 0928 
GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804160694 </F>
<F P=104>  Prague Radiozurnal Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Czech </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus to the First </F>
Congress of the Bohemian-Moravian Chamber of Trade Unions in the 
Palace of Culture in Prague--live] 
  [Excerpts] The government does not have the slightest doubt 
about the mission of the trade unions, and it would be a mistake 
to accuse it of this. At this moment, I would like to talk 
about our--and I repeat our--view on the role of trade unions on 
a large-scale level between trade union leadership and 
government. I have repeatedly spoken in favor of a relationship 
of consultations, in favor of informing each other, in favor of 
listening to each other, and, thanks to it all, in favor of 
mutual enrichment. 
  The government does not have a monopoly on knowledge, and 
therefore it listens carefully, and I can assure you that also 
in the future it will listen to trade unions' objections and 
suggestions regarding legislation as well as our country's 
economic and social policy. 
  The government is searching for a basic consensus of the 
population regarding the main issues of our current as well as 
our future situation and is aware of the exceptionally important 
role of the trade unions in this. We therefore respect the 
existence of the Council of Economic and Social Accord and will 
make every effort to continue negotiations within its framework, 
even though the privatization is radically changing the role of 
the government and the state as an employer. 
  We will continue submitting proposals for partial changes in 
tripartite negotiations, but I would like to stress here, in 
front of you, that we do not call for any revolution or for 
radical changes. I therefore believe that there is no need to 
dramatize the partial differences of opinion that exist on these 
issues. [passge omitted] 
  I believe everyone is aware that both our rate of inflation 
and the unemployment level are the lowest of all the 
postcommunist countries, and, in most cases, they are 
significantly lower. 
  I also believe that, in the recent period, there were no 
developments in our labor legislation that would really 
aggravate an employee's situation. I believe the recent, rather 
sharp controversy between the government and the trade unions on 
this matter is nothing more and nothing less than different 
opinions on one and the very same matter, and that this 
difference of opinion is common and one that exists legitimately 
in every democratic society. 
  I cannot agree with the opinion that the trade unions have 
to 
face insensitive politicians and deputies, as voiced at your 
recent rally. I can say, with full responsibility, that a 
number of requests by trade unions concerning the most varied 
issues have been accepted by the government recently. I cannot 
accept the accusations that we are not able, I quote, to listen 
to people, and that we retreat into office chambers, foreign 
limousines, and empty sentences because this simply is not true. 
  We, but not only we, may not succeed in everything. It is 
not true, though, that we are not trying to achieve the maximum 
possible contact with the citizens of our country, to listen to 
what they have to say. 
  I also disagree with the statement that we do not show 
social 
feeling because we have taken and continue to take on an 
everyday basis dozens of social measures. [passage omitted] 
  I am convinced and believe that many of you have the same 
view that we are implementing the profound and very much needed 
social change as quickly as we can and with the lowest possible 
costs for us all. Therefore, I cannot agree either with a 
statement pronounced at your recent protest rally that, as 
citizens, we had democratically voted for belt-tightening. I 
would like to say that we have voted for nothing of the sort. 
[passage omitted] 
  When I hear that this belt is getting rather dangerously 
tight for rather too many people, I cannot agree with that, 
either. [passage omitted] I am convinced that, in 1994, we will 
witness general economic growth in the form of a 
several-percentage-point increase in the gross domestic product, 
and that this will enable a further increase in real wages. I 
do not see any reasons the increase in real wages should not 
continue in the coming years. When I say this, I also say at the 
same time, with the same breath, that we are well aware of the 
imbalance in the economic and wage development in our country as 
well as some remaining social problems that some of our fellow 
citizens have to struggle with. For that reason, we are trying 
in every possible way--and I believe that in the majority of 
cases our views are not different from those of the trade 
unions--to improve our social policy. Not at the cost of our 
future but on the basis of our current possibilities and our 
active work. 
  I know that the trade unions do not like the introduction of 
wage regulation, but, after the excesses of a too rapid increase 
in wages in some enterprises in the past two years, this measure 
was unfortunately necessary. I believe that the selected very 
careful degree of regulation enables two main things. It 
enables the growth of real wages and the necessary wage 
differentiation between successful and less successful 
enterprises and between more and less efficient employees. This 
is the most important thing for all of us today becaquse a 
sensible level of wages is the most important prerequisite for 
the preservatin of the current low unemployment rate and for the 
overall success of our postcommunist era. 
  I believe that our views on these and many other issues do 
not differ too much from those of the trade unionists. I 
believe that what was said at your recent protest rally, to the 
effect that, in the next elections, we will make a better 
choice, was meant as rhetorical hyperbole and not as an 
expression of a responsible overall assessment of the situation 
in our country. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8103 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Demonstrators Demand Resignation of President </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Demonstrators Demand Resignation of President </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904161494 Paris AFP in English 1612 GMT 9 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0904161494 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Ljubljana, April 9 (AFP)--Some 5,000 demonstrators 
took to the streets here Saturday to call on the country's 
president and prime minister to quit, and for fresh elections. 
  The demonstration was called by opposition parties, the 
conservative Popular Party and the extreme right-wing Slovene 
National Party, which accuse President Milan Kucan and Prime 
Minister Janez Drnovsek of following communist policies. 
  Many Slovenians are also angry at the dismissal two weeks 
ago 
of the country's independence hero and Social Democratic leader 
Janez Jansa from the post of defence minister by the coalition 
government. 
  Jansa addressed the crowds saying he would soon return to 
power, calling on all opposition groups to support him. 
  The only government representative to take the stand was 
Foreign Minister Lojze Peterle, who was booed by the protestors 
when he called for a "fight against corruption, but only through 
democratic and legal means." The demonstrators later dispersed 
peacefully. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8104 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_s_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SLOVENIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Drnovsek on Recognition, Domestic Situation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Drnovsek on Recognition, Domestic Situation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804192394 Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network in Slovene 
1330 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804192394 </F>
<F P=104>  Ljubljana Radio Slovenia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Slovene </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Dr. Janez Drnovsek, prime minister and 
president of Liberal Democracy of Slovenia, dedicated the first 
part of today's news conference to the international activity of 
our country. According to him, Slovenia has won considerable 
recognition recently. Brussels supported our country's becoming 
an associate member of the European Union, while NATO, after the 
signing of the Partnership for Peace agreement, expressed full 
readiness for cooperation with us. Praise for the improving 
economic situation could also be heard from the leading 
international economists. The prime minister also analyzed the 
domestic political situation thoroughly. Sandi Frelih reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Frelih] [passage omitted] Regarding the 
political situation, the prime minister says that, after last 
night's departure of the Social Democrats from the government, 
all three major parliamentary parties are analyzing the 
situation, by which they will try to redefine the relations 
between the coalition partners in such a way that the coalition 
could function until the end of its mandate. 
  [Drnovsek] A wider parliamentary support suits me, as prime 
minister, more--therefore, the support of all three biggest 
parties, which gives me a certain majority in the parliament. 
Of course, all this is on the condition that their mutual 
differences can be settled in such a way that the efficient 
functioning of the government and parliament would be possible. 
If this wider option does not materialize--that is, if one of 
the partners can no longer participate in the tripartite 
coalition--we will consider the next best option, that is, the 
option that would secure the most stable work of the government. 
  [Frelih] [passage omitted] When asked about the 
participation of the Christian Democrats as a government party 
at the anticorruption rally, Drnovsek replied that the party 
president, Lojze Peterle, had assured him that the rally was not 
a meeting directed against the government. 
  [Drnovsek] [words indistinct] the assurances that the 
president of the Christian Democrat,s Mr. Peterle, gave to 
me--that is, that if the party takes part it will under no 
circumstances participate in an antigovernment meeting because 
it is a government party and bears the responsibility for all 
the hitherto events, and so does Mr. Jansa, who was a member of 
this government for four years and who, because of the duration 
of his mandate and his post, had more scope to influence affairs 
than I had in my two years of work in this government. Mr. 
Peterle, too, enjoys a rather long mandate in this government as 
do other Christian Democrats. [passage omitted] [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8105 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_m_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   VMRO-DPMNE Cited on Visit to Bulgaria </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    VMRO-DPMNE Cited on Visit to Bulgaria </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0904154294 Skopje MILS-NEWS in English 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0904154294 </F>
<F P=104>  Skopje MILS-NEWS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "VMRO-DPMNE Disassociates Itself From </F>
Its Candidate"] 
  [Text] The statement by the Internal Macedonian 
Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party for Macedonian 
National Unity [VMRO-DPMNE] candidate Branko Sinadinovski on 
chances that November elections in Macedonia [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia--FYROM] will be carried out in a 
"Romanian" recipe for democracy, [word indistinct] a lot of 
[word indistinct] in political circles in Macedonia. His party 
VMRO-DPMNE disassociated itself from his statement at 
yesterday's press conference. Party President Ljupco 
Georgievski stated "We disassociate from the statement on 
impossibility to win power through democratic means." The 
press-conference was mainly organized to report on his party's 
delegation three-day visit to Bulgaria. They said the visit 
took place on an invitation by the "Fatherland Alliance," which 
is a non-government organizations. President Ljupco Georgievski 
and vice-president Dosta Dimovska met with a number of 
parliament and non-parliament parties, with President Zhelyu 
Zhelev, Parliament President Aleksandur Yordanov, and the Holy 
Synod of the Bulgarian Church. They stressed Bulgaria has shown 
bigger interest for closer political and economic ties with 
Macedonia, as compared with 1992. In regard to the Bulgarian 
position in the Balkans, VMRO-DPMNE representatives informed the 
Serbian Academy of Science and Art and Serbian President 
Milosevic Advisers have offered Bulgaria to divide Macedonia 
between the two countries, but Bulgaria fully supports the 
independence of Macedonia and its nation [sentence as 
published]. In reference to the meeting with the Bulgarian 
Church Holy Synod, Ljupco Georgievski said they "met with strict 
views" concerning acknowledgement of the independence of the 
Macedonian Church, on basis of their obligation to respect the 
canons and their loyalty to the Romanian, Greek and Russian 
Orthodox Church. 
  Besides its party interests, VMRO-DPMNE represented above 
all 
the Macedonian state interests in Bulgaria, representatives said 
at the press conference. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8106 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Protests `Shocking Precedent' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Protests `Shocking Precedent' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1104102194 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 0910 GMT 11 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD1104102194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Knin, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- The people and the 
leadership of the republic of Serb Krajina [RSK] are deeply 
indignant over the shocking precedent set by NATO forces, under 
the auspices of the [UN] Security Council, by the bombing of 
Serb positions in the Srpska republic, with no prior notice and 
no good reason, RSK President Milan Martic said today. 
  "We sharply protest this insolent action which has 
undermined 
all efforts to end the crisis in the territory of former 
Yugoslavia by peaceful means," a statement stresses and adds 
that NATO's attack on the Srpska republic has further shaken the 
Serb people's confidence in the international community, which 
was at its lowest level anyway, due to the international 
community's partisan and biased attitude in the past. 
  "With this act of aggression the international community has 
declared war on the Serb people, thus trying to force it -- 
under the threat of NATO's war machinery -- to accept solutions 
which are in the interest of the other two warring sides and 
detrimental to the Serb people," the RSK president warns. 
  The statement goes on to say: 
  ``The RSK people and leadership again express their full 
support for our brothers in the Srpska republic and their 
efforts to defend their freedom won in blood. 
  ``Those who committed this thoughtless act will bear the 
blame for all the possible consequences of the bombing of the 
Srpska republic on the further course of the peace process in 
the territory of former Yugoslavia. 
  "At the same time, we warn all the relevant international 
factors that the RSK will not tolerate any attempts to solve its 
future political status through pressure and threats, regardless 
from which side they come." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8107 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK Assembly Ratifies Cease-Fire Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK Assembly Ratifies Cease-Fire Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804151294 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1426 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804151294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Knin, 8 Apr (TANJUG) -- Following today's lengthy 
discussions the assembly of the republic of Serb Krajina 
unanimously ratified the Zagreb agreement on a cease-fire and 
the separation of Serb and Croatian forces. 
  Winding up the discussion Assembly Speaker Branko Vojnica 
described the agreement as a constructive step in the 
negotiating process toward the restoration of peace. 
  The Assembly tasked a delegation of the republic of Serb 
Krajina to the so-called second phase of negotiations referring 
to economic and humanitarian cooperation not to accept talks on 
issues which could prejudice political solutions. 
  As the second phase of negotiations with the Croatian side 
is 
yet to begin, the assembly decided that these negotiations be 
led by a new Krajina government, which is to be formed in about 
10 days. 
  The Krajina parliament also unanimously decided that all 
agreements and treaties reached in negotiations with Croatia are 
subject to ratification by the assembly. The assembly session 
continues. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8108 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Granic, Greek Officials Discuss Cease-Fire </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Granic, Greek Officials Discuss Cease-Fire </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804135394 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
1300 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804135394 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Mate Granic, Croatian deputy prime minister and 
minister of foreign affairs -- ahead of his scheduled visit to 
Greece -- today received Pavlos Apostolidis, director of the 
Greek Foreign Ministry Political Relations Office, and the 
Zagreb-based head of the EC monitoring mission, Greek Ambassador 
Constantin Yerocostopoulos [names as heard]. The meeting was 
also attended by Croatian Deputy Foreign Minister Ivo Sanader. 
  Granic informed his guests about the course of the 
implementation of the cease-fire agreement between the Croatian 
authorities and the local Serbs living in UN protected areas, 
and announced that negotiations would resume next week. 
Speaking about the peace process in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Granic 
stressed the importance of the establishment of a total 
cease-fire in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the resumption of peace 
talks. He said that the Serb side should immediately join the 
talks and that the European Union should be more efficient. 
  Granic and Sanader also spoke about preparations for the 
reconstruction of Croatia, for which it is necessary to obtain 
economic aid, particularly from the European Union, as Croatia 
is a European country and wishes to join its political and 
economic trends. 
  Granic and his guests agreed that relations between Croatia 
and Greece are good, and that the visit by the Croatian foreign 
minister to Greece will contribute to their future bilateral 
cooperation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8109 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   RSK: Solution Only Possible Within Conference </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    RSK: Solution Only Possible Within Conference </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1004192994 Belgrade TANJUG in English 1910 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> LD1004192994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Knin, April 10 (TANJUG) -- Republic of Serb Krajina 
(RSK) President Milan Martic said Sunday that the RSK Parliament 
maintained that a political solution to the RSK should only be 
sought within the conference on the former Yugoslavia. 
  Martic conferred in Knin with Deputy Co-chairman of the 
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia Kai Eide and Russian 
Ambassador in Zagreb Leonid Kerestedzhiants at a preliminary 
meeting ahead of the second-round RSK-Krajina talks, opened in 
March. 
  The republic of Serb Krajina was proclaimed in 1991 by the 
local Serbs in their ancestral lands within Croatia's 
Communist-era arbitrary borders, in response to Croatia's 
violent secession from the former Yugoslav Federation and its 
attempt to downgrade the local Serbs' status to that of a 
national minority. Krajina became a U.N.-Protected Area in 
March 1992. 
  In two referendums so far, the RSK Serbs have voted against 
their return to Zagreb's jurisdiction. 
  On March 30, RSK and Croatian representatives signed a 
ceasefire agreement in the Russian embassy in Zagreb. The 
agreement took effect on April 4. 
  The RSK Parliament believes that the second phase of the 
talks, which is to include economic, humanitarian and political 
issues, could be held in any Russian embassy, except the one in 
Zagreb, said Martic. 
  After the talks, Martic assessed them as very useful and 
voiced his satisfaction with the degree of Eide's and 
Kerestedzhiants's understanding for RSK stands. He added that 
only an impartial stand towards the relations in the area could 
bring about solutions acceptable to all. 
  Eide, for his part, said that the ceasefire agreement was 
reached and observed by both sides, adding that the 
international community was very well prepared for the 
second-round RSK-Croatia talks which should open as soon as 
possible. 
  The international community platform on RSK-Croatia 
humanitarian relations gives priority to the re-opening of 
traffic and communications. Also to be discussed in terms of 
priority are: Industrial cooperation, cooperation in the field 
of energy and water supplies, trade and agriculture and lastly, 
social welfare policy and humanitarian relations issues. 
  It has been confirmed that the RSK is soon to submit a list 
of its own priorities. 
  Eide said that if both sides showed good will and readiness 
to cooperate, the way they did with the ceasefire agreement, the 
results would soon follow. 
  Kerestedzhiants said that it was all up to Knin and Zagreb, 
adding that reaching a political settlement would also depend on 
both sides. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8110 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   De Lapresle Calls Krajina Cease-Fire `Success' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    De Lapresle Calls Krajina Cease-Fire `Success' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804165694 Paris AFP in English 1637 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> AU0804165694 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Turanj, Croatia, April 8 (AFP) -- A ceasefire 
agreement between Croatia and breakaway Krajina to end more than 
two years of conflict is being broadly respected, a UN 
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) commander said here Friday. 
  Commander Bertrand de Lapresle said the first meeting of a 
joint Croatian-Serb commission to assess the Krajina ceasefire 
went off Friday without a hitch and was a "big success." 
  The meeting was held in a "positive and constructive 
climate," commented the French UNPROFOR commander, who said he 
was "very happy" about the "goodwill" shown since a ceasefire 
was signed March 30. 
  De Lapresle said the ceasefire terms had been respected but 
did not specify how far the two forces had withdrawn from the 
front line. He said they had gone "a long way in the right 
direction." 
  According to the accord which took effect Monday, each group 
was to pull back 1,000 metres (yards) from the front line by 
Friday 0700 GMT, leaving a buffer zone to be patrolled by 
UNPROFOR. The withdrawal of heavy weapons was also due to be 
completed by Friday. 
  Fighting has been going on for more than two years between 
Croatian authorities and the self-declared Krajina Serb 
republic, which occupies a quarter of Croatian territory and 
which wants union with Serbia. 
  In Turanj itself, which passed into Serb control in 1992, 
most houses have been completely destroyed by the fighting. 
  De Lapresle said a further meeting would be held "very soon" 
to resolve problems in the four zones placed under UNPROFOR 
control, which needed "high-level decisions." 
  Earlier on Friday, Croatia's semi-official agency HINA 
reported that General Janko Bobetko had complained about Serb 
forces holding some positions in contravention of the peace 
agreement. 
  In a meeting with De Lapresle, Bobetko said the Serbs were 
holding a position near the airport at Zadar on the Adriatic 
coast, where its guns also threatened the Zemunik airport 
recently reopened by Croatian forces, HINA said. 
  He also complained that Serb forces were blocking access to 
Jasenovac, a historical site where 600,000 Jews and Serbs were 
massacred during World War Two by Croatia's Nazi-backed Ustashis. 
  A delegation of Croatian Jews who wanted to visit the former 
concentration camp to commemorate the Holocaust were not able to 
reach Jasenovac Friday, according to the agency. It said the 
UNPROFOR commander promised to take up Croatian concerns with 
Serb officials. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8111 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Serb Staff Officer Views Infantry Withdrawal </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Serb Staff Officer Views Infantry Withdrawal </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU0804162994 Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1300 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU0804162994 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade Radio Beograd Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Danko Peric from Knin] </F>
  [Text] Lieutenant Colonel Marinko Gajic, assistant 
commander of the General Staff of the Serbian Army of Krajina, 
has said that members of infantry units had withdrawn by 0900. 
There have been minor problems in western Slavonia and the 
assistant commander of the Serbian Army of Krajina expects them 
to be solved during the day. So far, nothing has been heard from 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces], whose units are going to be 
deployed between Krajina and Croatian infantry units who have 
moved apart by one kilometer each. 
  The first meeting of the central joint commission, attended 
by Lieutenant General Bertrand De Lapresle, UNPROFOR commander 
for the former Yugoslavia, is under way in Turanj, near Karlovac. 
  The second meeting of the first session of the republican 
assembly is under way in Knin at the moment. It has been 
learned that the report by the negotiating team to the peace 
negotiations held in the Russian Embassy in Zagreb is also going 
to be discussed at the session. It has also been learned that 
the proposal on prime minister designate and the new government 
had been taken off the agenda and that this is most probably 
going to be discussed on 20 April. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8112 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Local Commander Refuses To Withdraw </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Local Commander Refuses To Withdraw </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804213994 Zagreb Radio Croatia Network in Serbo-Croatian 
2000 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804213994 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb Radio Croatia Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Joint Croatian and Serb Krajina commissions on 
withdrawal held talks today again at a UNPROFOR [UN Protection 
Forces] checkpoint near Sarvas in UNPROFOR's sector in eastern 
Slavonia. Reporter Verica Madjar has more on the results of the 
talks: 
  [Begin recording] [Madjar] It has been agreed that the 
Croatian army will control the village of Brijest, which is 
south of Osijek, and the Faculty of Agriculture in order to have 
uninterrupted work and life. In return, certain concessions 
have been made to the Serb side concerning a part of Nova Tenja 
and Ostrvo. According to Major General Djuro Decak, the 
commander of the Osijek operational area, the Croatian and Serb 
sides were to start withdrawing their units as early as this 
morning and to complete the withdrawal by 0900 [0700 GMT] on 
Sunday 10 April. He stressed that many issues remain unresolved. 
  [Decak] There are two disputed elements: Vinkovci and 
Mirkovci. The Croatian side explicitly refuses to withdraw even 
a single millimeter because Vinkovci is the most urban center on 
this line of separation. At the same time, the Serbs demand 
that we withdraw 300 to 500 meters. I refused to do that. 
  UNPROFOR General Vandick tried to find a compromise. He will 
come here to examine the situation. The stance of the Croatian 
side--my stance--is beyond discussion. The Croatian army will 
not withdraw one millimeter from the line of separation. 
  I also demanded that a local cemetery in the Nustar area, 
which is about 300 meters out of the line of separation, be 
included in Croatian area. That is the other disputed element 
because from the military point of view the cemetery is a 
strategic location, and the other side is afraid of it. 
  [Madjar] Because they failed to reach an agreement, the two 
sides agreed to hold next round of talks on Tuesday 12 April. 
[end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8113 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Martic: New Krajina Government To Be Appointed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Martic: New Krajina Government To Be Appointed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1004202294 Belgrade RTB Television Network in 
Serbo-Croatian 1730 GMT 10 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> AU1004202294 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade RTB Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Milan Martic, president of the republic of </F>
Serbian Krajina, by Dusan Vojvodic; place and date not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] [Vojvodic] Mr. President, could you say for the 
Radio and Television of Serbia how the present stage of the 
implementation of the cease-fire agreement and the separation of 
forces on the front lines is assessed in Krajina? 
  [Martic] So far I would say that everything is going 
according to the agreement. Separation has to a large extent 
been completed. The UN forces are entering the area between the 
two forces, this area of 2 km on each side. As envisaged by the 
agreement, they have the right to carry out inspections up to 20 
km inside the territory, where the heavy weapons are stored. 
  As I said, everything is going according to the plan. There 
have been no major disagreements. There are some small, minor 
details that need to be solved and they are being solved in 
Western Slavonia, where UNPROFOR's [UN Protection Forces] duties 
are obviously not properly understood, but we are working on it. 
There will be no problems with that. 
  [Vojvodic] How are the army and the people of Krajina, whose 
supreme commander you are, accepting this agreement, and what is 
their primary objective at present? 
  [Martic] They are accepting it very well. There have been 
no problems or provocations from the Croatian side in the past 
few days, which is understood to mean that they will, after all, 
adhere to the agreement. However, the army has its objectives 
and cannot fall asleep. We must think in terms of the 
possibility of being attacked tomorrow and we must prepare 
ourselves for a normal existence. 
  [Vojvodic] In any case, we have observed over the past few 
days, and we know that you personally, and the people of this 
region, are in favor of peace, but not at any cost. Could you 
tell us when the new Krajina government will finally be formed 
and what its first task will be? 
  [Martic] The new Krajina government will be formed on 20 
April. This government should be a government of national 
unity, a government of experts. As we have said, we plan to 
appoint people who can indeed deal with every task, people who 
can implement in the best possible way what we have emphasized 
in the program. In other words, they will be able to start the 
production process. Actually, they should address the six 
points emphasized in our program. The first, of course, is 
defense. This had to be placed in first place, then the legal 
system, the revitalization of the economy and environment, the 
social program, more aggressive diplomatic activities, 
especially that in which we are most interested, the unification 
of Serbian lands. 
  The biggest problem facing the government is the regulation 
of the legal system and revitalizing production. 
  [Vojvodic] There are rumors in [word indistinct] and Krajina 
that some agreements on this program have been reached with 
members of almost all parties. 
  [Martic] [Words indistinct] we have held talks with the 
majority of people who make decisions in the different parties 
and found a common language. What I am pleased about is that we 
are overcoming the small crisis that existed. I think that this 
will be thrill the entire nation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8114 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Krajina's Mikelic Names Deputy Prime Minister </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Krajina's Mikelic Names Deputy Prime Minister </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0804155194 Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service in 
Serbo-Croatian 1456 GMT 8 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0804155194 </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade TANJUG Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Kragujevac, 8 Apr (TANJUG) -- Borisav Mikelic, 
Krajina prime minister-designate, stated today that full 
agreement had been reached with the Democratic Party of Krajina 
on a government of national unity. 
  He told Kragujevac Radio that Milan Babic would be appointed 
deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs, and in 
the next few days more details would be disclosed regarding 
ministers and departments of the new Krajina Government. 
  Stressing that the basic aim was now to include in 
production 
those people returning from the front, Mikelic said there would 
be no place for war profiteers in Krajina. 
  "We shall fight them with all means at our disposal, 
primarily the means of a law-governed state," Mikelic said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-8115 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu069_k_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Negotiator Views Cease-Fire Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Negotiator Views Cease-Fire Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1104093394 Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 31 Mar 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> AU1104093394 </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slavko Degoricija, president of the state </F>
delegation for negotiations with the local Serbs, by Aleksa 
Crnjakovic; place and date not given: "The Refugees Will Return 
to Their Homes Within Six Months!"] 
  [Text] Although, by now, everything is known about the 
cease-fire agreement signed early Wednesday morning, we asked 
Slavko Degoricija, one of the negotiators on the Croatian side, 
to tell us specifically if the refugees can now return to the 
protected areas, who will organize their return, and when. 
  [Crnjakovic] Mr. Degoricija, can the people of Skabrnja 
return to their village, and who should organize that? 
  [Degoricija] The agreement itself is so global that its 
function is not only the ceasefire and putting a stop to further 
hostilities, but it also opens the practical possibility of the 
return of the refugees. At issue is a great area, stretching 
over a thousand kilometers, and it will now be necessary to 
determine specifically which villages the people can return to, 
if there is an infrastructure there, if they can work, sleep, 
eat there. 
<H5>  The Entire Line Free </H5>
  [Crnjakovic] Who will make all the preparations, and why 
have they not been made yet? Namely, it would be logical that 
these plans would be completed parallel to the negotiations. 
Were they? 
  [Degoricija] Unfortunately, the state institution that would 
organize the return of the refugees and their life in the 
villages that have been empty for over two years does not exist 
yet. At the time, there was the Ministry of Restoration, which 
had gained very good experience in 1992, when people were 
returning to Pakrac, Lipik, or Gorice. I really do not know who 
will be doing that now. For instance, in the area of Jasenovac, 
or Novska, refugees can return to three villages: Tanac, 
Ustice, and Visnjica. In sector west, refugees can practically 
return to the villages behind Lipik and Pakrac now that this 
agreement on the cessation of hostilities has been signed. 
Clearly, this can not be done in an unorganized way; these 
people must have complete protection. Theoretically, refugees 
can return to Skabrnja, Islam Grcki, Smokovici, and Kasic, since 
that entire line is now free. The greatest value of this 
agreement is precisely that -- the process of the refugees 
returning to their homes beginning. 
  [Crnjakovic] Who is to say when this will happen? 
  [Degoricija] That is what I would like to know! 
  [Crnjakovic] Nothing has been organized in practical terms? 
  [Degoricija] These people need material help. We had 
offices for return and restoration in municipalities, but I do 
not know if such offices have been organized in counties. 
  [Crnjakovic] Why has that not been done yet? 
  [Degoricija] No substitute has been found for the former 
Ministry of Restoration. The government will have to give 
initiative to some other institution that would take care of all 
this. 
  [Crnjakovic] You keep mentioning the protected areas. The 
public is afraid that this is the final "cementing" of the 
Cyprus syndrome. 
  [Degoricija] The Cyprus syndrome being created in Croatia is 
out of the question. Croatia has been given all the 
international guarantees that the normalization process must 
have three stages, the first relating to ceasefire, which I 
consider the most important one, and the last one regarding the 
political solution. 
<H5>  The Opening of the Highway </H5>
  [Crnjakovic] How much time will there be between the first 
and second stage? 
  [Degoricija] The actualization of the second stage will 
follow within 10 days, or 14 at the longest. It is very 
important, and it relates to the preparation of the negotiations 
on economy and infrastructure. Specifically, that means that 
all the railroads and roads will be open, the electric power 
supply facilities repaired, and the water supply facilities open. 
  [Crnjakovic] Even the Knin railroad to Split? 
  [Degoricija] Of course! The Zagreb-Belgrade highway, and 
the Karlovac-Korenica-Obrovac-Zadar road too. There will 
probably be priorities in the process, as each side has its own, 
mostly different, priorities. For instance, the Serb side 
considers electricity important; for us it is the highway; for 
UNPROFOR [United Nations Protection Force] it is the 
Zagreb-Knin-Split railroad; the Croatia's interest is to open 
all the water sources, so that Zadar, Sibenik, and Biograd can 
be supplied. Hungary, Austria, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia 
are especially interested in the opening of the oil pipeline. 
Therefore, in about two weeks, we will decide at the green 
table on the process of the economic and traffic normalization. 
When we do that, the third stage, relating to political 
negotiations, will follow. 
  [Crnjakovic] In your opinion, of all the miracles you have 
promised, which will happen first? 
  [Degoricija] They are no longer miracles; this is reality. 
I believe that the highway will open first, and the opening of 
the oil pipeline will follow, but I think that the water supply 
will not be late either. It is quite certain that many local 
roads will open immediately. 
  [Crnjakovic] Are you not afraid that the Serb rebels will 
stop the passengers, or the workers at the water pumping sites? 
  [Degoricija] Now, the issue is no longer fear, because now 
the guarantor is the international factor. 

<H5>    Sanctions Against Offenders </H5>
  [Crnjakovic] However, theoretically, the possibility that 
someone will violate the agreement should be taken into 
consideration. Have provisions been made for this case? 
  [Degoricija] The international factors will impose 
sanctions. 
  [Crnjakovic] What kind of sanctions? 
  [Degoricija] We will see when the new Security Council 
resolution is passed, which will happen very soon. At any rate, 
Messrs. Redman and Galbraith said that the agreement should now 
be operationalized, and they will not spend too much time on it 
now that the agreements have been signed. Namely, we are in the 
"sign it or leave it" stage. 
  [Crnjakovic] Who will have civilian authority in the 
protected areas? 
  [Degoricija] In the first 14 days it will be UNPROFOR, along 
the whole length of the separation line, but, at the same time, 
200 policemen will be organized on both the Croatian and the 
Serb sides. These policemen will bear the marks of the 
international community, and they will be supposed to prevent 
illegal actions; any crime, any unallowed action. They will act 
at the invitation of UNPROFOR in the area within a kilometer on 
each side of the demarcation line. No more than 50 policemen can 
be in one zone. 
  [Crnjakovic] Who will select them? 
  [Degoricija] Each side will give their list to UNPROFOR. 
UNPROFOR can erase a certain name or the entire list, or cross 
somebody off later if they carry out impermissible actions. 
  [Crnjakovic] But that means that, for instance, Serb war 
criminals can be on the list. 
  [Degoricija] No. UNPROFOR determines who will be entrusted 
with the task. 
  [Crnjakovic] Where will our army be? 
  [Degoricija] The infantry forces will withdraw 1 km from the 
frontline on each side. I have already explained the issue of 
the heavy weapons to the representatives. 
  [Crnjakovic] You said that the third stage was the political 
solution to the Serb issue in Croatia. Has that not been solved 
by passing the Constitutional Law on Minority Rights? Is that 
the most difficult part of the job? 
  [Degoricija] Everybody considers it to be the most difficult 
problem, but I do not. I believe that the most difficult part 
of the job was the stage of the preparations and the signing of 
the cease-fire agreement. It was the precondition for sitting 
down at the green table and discussing the political solution 
without being burdened by the war option. 
<H5>  The Six-Month Deadline </H5>
  [Crnjakovic] When will the political solution be reached? 
  [Degoricija] I think that the deadline is six months, which 
is how long the UNPROFOR mandate has been extended for. If we 
do not reach it by then, the mandate will have to be extended 
again, for which the world has neither the willingness or the 
patience. 
  [Crnjakovic] The world does not, but do the local Serbs? 
They have often counted on this stalling. 
  [Degoricija] This may have been the case earlier, but no 
longer. If they had not been prepared for a political solution, 
they would not have sat down at the table and signed the 
cease-fire agreement. I think that they have the intention and 
the willingness to achieve peace through political means. The 
Serbs are prepared for a political solution. 
  [Crnjakovic] Without new conditions and blackmail? 
  [Degoricija] I think so, although I would not rule out the 
possibility of small corrections being made. 
  [Crnjakovic] We will not talk of a historical agreement, but 
I will ask you a very specific question: Will the refugees soon 
return to Glina, Petrinja, Vukovar....? 
  [Degoricija] Absolutely! 
  [Crnjakovic] When? 
  [Degoricija] I firmly believe that it will happen within the 
next six months. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
